<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3351</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAFBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Survey of Derivatives (6): US pioneers lured to new frontier
by rich packages - European banks' activity in a growing market
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TRACY CORRIGAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ENTHUSIASM FOR the derivatives market among banks and securities houses in
Europe is unabated, even though most other areas of their business are
contracting. European and Japanese banks are struggling to catch up with the
US banks which were at the forefront of developing many innovative
derivative instruments.
The size of the derivatives market has increased substantially in the past
two years. While the exchange-traded futures and options business is now
considered a mature market, the market in over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives
 -specialised products designed to suit clients needs - is still expanding
rapidly.
'A lot of European banks still have to complete their teams,' said Mr Tim
Sheffield, an executive consultant specialising in derivatives at Jonathan
Wren. 'Last year, many of them established their operations and entered the
market. This year they have been building upon that base.'
The US banks, which were the pioneers of OTC derivatives business, have
started to see their dominance threatened in Europe, particularly by
European banks anxious to take advantage of their strong credit ratings.
The main strategy of European banks has been to hire experienced people from
the leading US banks. In order to attract key people, European banks have
had to offer substantial packages.
But the tendency has been to offer increased bonuses and other perks, rather
than raise basic salaries, in an attempt to control costs more effectively
than in previous recruitment efforts.
For example, a top equity derivatives salesperson is expected to generate
revenues of Dollars 5m-Dollars 10m a year, for which he or she would receive
a package consisting of Pounds 85,000-Pounds 100,000 basic, plus a bonus of
around Pounds 300,000, according to Mr Sheffield.
The policy of hiring a well-known market professional to head up a new
derivatives team has proved an effective means of showing commitment to the
market, and therefore of attracting the right team at the lower levels.
The classic example is Credit Suisse Financial Products, now a market
leader, which was set up 2 1/2 years ago under the leadership of Mr Allen
Wheat, who had headed Bankers Trust's strong derivatives-led London
operation. CSFP was then able to recruit top derivatives specialists,
including a team from Bankers Trust, even though Credit Suisse First Boston,
its sister company, did not previously have a strong presence in the
derivatives market.
From a start-up operation consisting of 30 people, the front- and
back-office staff of CSFP now totals close to 500. 'It won't see the same
helter-skelter growth over the next couple of years,' said Mr Wheat. He
explained that the liability-management side of the business was mature, but
that there would be some expansion on the investment management side.
Although no separate results are published, CSFP is known to be a
significant contributor to the bottom-line of Credit Suisse, its parent.
'The return on capital is way in excess of the average for the firm,' said
Mr Wheat.
UBS Phillips &amp; Drew, which has made a more recent push into derivatives, has
followed an aggressive hiring policy in an effort to build its presence in
the market. For example, the firm recently recruited Mr Ramy Goldstein, from
Goldman Sachs, to head up its equity derivatives business in London.
'Recruitment became easier for them after that, and they were able to hire
some top-quality sales people,' said Mr Sheffield, of Jonathan Wren.
But the rapid expansion of the OTC market has made it hard to find
experienced derivatives personnel. Most banks first look internally, perhaps
moving staff from, say, fixed-income to equity derivatives, or from futures
broking to OTC derivatives trading.
There has been a strong build-up this year in equity derivatives, which many
banks believe will see the fastest expansion, as more fund managers become
users of derivatives. But there has also been a recent surge of growth in
the area of structured foreign exchange derivatives, following the upheaval
in the currency markets this autumn.
Although exchange-traded futures and options are a much more mature
business, the continued increase in the number of users of futures contracts
in Europe has encouraged European banks to build teams in that area as well.
While approaches to the structuring of derivatives business still vary -
some institutions differentiate between equity and debt products, or between
exchange-traded and OTC derivatives - many banks have been restructuring
their derivatives operations this year. For example, National Westminster
has been consolidating its exchange-traded business under NatWest Futures,
and has set up a derivatives unit called NatWest Financial Products.
But salaries are generally lower in the exchange-traded than in the OTC
market, partly because exchange-traded markets tend to be more competitive
and therefore less profitable.
'A good broker can be a loss maker if paid incorrectly,' said Mr Sheffield.
For example, a successful broker earning Pounds 50,000-Pounds 60,000 could
become a loss-maker if he was hired away for Pounds 80,000.
Meanwhile, US banks, which have been suffering some loss of business as a
result of their declining creditworthiness, are considering ways of creating
credit-enhanced units through which to channel derivatives business. A
number are likely to set up separately-capitalised derivatives units in the
coming year, based loosely on the model of Merrill Lynch Derivatives
Products, which was established a year ago.
According to Mr Christian Schade, vice-president in charge of European swaps
marketing at MLDP: '(Our derivatives business) has expanded across the
board, because of the vehicle. We can deal with counterparties who would not
normally consider us.'
After its first year of trading, MLDP has a portfolio of 550 transactions
with a notional value of Dollars 22bn, made up of 106 active counterparties.
Revenues for the nine months ending in September totalled Dollars 13m.
Salomon Brothers is expected to set up a credit-enhanced vehicle in the next
few months, while other banks currently believed to be planning separately
capitalised units are Continental, Citibank, Chase, Lehman Brothers and
Kidder Peabody.
Goldman Sachs set up a separately-capitalised derivatives unit earlier this
year, but with somewhat different objectives. 'We had certain positions
which it made sense to put into a special purpose vehicle; now we are
starting to look at other ways to use it,' said Mr Kipp Nelson, an executive
director at Goldman. 'It is not, broadly speaking, the vehicle we use for
derivatives transactions.'
While most banks with weak credit ratings, which are involved in the market,
are now considering setting up credit-enhanced vehicles, the concept is
still met with scepticism in some quarters.
'To go the full route, you have to put up a lot of capital, so unless you
can generate a lot of activity, the return on capital may not be
satisfactory,' said one banker.
The derivatives market boasts many success stories. But some banks and
securities houses have paid a price for their rush to participate.
Inadequate systems, weak controls, or simply insufficient understanding of
complex risks have created a number of victims.
The enthusiasm of some Japanese entrants to the market last year has
noticeably abated, while the recent shock waves in the foreign currency
markets also claimed some victims.
But with attractive margins still to be earned, many senior managers feeling
that they cannot afford to stay out of the market.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page IV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3352</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAFAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Survey of Derivatives (4): A global game for allies and
rivals - New exchanges around the world have reduced the Chicago giants'
market share / Technology has broken down domestic barriers and spanned
time-zones
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TRACY CORRIGAN and LAURIE MORSE
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   LONDON, CHICAGO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE FUTURES industry is becoming increasingly competitive, as new exchanges
spring up around the world and competing exchanges launch rival products.
Paradoxically, this has spurred greater interest in creating links between
exchanges. Technological advances have enabled traders around the world to
come together on screen-based systems, while the breakdown of barriers
between domestic markets has furthered the internationalisation of futures
as well as cash markets.
The Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME),
after 10 years of dynamic growth, have seen their world market share fall in
the last year or so, due to growing competition from European exchanges,
though year-on-year volume continues to grow and membership sales in the
second half of 1992 hit record levels.
As a share of global futures trading, volume on the CME and CBOT dropped to
40 per cent this year, compared with 80 per cent in 1985. In the first half
of 1992, the CME and the CBOT saw volume grow at 28 per cent and 11 per cent
respectively. But volume on the London International Financial Futures
Exchange (Liffe) surged 84 per cent rate, and on Germany's Deutsche
Terminborse (DTB) jumped 143 per cent.
Chicago has a natural disadvantage in its time-zone. While European centres
sit in the middle of the world's financial markets, overlapping Asia's
afternoon and North America's morning, Chicago gets the tail end of London's
afternoon, and misses Japan entirely.
In 1983, the CME franchised an exchange in Singapore to capture business in
a portion of the world that slept while Chicago traded. It aimed to capture
the interest of Hong Kong and Tokyo traders with the Singapore International
Monetary Exchange, in advance of Japan's entrance into the financial futures
arena.
But the Simex project was quickly overtaken by new exchanges in Japan and
other parts of the Pacific, and there have been no other franchises. By 1987
Chicago exchanges were turning from aggressive expansion to defensive market
positioning as foreign competition increased.
That year the CME proposed a sort of electronic futures supermarket with the
potential to offer products from every exchange in the world 24 hours a day.
In June, Globex, the international after-hours screen trading system, was
finally launched after five years in development by the CME, CBOT and
Reuter, at an estimated cost of Dollars 80m (Pounds 43m).
So far only the Marche a Terme International de France (Matif) has joined
the system. Its French bond futures will start trading on the system in the
first quarter of next year. But at least a half dozen other exchanges,
including the Sydney Futures Exchange and Liffe, are in advanced discussions
on signing up to Globex
Liffe appears to be getting closer to agreement on two stumbling blocks  -
the length of its initial commitment to the system, and the terms for
listing contracts on Globex.
Exchanges have also been in engaged in bilateral attempts at mutual offset
trading.
The CBOT has been courting Liffe, offering to swap part-time rights to its
10-year US Treasury note contract for night-time trading rights to Liffe's
successful Bund and Italian Bond futures. Old rivalries and a leadership
change at the Liffe have so far prevented consummation of the deal. This
would be only the second link of its kind, after the agreement between the
CME and Simex, on their Eurodollar contracts.
In a recent letter to members, Mr Nick Durlacher, Liffe's chairman, said the
exchange was discussing with the CBOT 'the possible establishment of a
mutual offset arrangement for certain products. This approach is consistent
with your board's long-held view that the trading of identical products in
different time zones is best achieved by exchange linkages,' he added.
The DTB, Liffe's rival for dominance of Bund futures trading, is also in
negotiation with Globex, and is further considering links, outside Globex,
with the CBOT, or with other exchanges.
'We are still in talks with the CBOT and Globex, but there are some legal
obstacles,' said Mr Jorg Franke, chief executive of the DTB. Until new laws
are introduced next year, the DTB's plans will be hampered by its inability
to comply with US rules on disclosure and market supervision.
The DTB is also planning to expand internationally by establishing trading
terminals throughout Europe. The exchange hopes to have terminals in London
during the first half of next year.
Meanwhile, some smaller European exchanges have already joined together in
an effort to broaden their distribution. The European Options Exchange in
the Netherlands, OM Group, with exchanges in Stockholm and London, and
Switzerland's Soffex signed a co-operation agreement in May. The alliance,
known as First European Exchanges (Fex) has since been further expanded by
the admission of Otob, the Austrian exchange. They plan to offer local
access to derivative financial products developed on other exchanges.
Meanwhile, some exchanges are still trying to grab contracts from other time
zones, a less than convincing competitive strategy, although it does
generate volume and preserves certain opportunities. In the past five years
Chicago has launched two Japanese stock index futures contracts, a yen bond
contract, English stock index futures, and a handful of currency cross-rate
futures.
Versions of the CBOT's US Treasury bond futures trade at the Liffe and the
Tokyo Stock Exchange, while the CME's highly successful Eurodollar futures
contract has been imitated by the Tokyo International Financial Futures
Exchange.
The New York-based Comex, best known for its precious metals contracts, this
month expanded its trading hours in a different direction. In a bid to
bolster its fledgling Eurotop 100 contract, it is asking its traders to open
the pit at 0530 EDT to catch part of the European morning stock markets. But
despite direct competition, the CBOT still keeps a stranglehold on US bond
futures, the Osaka Securities Exchange still dominates the Nikkei-225 index
market, and Liffe trades far and away more FTSE-100 contracts per day than
the CME. Whether the future lies in Globex, which has yet to prove itself,
or in bilateral links between exchanges, greater co-operation between
exchanges seems to be on the way. Although competition in some areas remains
fierce, exchanges seem to be finding that their common interests exceed
their points of conflict.
'We currently have more than 20 futures and options exchanges in Europe
(including those dealing in commodity derivatives), and we have to look at
how to come together,' said Mr Franke, of the DTB.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page III
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3353</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAE9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Survey of Derivatives (3): Volatility demands ingenuity - A
guide to some of the new products
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TRACY CORRIGAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
IT HAS been a difficult year in the financial markets. Sudden foreign
exchange and interest rate movements have taken investment managers and
banks by surprise.
Last year's easy trading profits have evaporated in volatile market
conditions, with difficulties often exacerbated by high short-term interest
rates. Companies, already struggling to cope with the recession, have also
had to deal with shifting revenues and costs due to currency devaluations.
Derivative specialists have reacted by designing products structured to
protect against - or take advantage of - market conditions. A series of new
products - or variations on old ones - designed to help fund managers and
companies cope with uncertainty and volatility have enjoyed a vogue.
Volatility has been most extreme in the foreign exchange market. As a result
of volatility, the cost of currency options, which companies typically used
to hedge their foreign exchange exposure, has rocketed. Banks found that
they had been writing (or selling) currency options too cheaply, because the
exchange rate mechanism had held down volatility, which helps determine the
price of options. Following the recent turmoil in currency markets, a number
of banks which had been writing options have found themselves out of pocket,
and are now putting their prices up.
As a result, some companies are eschewing options in favour of dynamic
hedging. In dynamic hedging, instead of buying options in the market,
exposure is hedged dynamically by buying and selling forward contracts in
the market in order to replicate options. This method creates substantial
savings for companies, according to Mike Shilling, assistant director at
Record Treasury Management.
Meanwhile, some banks are touting Safes - synthetic agreements for forward
foreign exchange - which are essentially forward contracts that do not
require an exchange of principal. As a result, banks need to devote less
capital and are less exposed to the risk that their counterparty will
default. There are two types of Safe: the exchange rate agreement, or ERA,
which protects the purchaser against a change in the forward foreign
exchange spread; and the forward exchange agreement (FXA), which gives
protection against a change in the spot rate as well as the forward spread.
On the interest rate side, the most successful product this year has been
the differential, or 'diff', swap, also known as the 'quanto' swap, which
allows a borrower or an investor to separate currency and interest rate
exposure, by paying interest rates based on one currency while taking the
currency risk of another.
For example, a company with Deutsche Mark liabilities, paying, say, 8 per
cent interest would prefer to be paying dollar rates of 3 1/2 per cent, but
may not want to be exposed to the dollar. Under a differential swap
agreement, the company agrees to receive D-Mark Libor in D-Marks, and to pay
a margin over dollar Libor in D-Marks.
The structure takes advantage of different-shaped yield curves to create
immediate cost savings for the borrower, and allows an investor to receive
higher interest rates without changing currency exposure.
Such an agreement typically runs from three to five years, so the risk for
either borrower or investor is that the shape of one or both yield curves
will change more quickly than expected, turning expected benefits into
losses.
'A major change this year has been the introduction of interest rate swaps
into fixed-income portfolios,' said one fixed-income specialist. This had
been encouraged by the availability of a liquid swaps market at times when
liquidity in cash markets had evaporated.
There are other bets on the yield curve, such as the Libor-in-arrears swap,
which has enjoyed a new vogue this year. The borrower essentially takes a
bet that implied forward rates are wrong, by having Libor set, say,
six-months in arrears. Meanwhile, specialists continue to expand the range
of applications for derivative techniques.
The commodity swaps market - which allows companies to reduce their exposure
to price changes in oil or metals - has grown swiftly in the last couple of
years. From Dollars 3bn in 1988, according to estimates, the size of the
market had reached Dollars 10bn before Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990,
and is now believed to total Dollars 40bn, mostly in oil-related
transactions.
Mr Malcolm Basing, of Swiss Bank Corporation, who heads the International
Swap Dealers Association, believes that commodity swaps will be a big growth
area next year. 'We have the computing power and the people, and the risk is
certainly there,' he said.
Meanwhile, the Chicago Board of Trade will launch the first contracts based
on insurance risk on December 11. The futures and options on catastrophe
insurance are designed for hedging underwriting risk associated with
unexpected disasters.
The contracts 'will be the first in a new complex for a vital industry in
need of efficient risk-management tools,' said Mr William O'Connor, CBOT
chairman. Other potential insurance contracts include health, homeowners and
reinsurance risk.
There is also talk of reviving property futures. A property futures contract
on the London Futures and Options Exchange (Fox) was closed last year,
following the discovery of trading irregularities designed to inflate volume
in the failing contract. The London International Futures and Options
Exchange (Liffe) is considering launching both property and insurance
futures.
Still on the drawing board is another new breed of derivatives. A number of
institutions are developing credit risk derivatives, which would allow fund
managers, banks or companies to synthetically reduce their credit risk.
For example, a fund manager holding double-A rated bonds could buy a
credit-risk option which would compensate him if the securities were
downgraded to single-A.
Potentially, the concept could also be extended to tackle the problem of
counterparty risk in the swaps market, but the development of credit risk
products is still at an early stage. Some problems, such as analysing the
pricing of credit, may not yet have been solved.
'With all these new products, the concepts are there,' said one specialist.
'But it is extremely difficult to find efficient reference points for
concepts like credit risk or insurance.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page II
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3354</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAE8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Survey of Derivatives (2): It's time to know what's going on
 -Why the regulators' eyes are fixed firmly on the OTC market
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PATRICK HARVERSON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
HORDES OF government regulators across the globe are grappling with the
question of how best to handle supervision of the over-the-counter financial
derivatives market. Rarely can so many different agencies have taken up the
same subject with so much enthusiasm.
Among the institutions that have launched formal and informal studies of the
market during the past year are:
The New York Federal Reserve; the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC),
the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), and the General Accounting
Office, all US watchdog agencies; the Bank for International Settlements
(BIS), in Basle, which is working alongside the International Organisation
of Securities Commissions (Iosco) on capital adequacy and accounting issues;
the Bank of England; and the Group of Thirty, a consultative group of top
bankers, financiers and academics from leading industrial nations.
Why such keen interest in derivatives? One answer is that the
over-the-counter market for financial instruments such as swaps, options,
and forward rate agreements is lightly regulated by modern standards,
particularly considering its size and rapid growth. Although the activities
of individual players are monitored by their own supervisory bodies (US
banks, for example, are answerable to the New York Fed, and securities
houses to the SEC), no one body is in charge of the entire market.
Opponents of derivatives in the US have tried to force the market into the
domain of a regulatory body, but their best recent attempt at doing so
failed two months ago when the Futures Trading Practices Act 1992 was
passed. The act reaffirmed that swaps (which make up the bulk of
over-the-counter derivatives business) are not futures contracts, and
therefore do not have to be traded on established exchanges and are not
regulated by the CFTC.
Perhaps the most compelling explanation for the rash of regulatory inquiries
is the perception, formulated over the past couple of years, that the
regulatory authorities do not entirely know what is going on.
While it is wrong to suggest that derivatives instruments are so complex
that regulators cannot understand them, officials privately admit that the
pace of innovation in the business means they have struggled to keep up with
the market's growth, and its implications for risk in an increasingly global
financial system.
Moreover, it is the job of regulators to look at financial risk and consider
how the system would cope in the event of a 'doomsday' scenario of
confusion, chaos and collapse. In the case of the derivatives market, the
regulators want to know what would happen if one of the biggest players in
the market were to go under, creating a massive gridlock throughout the
system as its many counterparties struggle to replace their defaulted
contracts.
The problem with derivatives is that no one is entirely sure what would
happen. So regulators are hurriedly trying to learn about the risks of the
business (which is why JP Morgan held a series of well-attended derivatives
seminars for regulators during the summer).
The main risk that concerns them is credit risk - what happens when a
counterparty to a contract defaults on its payments. In the US, the
participants in the market have gone furthest towards addressing credit
problems by drawing up the International Swap Dealers Association (Isda)
master agreement, a flexible, all-purpose document that allows an
intermediary to reconcile all of its transactions with a defaulted
counterparty and come up with a final net payment.
This practice of netting has become a crucial factor in the growth of the
derivatives market. Bankers say that not only does it reduce credit risk, it
also means that if capital adequacy rules are applied to the net, not gross,
value of transaction payments, participants in the business can reduce the
amount of capital they have to put aside to support the business by as much
as 50 per cent.
The central problem with netting, however, is that its status as a legally
recognised practice is only ensured in the US. In non-US jurisdictions, no
one knows if the Isda master agreement and netting would hold up in a
bankruptcy court.
The BIS has given netting its unofficial seal of approval, but only in a
somewhat hedged manner. The Lamfalussy Report, in November 1990, concluded
that bilateral netting was 'virtually certain' to be legally binding in all
Group of Ten countries.
The derivatives industry seized on the finding as proof that netting would
work. Yet regulators point out that the Lamfalussy Report also expressed
reservations, saying that no single form of bilateral netting arrangement
exists which will work in every jurisdiction, primarily because each
contract has to be tailored to fit the bankruptcy law under which it is
designed to operate.
This thorny issue is currently being looked at by a BIS sub-committee. It is
looking into credit-related risk, which includes both bilateral and
multilateral netting. This dual approach has disappointed some industry
observers, who claim that the investigation of multilateral netting - a
technique which would require the establishment of a central clearing house
and is probably many years away - is holding up the inquiry into bilateral
netting and should be kept separate.
A second BIS sub-committee is looking into market-related risk - what
happens to derivatives in the event of sudden and dramatic shifts in market
prices and conditions. One central banker categorised this study as an
effort to understand how market risk can be incorporated more fully into
current risk-adjusted capital structure, which is primarily designed to
account only for credit risk.
Both sub-groups are still conducting their studies. The market-risk group's
investigations are currently stalled, because of differences between
national regulatory agencies, while the credit-risk group is waiting to see
what the BIS supervisors committee has to say on the subject.
As one senior central banker admitted, any action on netting from the BIS is
'not months, but years away.' The market's participants are left grinding
their teeth in frustration at the delays. Mr Mark Brickell, a former Isda
chairman and member of JP Morgan's emerging markets group, believes that the
quicker netting is recognised the better. He says: 'We'll have a less risky
system when more transactions are put under these (netting) agreements.'
While international regulators like to view derivatives on a global scale,
and look at the systemic risks in the business, they are also worried about
practices at individual banks and securities houses, and whether they are
being adequately monitored by the authorities.
The Bank of England, for example, is currently conducting its own study into
both over-the-counter and exchange-traded derivatives, to find out more
about the new instruments in the market, and to discover whether the banks
and securities houses that design and trade them, and the corporate
customers who use them, fully understand the risks they are taking.
In this respect, some regulators are particularly worried that, as the
margins intermediaries earn on the simpler, more established, products
decline in a maturing, more competitive market, some banks and securities
houses may be rushing into more complex, esoteric instruments where the
returns are higher, but where the risks are less well understood.
Perhaps the greatest worry is that the senior management and boards of
directors of these companies do not know what is happening. As one senior
regulator puts it: 'We feel that some directors are not wholly comfortable
with derivatives, and they don't know anybody who they can trust. There is a
gulf between the top and medium level that is not being wholly bridged.'
It is a point echoed by another central banker, who accepts that, while many
derivatives involve risks that bankers are familiar with, the newer, more
complex instruments which combine risks in a single product, transform those
risks in a way that is unfamiliar to senior bankers.
This concern that innovation is getting out of hand was best expressed in
the now notorious speech to New York bankers, in January, by New York Fed
chairman Mr Gerald Corrigan. Mr Corrigan's comment that 'hi-tech banking and
finance has its place, but it's not all that it's cracked up to be' was
clearly aimed at the sharp end of the business, where the pace of innovation
is most hectic.
In its defence, the industry argues that only a small proportion of the
total derivatives business involves the new hi-tech instruments that
regulators, legislators and the press make such a fuss about. Derivative
specialists also say these new products are less complex than they look,
that most are variations on a theme - primarily different combinations of
risk-management instruments, combinations easily broken down into component
parts that have been used and understood for years.
Industry insiders also decry the notion that senior management does not
understand what their derivatives people are doing. While some accept that,
in the early days, the view that 'rocket scientists were bamboozling
management' may have been partially valid, the level of awareness and
understanding of the business is said to be much higher today.
Furthermore, Mr Malcolm Basing, current head of Isda, questions whether
senior managers should be expected to know every detail of the derivatives
business. After all: 'How many people at GM who make motor-cars understand
the engineering of the motor in details, or how a catalytic converter
works?'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page II
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3355</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAE7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Survey of Derivatives (1): Ever more complex - The industry
hopes that the many studies and investigations currently being undertaken by
regulators are part of a drive to deepen their understanding of the market,
rather than a prelude to tighter regulatory controls
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TRACY CORRIGAN and PATRICK HARVERSON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
IN THE past 10 years, the most creative engineering in the world of
international finance has been concentrated in the huge and rapidly growing
market for derivative products.
Futures, options, swaps and related instruments today make up an estimated
Dollars 10,000bn in investments traded both over-the-counter (OTC) and on
regulated exchanges.
Many exchange-traded futures and options contracts are now more liquid than
the cash markets on which they are based.
Innovative OTC derivative products sold directly by banks and securities
houses to companies or fund managers, meanwhile, are rapidly being subsumed
into the mainstream. This has fuelled the development of ever more complex
variations as intermediaries, searching for higher spreads in an
increasingly competitive environment, no longer offer just straightforward
options but a seemingly endless variety of twists, such as caps and
range-forwards, which slightly alter the degree of exposure to different
market movements.
The technology used in the derivatives market is often applied throughout a
range of underlying products. Swap technology, allowing counterparties to
exchange interest-rate and currency flows, is now being applied to the
equity, commodity, and insurance markets.
Although the exchange-traded business is more mature than the OTC business,
the two halves of the derivatives market are interdependent. Banks which
sell OTC products use exchange-traded markets to offset the risk they take
on when writing options or swap agreements; so without the development of
efficient and active futures trading, the massive growth in over-the-counter
derivatives would have stalled.
The OTC market's growth could not have happened, either, without the
information technology revolution. The advent of the desktop personal
computer has allowed investment bankers to construct complex products and
transactions that could never have been designed, priced or monitored under
the old system of writing trades into book ledgers.
The technological changes came at a time - the early and mid-1980s - when
banks and securities houses were looking to diversify. Tougher capital
requirements for banks, imposed by international regulators, forced them to
turn from their traditional lending business, where margins had been
squeezed, while securities firms were looking for ways to move away from
their reliance on their broking and underwriting businesses.
The pool of derivatives users has grown rapidly. While only the biggest
multinationals were involved with derivatives in the early days, now smaller
corporations, pension funds, insurance companies, money managers and small
to mid-sized banks are all jumping on the bandwagon.
They have become familiar with the concept of using derivatives to hedge
risk, balance portfolios and participate in new markets that might normally
be outside their reach.
Yet the dynamic growth of the OTC derivatives market - the International
Swap Dealers Association (Isda) says it now totals Dollars 4,300bn in
outstanding contracts (compared with Dollars 866bn just five years ago) -
has created new types of risk and exposure for financial institutions.
Bank and securities industry regulators find themselves in the rather
uncomfortable position of supervising a business they do not always fully
understand, and assessing asset-like instruments that do not show up on
participants' balance sheets.
There are also substantial variations in the way intermediaries handle risk,
from the most sophisticated players using complex computer models, to some
of the less sophisticated, newer participants, who may limit their use to
more straightforward transactions, so that risk is more easily managed.
There is also a fear among regulators that techniques applied to a broad
variety of underlying markets ties markets more closely together, increasing
the potential for shock in one part of the global financial system to be
quickly transmitted to other parts.
Mr Malcolm Basing, chairman of Isda, however, thinks those fears are
overdone. He says: 'I'm at a loss to understand why people think that. If
anything, markets are now more open between countries, which reduces risk.'
The authorities are taking an especially close look at the practice of
netting, a risk-reduction method whereby the payment flows involved in a
large number of derivatives contracts between regular counterparties are
'netted out' to produce one single measure of credit exposure.
Although netting is legally recognised in the US, with Isda providing an
all-purpose master document for counterparty contracts, elsewhere the legal
status of netting remains uncertain. This frustrates the market's biggest
players, who believe that netting not only reduces counterparty credit risk
but also frees up funds for expansion, because it lowers the amount of
capital that banks and securities houses have to set aside under
international capital adequacy rules.
The industry hopes that the many studies and investigations into the
business currently being undertaken by regulators are part of a drive to
deepen their understanding of the market, and not a prelude to tighter
regulatory controls on intermediaries and users of derivatives.
One of the main problems with the derivatives market is in coming to terms
with its size and the level of risk involved in transactions. The
trillion-dollar figure that catches the interest of regulators and
politicians covers the notional amount of derivatives contracts outstanding,
and is useful only as a guide to business activity and the growth of the
market.
Bankers say that derivatives risk is best measured by calculating net
replacement value - the cost of replacing netted contracts if a counterparty
defaults. When measured by net replacement value, banks' exposure to
derivatives risk drops dramatically to levels below comparable exposures to
traditional lending activities. The ratings agency Standard &amp; Poor's has
calculated that the net replacement value of the Dollars 3,400bn of total
outstanding swap contracts is slightly more than Dollars 90bn, or just 2.6
per cent.
The problem with net replacement value accounting, however, is that
derivatives are dynamic - the risk profile of each transaction changes
constantly as markets and prices move. Intermediaries mark their books to
market at the end of each day, but those snapshots of dealers' positions can
be redundant within minutes. It is the fluid nature of the business that
worries regulators, who fear intermediaries' risk measurement and risk
management systems and procedures cannot keep tabs on the constantly
shifting sands of derivatives.
The more mature exchange-traded markets, meanwhile, also continue to expand.
Although the big US exchanges in Chicago have seen their market share
dwindle, because of competition from other exchanges and from the OTC
market, growing numbers of western European countries now have their own
futures exchanges, and new markets are being set up in developing countries,
such as Latin America.
Increasingly sophisticated information technology may cause a gradual shift
away from the traditional trading of futures in trading pits. Last June,
Globex, the round-the-clock futures trading system developed by the Chicago
Board of Trade, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and Reuter, was launched
after five years in development, at an estimated cost of Dollars 80m. So
far, the Matif in Paris is the only European exchange to have signed up, but
others, including the London International Financial Futures and Options
Exchange, are in advanced discussions.
Mr Leo Melamed, head of Globex, hailed the debut as 'the dawn of a new era'.
Even if it does not fulfil expectations, Globex has sparked a reassessment
of the future of exchanges by reviving ambitions to form links between
exchanges, and for cross-listing of products.
Whether it be new products such as insurance and pollution derivatives, or
new trading systems like Globex, one of the chief characteristics of the
exchange and OTC derivatives business is innovation. With large pools of
users among companies and investment managers still to be tapped, and
sizeable profits to be earned, the pace of growth is unlikely to slow
significantly over the next few years.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
DERIVATIVES EXPOSURE (DOLLARS BN)
The top eight US commercial banks
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
                         Total
                      notional         Total
                      value of   replacement
                     contracts      value of
                    originated     contracts
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
Citicorp                 1,426          23.5
Chemical Banking         1,296          19.4
JP Morgan              1,014          20.0
Bankers Trust              958          21.6
Chase Manhattan            837          16.7
Bank America               795          18.4
First Chicago              387           7.2
Continental Banking        136           2.7
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
Figures refer to exposure and contracts as of June 30,1992
Source: Standard &amp; Poor's
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page I
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3356</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAE6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / London Stock Exchange: Second line stocks take the lead
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SECOND line stocks continued to make good progress in London yesterday but
early gains in the blue chip names were reversed towards the close by a rout
in the stock index futures sector. Once again, however, traders stressed
that selling pressure was modest, and the FT-SE Mid 250 Index strongly
outperformed the FT-SE 100.
The first half of the trading session went well, with the market leaders
moving ahead, encouraged first by further firmness in sterling and then by
favourable October statistics on UK consumer credit. A firm pound is
regarded as underpinning hopes for a further cut in base rates, probably
just after Christmas, and also suggests overseas investment in UK
securities.
The Pounds 76m increase in net credit to consumers in October provided
support for belief that some areas of the domestic economy have begun to
show signs of recovery. However, the stock market, having already discounted
some pick-up in economic activity since Britain's departure from the
European monetary system, remained inclined towards caution.
Nevertheless, the Footsie gained 16.6 to 2,776 before topping out smartly at
mid-session. Share prices then hung fire for a while, with turnover fading
away. The crunch came when the premium on the December FT-SE Index futures
contract suddenly contracted. Share prices reacted sharply and the market
fell by 24 points to show a net loss of 7.6 on the Footsie.
A modest rally at the close, also sparked from the stock index futures
market, left the FT-SE Index at 2,754.5 for a net loss of 4.9. But FT-SE Mid
250 Index, in contrast to the Footsie which is made up of 100 leading
stocks, had a firm session throughout, closing with a gain of 13.1 at
2,674.3.
Trading volume was reduced, bringing the day's Seaq-reported total down to
426.6m shares from Friday's 676.1m. But, as indicated by the FT-SE Mid 250
Index performance, turnover in the second line issues well outstripped that
in the Seaq listed stocks.
Moreover, the value of retail, or customer, business rose on Friday to
Pounds 1.53bn, one of the best daily totals of recent weeks and extending
the prolonged run of relatively profitable trading for the London-based
securities industry.
Little heed was paid to an opening gain of 10 Dow points in New York,
although there were reports of selective buying of London equities from
across the Atlantic.
The market was held back by selling of a handful of blue chip issues,
notably ICI which attracted adverse review from the brokerage community.
Retail and stores issues lacked supporters, in spite of the favourable
consumer credit news. Some leisure and hotel issues, however, found
encouragement from the terms of the long-expected sale by Forte of its
Gardner Merchant catering division.
Market strategists remained optimistic, taking the view that the market's
surge towards new territory has been well underpinned by last week's signs
of recovery in the US economy and by the boost to the UK's competitiveness
provided by the prolonged fall in sterling. However, some believe that the
market could react should the next base rate cut be long delayed, - even if
German rates are shaved this week.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 36
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3357</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAE5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / London Stock Exchange: Forte deal satisfies
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOEL KIBAZO, CHRISTOPHER PRICE and STEVE THOMPSON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE long-awaited and well-signalled sale by Forte of Gardner Merchant, its
catering subsidiary, nevertheless managed to take the market by surprise as
some investors took fright at the headline figure and sold the shares.
However, an afternoon presentation by the hotel group helped soothe some of
the suspicions that Gardner had been sold too cheaply and the shares
regained some of their losses before the close of trading.
The complex deal involves Forte investing Pounds 60m in the new venture,
with the remaining Pounds 342m price tag being paid by a combination of
institutions and the Gardner management. At the same time, Forte announced
it was buying a chain of French roadside restaurants and sealing a similar
deal in Italy, in keeping with its declared strategy of expanding its
Continental food operations.
Mr Ron Littleboy at Nomura said that the deal would ease dividend worries
and greatly improve Forte's debt position. 'This is a very good deal for the
group,' he said. Others were less impressed. One long-term bear of the stock
suggested that the Gardner sale changed very little and that the problems of
'flat trading and unimaginative management' meant downward pressure on the
shares would remain. Having dropped 7 on the news of the disposal, they
recovered to close 2 1/2 lighter at 167 1/2 p. Turnover was a healthy 4.2m.
Amstrad surprises
Many market operators were surprised at the performance of Amstrad shares
after suggestions in the press that the 30p a share bid for the minority 66
per cent of the shares owned by Mr Alan Sugar would probably fail.
Amstrad stock dropped to 22 1/2 p at the opening as speculators sold their
shares, but later stabilised and closed a net 4 off at 24p. Turnover was a
rather disappointing 1.5m.
One electronics specialist said he was very surprised at the shares'
performance after news that then Sugar bid would probably fail: 'They've
held up quite nicely, I thought they would fall to 10p.' Another analyst
said he thought, 'there was very little downside from here; the stock was
trading in the low 20p's before the bid was announced.'
S&amp;N cheer
A sigh of relief greeted interim figures from Scottish &amp; Newcastle
Breweries, the shares jumping 12 to 413p, as the effect of the recession
appeared to be not as bad as had been signalled last week in results from
two of S&amp;N's competitors. Pre-tax profits were Pounds 108.4m against Pounds
115.7m with a slightly improved dividend also lending the shares support.
However, analysts foresee a dull time for the shares in the short-term with
a flat beer market and dull leisure business offering little in the way of
stimulus for earnings growth.
While remaining a holder of the shares, Mr Graeme Eadie at County NatWest
foresees some recovery potential. 'Being concentrated in the north and
Scotland, S&amp;N is likely to benefit more than the likes of Bass and Whitbread
as we come out of recession.'
The two classes of BT shares drifted easier, with the fully-paid closing off
7 1/2 at 403 1/2 p and the partly-paid 6 down at 301p with good volumes as
the market awaited news of the appointment of the adviser to the government
for the third issue of BT shares.
There were hints of some determined US selling of BT stock as some investors
referred to their charts of the run up to BT II, where the shares fell
around 15 per cent relative to the market ahead of the listing. The Ofgas
statement of 'rate of return' for British Gas was also cited as partly
responsible for the slippage in BT shares.
Merchant bank SG Warburg sprinted 17 higher to 516p amid strong hints that
the group will again advise the Government on the sale of the third tranche
of BT shares.
Vodafone edged up 5 to 410p on 1.1m traded with one of the leading US
brokerages, Lehman Brothers, said to have been a strong supporter of the
shares.
Electronics group Tunstall jumped 10 to 309p after the 20 per cent leap in
full-year profits and the 12.1 per cent increase in the dividend total.
Of the day's two newcomers to the market, Tadpole Technology, placed at 65p
a share, opened at 73p and quickly raced up to 86p before settling at 85p.
Hunters Armley, the printing group whose stock was placed in the market at
90p a share, moved ahead to touch 103p during early trading, but later eased
to close at 99p.
British Gas was the weakest performer in an oil and gas sector short of
activity but full of stories. Gas shares retreated to 272 1/2 p before
stabilising and closing a net 4 off at 274p, on turnover of 7.6m, after
Ofgas, the industry regulator, issued a report of rates of return on Gas's
pipeline business.
The report was in favour of a reduction in Gas's real return from this
business, from the 6.7 per cent level thought to be needed by Gas to the
level of 2 1/2 to 5 per cent recommend by Ofgas. One of the stockmarket's
gas specialists said he thought it likely that the authorities will find in
favour of the Ofgas view.
BP eased a faction to 228p after the company revealed a 600m barrel increase
in oil reserves during its presentation to London oil analysts. US investors
now account for some21.8m per cent of BP's shares.
Calor held at 218p but one sector specialists said there was 'Real unease
among analysts about the unexpected and unexplained resignation of the
group's highly respected finance director, Mr AM Pate. 'It could just be
that SHV is flexing its muscles but there are concerns that there has been a
disagreement over accounting policies,' said the analyst. SHV last week
increased its stake in Calor to just below 49 per cent.
Impressive full year results from Airtours left analysts searching for
superlatives as the tour operating group again exceeded market expectations.
The company refused to comment on whether it still harboured interests in
rival Owners Abroad, and this speculation was said to have held the shares -
which have also run ahead prior to the results - steady at 260p. Owners
edged forward a penny to 77p.
Talk that Kingfisher was eyeing the German interests of US store giant
Woolworth found little support and the shares drifted back 3 to 577p in thin
trading. Hints from Great Universal Stores that its catalogue business was
winning market share continued to underpin the shares and they rose 14 to
1667p. A shortage of stock was said to have been behind Kwik Save's jump of
24 to 775p.
Speculation that British Aerospace would soon win a lucrative order for the
Hawk trainer aircraft from Saudi Arabia under the Al Yamamah defence
project, helped the shares buck the market trend. They gained 7 to 141p,
with sentiment further boosted by reports that a collapse in the European
Fighter Aircraft (EFA) project, on which BAe is the leading UK contractor,
may be averted. Turnover was 4.2m.
A squeeze sent Smiths Industries climbing 8 to 348p. The dividend increase
at Westland as it reported an 11 per cent improvement in full year figures,
just ahead of expectations, cheered the market and the shares firmed 3 to
116p. Whessoe were wanted ahead of results on Thursday. The shares gained 17
to 234p. Also wanted were Siebe, 8 better at 387p, ahead of today's interim
figures.
Among motor stocks, the improvement in car sales helped Lex Service gain 10
to 263p.
Shares in ICI retreated following a downgrade from the company's broker.
Blaming weak October trading, Hoare Govett cut its forecast for the current
year by Pounds 40m to Pounds 540m, lopping a similar amount from 1994 to
Pounds 680m. The shares fell 11 to 1025p.
In transport stocks, P&amp;O bounced 2 to 462p, in trade of 1.8m. Strong demand
was seen for NFC. Turnover rose to 8.1m and the shares having touched 284p,
closed 4 harder at 282p.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1992
NEW HIGHS (68).
OTHER FIXED INTEREST (1) Utd. Mex. States 16 1/2 pc '08, AMERICANS (3)
Chrysler, Echlin, Varity, BREWERS (1) Taunton Cider, BLDG MATLS (2) Anglian,
Wolseley, BUSINESS SERVS (3) Hays, Serco, Wills, CHEMS (2) Croda, Halstead
(J), ELECTRICALS (2) Nokia Pf., Volex, ELECTRONICS (2) Electrocomps.,
Tunstall, ENG AERO (1) Smiths Inds., ENG GEN (1) FKI, FOOD RETAILING (7)
Argyll, Iceland Frozen, Kwik Save, Morrison (Wm), Do 5 1/4 pc Pf., Park
Food, Sainsbury (J), HEALTH &amp; HSEHOLD (1) Quality Care Homes, HOTELS &amp; LEIS
(3) Granada, Do 7 1/2 pc Pf., Sleepy Kids, INSCE LIFE (2) Liberty Life,
Refuge, INV TRUSTS (13) Brit. Assets IL '05, Broadgate Inv., GT Venture
Wts., Gartmore Scot. Zero Pf., Gartmore Value Zero Pf., Law Debenture,
Malvern UK Index, Merlin Intl. Green, Murray Intl. B, Murray Split Cap. Zero
Pf., Scot. Natl. Zero Pf., Sphere Zero Pf., TR Tech. Stppd. Pf., MEDIA (5)
EMAP, Midlands Radio, News Intl., Reed Intl., Utd. News., MISC (3) Birkby,
Danka, Faber Prest, MOTORS (1) Trinity, OTHER FINCL (2) Aitken Hume, Govett,
OTHER INDLS (2) McKechnie, Scapa, PACKG, PAPER &amp; PRINTG (5) Bowater, Capital
Inds., Elswick, Gibbons Lyons, Portals, PROP (2) Embassy, Lon. Merchant 7
3/4 pc Cv '00-05, STORES (1) MFI, TEXTS (2) Claremont Garments, Youghal,
TRANSPORT (1) BAA.
NEW LOWS (44).
AMERICANS (1) Amdahl, BREWERS (1) Macdonald Martin A, BLDG MATLS (1) Russell
(A), BUSINESS SERVS (3) BET, Bridgend, CRT, CHEMS (1) Caird 7p Pf '09, CONTG
&amp; CONSTRCN (2) Brandon Hire, Melville, ELECTRONICS (2) Graseby, Prestwick,
ENG GEN (4) Beauford 7p Pf., Vortex, Wellman, Wilkes (J), FOOD MANUF (1)
Sentry Farming, HOTELS &amp; LEIS (3) Euro-Disney, Hi-Tec, Resort, INV TRUSTS
(3) Contl. Assets Wts., Jersey Phoenix Wts., Lon. &amp; Strathclyde, MEDIA (1)
Osprey Comms., MISC (2) Erskine House, Nu-Swift, OIL &amp; GAS (1) Ranger, OTHER
FINCL (2) BWD, Baltic, OTHER INDLS (1) Tomkins 6 1/4 pc Pf., PACKG, PAPER &amp;
PRINTG (1) Stat-Plus, PROP (3) Greycoat, High-Point, Markheath, STORES (2)
Alexon, Colorvision, TEXTS (2) Cupid, Foster (J), TRANSPORT (1) Vard, MINES
(6) East Rand, Joel (HJ), Monarch Res. '93, Northam Platinum, Rand Mines,
Renison.
Other market statistics, Page 24
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 36
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3358</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAE4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / London Stock Exchange: Futures and Options Trading
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOEL KIBAZO
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A SQUEEZE in stock index futures led to a strong advance in the first half
of the session before sizeable selling brought a decline in the afternoon,
writes Joel Kibazo.
Trading in December opened firmly at 2,779, some 11 points above Friday's
close and strong demand moved it quickly forward and it pulled the
underlying cash market ahead. By noon, the December contract was trading at
2,792, which proved to be the day's high, with sentiment encouraged by
favourable data on UK consumer credit for the month of October.
It was however the weakness in the short sterling contract that led to a
turnaround in the fortunes of the contract and it fell heavily, not only
causing a decline in the premium, but led to falls in the underlying
equities though some bargain hunting at the close was reported by dealers.
December finished at 2,757, around 11 points below Friday's close and around
its fair value premium to cash of about 4. Turnover was 7,571 contracts.
In traded options, activity in the index options accounted for the bulk of
the day's total turnover of 23,954 lots. The FT-SE 100 option traded 12,451
contracts, while the Euro FT-SE option saw business of 3,947 lots. In stock
options Lonrho was the busiest with a total of 755 contracts. Asda traded
723 lots, followed by Shell which traded 633 contracts.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 36
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3359</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAE3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / World Stock Markets (America): Rosy outlook lifts Dow again
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PATRICK HARVERSON
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Wall Street
GROWING confidence about the economy continued to feed through into higher
share prices on US stock markets, writes Patrick Harverson in New York.
At the close the Dow Jones Industrial Average was up 18.65 at 3,307.33, the
high for the day. The more broadly based Standard &amp; Poor's 500 also finished
firmer, up 3.23 at 435.29 at another new record close, while the Amex
composite eased 0.59 to 394.36 and the Nasdaq composite added 4.93 at
666.53, its own all-time high. Turnover on the NYSE was 218m shares, and
rises outpaced declines by 1204 to 651.
Although there were no new economic figures out yesterday, share prices made
further gains as investors continued to buy stocks in the wake of last
week's better-than-expected November employment report, and in anticipation
of an improvement in economic growth during 1993.
Market sentiment was aided by the reaction of Treasury investors to recent
good economic news. Instead of selling bonds, as they would normally do,
investors have been buying government securities because they believe that
the stronger the recovery, the less chance there is of a new Democratic
administration introducing a deficit-widening package of aggressive fiscal
measures to stimulate the economy.
Investors were also encouraged by the news that president-elect Bill Clinton
has chosen senator Lloyd Bentsen to be his new Treasury secretary.
Among individual stocks, American Express rose Dollars 1 3/8 to Dollars 24
7/8 in turnover of 7.4m shares as investors responded positively to
confirmation over the weekend that the company's chairman and chief
executive, Mr James Robinson, will resign his post next year after 15 years
at the helm of the financial services group.
ICN Pharmaceuticals dropped Dollars  3/4 to Dollars 7 1/2 after the group's
SPI Pharmaceuticals subsidiary cut its quarterly dividend by more than 20
cents and warned that it would not meet analysts' estimates for the fourth
quarter.
Gtech Holdings jumped Dollars 3 1/2 to Dollars 38 on the news that it had
won the contract to supply the on-line system for the New York State
lottery.
Family Dollar Stores fell Dollars  3/8 to Dollars 22 7/8 on news of a 4.8
per cent fall in same-store sales during November. Other retailers were
mixed at the start of what is the second full week of the Christmas shopping
season. JC Penney firmed Dollars 1 at Dollars 78 1/8 , Woolworth was up
Dollars  1/4 at Dollars 33 1/4 , Kmart edged Dollars  3/8 higher to Dollars
26 5/8 , Federated Department Stores eased Dollars  1/8 to Dollars 19 and
Neiman Marcus slipped Dollars  1/8 to Dollars 19.
On the Nasdaq market, Kirschner Medical jumped Dollars 1 1/2 to Dollars 9
1/2 on the news that Figgie International will buy a 20 per cent stake in
the company for Dollars 12 a share as part of a pact that also involves a
reciprocal distribution agreement. Figgie fell Dollars  1/8 to Dollars 16
5/8 after the deal was announced.
Canada
TORONTO share prices ended mixed in uneventful dealings.
The TSE 300-stock composite index added 3.67 points or 0.11 per cent to
3,293.09, with advancing issues topping declines 314 to 291. Volume dropped
to 37,510,000 shares from 43,310,000 on Friday, and trading value was
CDollars 311.1m.
The industrial products sub-group posted the largest gain among the sectors,
up 1 per cent on index, while consumer products were moderately higher.
Financial services, mining and energy ended steady, while golds were off
moderately.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 33
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3360</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAE2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / World Stock Markets: South Africa
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
INDUSTRIAL and mining shares closed stronger on good local demand while gold
shares eased on profit-taking after last week's gains. Trade was thin.
The gold index fell 21 to 864 and the overall index moved up 9 to 3,240. The
industrial index added 27 to 4,295.
The diamond giant De Beers recovered some of its recent losses, rising 75
cents to R58. Gencor added 5 cents to R9.80.
The food group Tiger Oats was up 25 cents at R46.25 and SA Breweries added
R1 to R57.
Among gold shares, Dries lost R1 to R41 and Kloof fell 50 cents to R29.15.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 33
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3361</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAE1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / World Stock Markets (Europe): Switzerland shrugs off 'No'
vote
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By IAN RODGER and Our Markets Staff
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   ZURICH
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
ZURICH yesterday shrugged off the rejection by Swiss voters in Sunday's
referendum to join the European Economic Area (EEA), writes Ian Rodger in
Zurich.
'We were all braced for a very bad day. Maybe there will be a bit of a
correction tomorrow, but it seems that the Christmas rally is upon us,' said
Mr Silvan Trachsler, head of research at Union Bank of Switzerland.
But many analysts believe that the value of most Swiss equities will be hurt
in the short- to medium-term by the people's decision to remain outside the
expanded European single market.
'I cannot see how this is going to make things better for any Swiss shares,'
said Mr Stephan Meier, head of Swiss equity investment research at Swiss
Bank Corporation.
Mr Trachsler agrees: 'In the long term, Switzerland will have problems being
outside the EEA. Growth will be lower and unemployment will be higher.'
But yesterday, the widely anticipated, negative reaction to the 'No' vote
did not mat-erialise. The Swiss franc opened lower against the D-Mark but
soon recovered to close at Friday's level of SFr0.896 to the German
currency. The Swiss Index of leading shares was up 19.5 at 1,954.5, with
advances occurring on a broad front. Among international stocks, Roche PC's
rose SFr30 to SFr3,930 and Nestle registered shares put on SFr15 to
SFr1,085.
The all-share Swiss Performance Index was up 5.4 at 1,164.19, discrediting
the view expressed in advance of the vote that there would be an exodus from
the vulnerable second-tier, manufacturing shares to blue chips in the event
of a 'No' vote.
The only immediate victim of the 'No' vote was Swissair, which stands to be
the only major airline in Europe that will not participate automat-ically in
the planned liberalisation of air traffic within the EEA. Swissair bearers
fell SFr35 to SFr445. Some machinery exporters were also hit: Sulzer
registered shares fell SFr4 to SFr546, Georg Fisher bearers lost SFr25 to
SFr680 and Von Roll bearers lost SFr30 to SFr570.
Analysts suggested that there had been a lot of short-selling last week in
anticipation of a rejection of the treaty, and these positions had to be
covered quickly yesterday morning when it became apparent that the market
had fully discounted the result.
Mr Pierre Tissot, an analyst with the Geneva bankers Lombard, Odier, said
that was a plausible interpretation of the performance of the Union Bank of
Switzerland bearer share which opened at SFr810, SFr7 below Friday's close,
but finished SFr5 ahead at SFr822.
Mr Tissot argued that banks' profits too would be affected if the rejection
of the EEA prolonged the recession in the Swiss economy.
Analysts' main concern was for export-oriented manufacturers with
substantial production bases in Switzerland, companies such as Sulzer
Brothers, Georg Fisher, Landis &amp; Gyr and Von Roll.
Their Swiss-made products would now have to pass approvals in each European
country while all their European competitors would have automatic entry. An
analyst at James Capel said that the strength of the rejection would make
the boards of manufacturing companies look closely at moving out at least
part of their activities.
'The Swiss people may eventually change their minds, but these companies
cannot take the risk,' he said.
Other Efta stock markets took Switzerland's 'No' to closer ties with the
European Community in their stride, writes Our Markets Staff.
VIENNA, little changed on the day, saw low volume ahead of today's holiday.
Activity was also stunted by a break-down in the electronic trading system
of the OTOB futures and options exchange. The ATX index rose 1.44 to 755.75.
OSLO closed mostly higher with biggest gains coming in cyclical stocks. The
all-share index rose 0.85 to 376.21 in trading worth NKr225.8m. Elkem A
shares added NKr2 to NKr25 while Norske Skog's A shares finished NKr5 higher
at NKr74. Bergesen A shares added NKr4 to NKr102.5.
STOCKHOLM recovered after a weak opening, as the dampening effect of the
Swiss 'No' quickly wore off. The Affarsvarlden general index rose 7.0 to
871.4 as turnover dropped sharply to SKr451m from SKr727m.
The ball-bearings group SKF, which rose last week on takeover speculation,
slipped SKr1.5 to SKr78.50 on profit-taking.
HELSINKI closed higher in active trading, as the HEX index closed 13.1 or
1.5 per cent higher at 870.0 in turnover of FM140.1m.
FRANKFURT largely ignored the Swiss 'No' vote and was mildly encouraged by
some fresh corporate news. The DAX index put on 3.16 to 1,525.32 as turnover
shrank to DM3bn from DM4.4bn.
Among the banks, Dresdner was the latest to report 10-month results, in line
with expections and the shares improved DM1 to DM353.50. The market now
awaits Deutsche's figures, due today, which are forecast to be flat to
slightly lower. The shares were up DM2 at DM667. Bayerverein, which also
reported good 10-month results, rose just 50 pfg to DM418.50.
Degussa, up DM7.30 at DM334.50, surprised the market with
better-than-expected earnings in fiscal 1991/1992, with the pharmaceuticals
division performing well.
Other chemical stocks were unmoved by the news, with Hoechst down DM2.50 at
DM233.60, BASF 10 pfg weaker at DM207.40 and Bayer down 30 pfg at DM254.50
as the outlook for 1993 remains depressed.
PARIS focused on special situations as the CAC-40 index ended 6.93 higher at
1,788.61 in low turnover of FFr1.9bn.
Rhone-Poulenc CIs rose FFr14 to FFr506 in response to news late last week
that the government had postponed its plans to sell a substantial minority
stake in the chemicals group because of poor market conditions.
Shares in Club Mediterranee rose FFr6.30 to FFr345 following news that it
returned to profit in the year ended October 31.
Havas closed at the day's low of FFr421, down FFr1350 or 3.1 per cent, after
its chairman Pierre Dauzier told shareholders that he saw no improvement in
the media group's markets in 1993 and expects 1993's profit to be around the
same as in 1992.
Elf was steady at FFr346. After the close, the oil company's chairman said
he could not rule out a 35 per cent drop in profit in 1992.
MILAN saw some privatisation candidates rise sharply in a largely deserted
market due to the semi-holiday in Milan yesterday and today's national
holiday. The Comit index rose 7.37 to 430.92 in turnover estimated at L120bn
after Friday's L178.5bn.
State-controlled stocks were lifted by prime minister Giuliano Amato's
statement late on Friday that the treasury minister Piero Barucci was
heading the government team on privatisations, thereby taking Mr Barucci's
side in a recent dispute with the industry minister on privatisations.
Credito Italiano added L180 or 6.5 per cent to L2,950 while Assitalia put on
L539 or 7.1 per cent to L8,099.
AMSTERDAM lost ground in the afternoon as the dollar weakened, while the
lack of corporate news kept interest low. The CBS Tendency index closed up
0.2 at 105.8. Unilever advanced Fl 1.60 to Fl 186.30 and Elsevier was Fl 1
firmer at Fl 118.10.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
FT-SE ACTUARIES SHARE INDICES
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
December 7  THE EUROPEAN SERIES
Hourly changes
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Open     10.30     11.00    12.00
FT-SE Eurotrack 100     1053.77   1055.47   1056.80  1057.64
FT-SE Eurotrack 200     1136.92   1137.09   1138.55  1143.43
                          13.00     14.00     15.00    Close
FT-SE Eurotrack 100     1058.58   1058.93   1057.38  1056.02
FT-SE Eurotrack 200     1141.03   1139.76   1139.48  1137.52
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Dec 4     Dec 3     Dec 2     Dec 1    Nov 30
FT-SE Eurotrack 100    1052.78   1055.11   1052.11   1056.79   1057.75
FT-SE Eurotrack 200    1133.53   1136.09   1130.96   1135.62   1132.14
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Base value  1000 (26/10/90)  High/day: 100 - 1059.15; 200 - 1145.44
Low/day: 100 - 1053.77  200 - 1135.53
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 33
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3362</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAE0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / World Stock Markets (Asia Pacific): Nikkei lower ahead of
BoJ survey
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By EMIKO TERAZONO
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
SHARE prices moved marginally lower in quiet trading ahead of the release of
the Bank of Japan's quarterly business survey and the settlement for
December futures and options contracts at the end of the week, writes Emiko
Terazono in Tokyo.
The Nikkei average fell 88.57 to 17,207.12 after a high of 17,326.38 and a
low of 17,175.13 in the morning. The index moved up in early trading on
buying by public funds but hardly moved in the afternoon as investors took
to the sidelines.
Volume fell from 179m shares to 140m, the lowest since November 16. Public
funds and companies, purchasing for their employee stock ownership plans,
were the only participants noted. Declines led advances by 573 to 344 with
183 issues remaining unchanged. The Topix index of all first section stocks
lost 2.44 to 1,300.41 and in London, the ISE/Nikkei 50 index rose 0.56 to
1,050.92.
Investors did not react to a fall in money market rates. The unsecured
overnight call rate, strongly influenced by Bank of Japan's money market
operations, fell to 3.84375 per cent, the lowest since January 1989. Yields
on three-month certificates of deposit fell to a record low of 3.70 per
cent. Traders said last week's cut in the short-term prime rate by Sanwa
Bank prompted the easing.
Large-capital, interest-rate sensitive stocks rose slightly on the lower
interest rates. Nippon Steel was the most active issue of the day, rising Y1
to Y296, while Kawasaki Steel also gained Y1 to Y289.
Car stocks were higher on hopes of an early economic recovery in the US.
Toyota Motor gained Y10 to Y1,440 and Honda Motor rose Y40 to Y1,340.
Isetan, the department store, plunged Y250 to Y2,350. Traders said Shuwa,
the financially troubled real estate and stock speculator, was liquidating
its stake in Isetan.
Nihon Unisys fell Y20 to Y1,120 on reports that the Securities and Exchange
Surveillance Commission, the stock market watchdog set up last July, had
launched a raid on Teishin Fudo, a stock speculator group, for allegedly
cornering Nihon Unisys shares. Sumitomo Realty and Development, a leading
real estate developer whose affiliate, Sumitomo Fudosan Finance, had lent
some Y55bn to Teishin, retreated Y17 to Y543.
In Osaka, the OSE average fell 37.91 to 18,632.16 in volume of 11.1m shares.
Roundup
HONG KONG was the worst performer last week, according to the FT-A World
Indices, falling 12.9 per cent in local currency terms. In its weekly
report, Hoare Govett says that although the local economy remains strong
there is clearly an unpredictable element to the market because of the state
of political relations between Britain and China. It notes that
historically, such skirmishes have produced p/e levels of 8 or 9 times, but
that the market, now on a 1992 p/e of 11.2 and 9.4 for next year, is still
some way off these levels.
Yesterday, the market showed some signs of resistance to the political
tension. The Hang Seng index closed 76.35 lower at 5,191.35, but was off the
day's low of 5,126, in turnover of HKDollars 2.1bn.
The most active issue was HSBC Holdings, down HKDollars 1 at Dollars 54,
while Hang Seng Bank eased 75 cents to HKDollars 46.75 and Cheung Kong lost
50 cents to Dollars 18.10.
Other markets in the region were mixed. Bombay was closed because of
violence following the storming of an ancient mosque in Ayodhya.
AUSTRALIA was firmer in quiet trading. The All Ordinaries index rose 9.7 to
1,444.7 in turnover of ADollars 209.3m. Among active issues, CSR gained 7
cents to ADollars 3.90 after announcing the appointment of a new managing
director. BHP added 28 cents to ADollars 11.70, while News Corp climbed 40
cents to ADollars 29.60.
Banks were mixed, with Westpac gaining 4 cents to ADollars 2.96 on the
appointments of Mr Kerry Packer and Mr Al Dunlap, the managing director of
Consolidated Press Holdings, to the board. The shares were up 4 cents at
ADollars 2.96. National Australia rose 6 cents to ADollars 7.43 and ANZ lost
1 cent to ADollars 2.59.
SEOUL fell back as further evidence emerged that Hyundai Group companies
were funding the political campaign of Chung Ju-yung, the group's founder,
who is standing in the presidential elections on December 18. Hyundai Motor
fell Won1,000 to Won20,600 as the composite index shed 7.04 to 616.21.
MANILA advanced on good macro-economic news over the weekend and the
composite index closed up 4.70 at 1,284.24 in combined turnover of 216m
pesos.
Some analysts said that publication of lower November inflation data could
support the market this week.
KUALA LUMPUR declined on profit-taking. The composite index weakened 2.05 to
635.56 in turnover of MDollars 346m.
The debut of the financial services group, Malaysian Industrial Development
Finance, generated the day's most active dealings. MIDF closed at MDollars
3.18, up 68 cents from the offer price.
NEW ZEALAND fell back as both Telecom and Lion Nathan went ex-dividend. The
NZSE-40 index lost 5.32 to 1,512.76 in turnover of some NZDollars 24m.
Telecom rose a net 1.25 to NZDollars 2.40 while Lion Nathan fell a net 3
cents to NZDollars 3.90.
TAIWAN advanced in active trading with the weighted index putting on 27.82
to 3,755.77 in turnover of TDollars 12.8bn.
SINGAPORE eased, and trading concentrated on the OTC market. The Straits
Times Index fell 2.57 to 1,440.13 in turnover of SDollars 113m.
JAKARTA's index slipped 1.09 to 279.36 in dull trading. Astra was the most
active issue, up R125 to R8,625. Banks eased with Bank Bali and Bank Duta
both down R50 to R3,350 and R2,325 respectively.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 33
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3363</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAEZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Money Markets: Futures hit in late trade
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER JOHN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
STERLING futures fell as dealers adjusted positions yesterday and the belief
hardened that base rates will remain at 7 per cent for the next few months,
writes Peter John.
The March contract opened marginally higher but a rally was unsustainable
and it drifted back throughout the day. Then, shortly before the official
close, the contract was hit again and sold down to 93.27. The pressure came
from a large options-related trade. Dealers said one financial house had
sold short sterling and written more than 2,200 March 93.25 sterling calls.
At the official close, March short sterling was around its lows of the day
with more than 22,000 contracts dealt. It was joined by the franc and D-Mark
contracts which also retreated from expectations that interest rates are
about to fall. March Pibor settled 25 basis points lower at 91.30 while the
March Euromark contract fell 14 to 92.14.
Meanwhile, cash rates remained steady with three-month Libor holding at 7
1/8 . There was some pressure at the shorter end as a result of a lower than
expected liquidity shortage forecast from the Bank of England. Expectation
that the shortage would easily be taken out meant that few people would be
interested in borrowing overnight. The rate dropped to 6 1/8 per cent as the
Bank forecast a shortage of around Pounds 100m, up to Pounds 200m below some
estimates.
Among the main factors affecting the position were exchequer transactions,
expected to remove Pounds 775m from the system, take-up of treasury Bills
and paper maturing in official hands and bankers' balances below target.
These were partly offset by a fall in note circulation adding Pounds 780m.
The Bank did not operate in the money market at midday, nor in the
afternoon, but later revised its shortage forecast to Pounds 250m. During
late assistance, the period when the term of loans are not mentioned, the
central bank provided Pounds 180m.
It also announced the roll-over details of the temporary arrangement first
made available on September 18 to help money market liquidity after the
collapse of sterling on Black Wednesday. The Bank yesterday set a weekly
rate of 6 per cent on the agreement.
Meanwhile, German call money, which is reflected by the narrow money supply
band, firmed slightly to about 8.90 per cent after Friday's 8.85 per cent.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 27
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3364</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAEYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Foreign Exchanges: Dollar resists positive data
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER JOHN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE DOLLAR lost ground against a wide range of currencies yesterday despite
recent positive economic news from the US. Meanwhile sterling performed very
strongly against the dollar and continued its assault on the DM2.50 level
which it tested last week, writes Peter John.
The US currency opened at DM1.5787, down from Friday's close. Foreign
exchange dealers said that concentration on European currencies ahead of the
EC summit in Edinburgh ensured that the dollar remained on the sidelines.
Also, comments from the Bundesbank reaffirming commitment to current
interest rates prompted some weakness.
Mr Mark Austin, an economist with the HongKong Shanghai Bank said; 'People
have been holding long positions on the D-Mark which they have been closing
up. There was also a story that a slightly stronger performance of the US
economy would make Clinton less liable to make fiscal changes.'
The dollar was further affected by heavy switching as investors moved into
Swiss francs after Switzerland's rejection on Sunday of closer European ties
in the European Economic Area. The dollar closed nearly three pfennigs lower
against the D-Mark at DM1.5685 and hit SFr1.4000, down from SFr1.4335
previously. It was slightly weaker against the Yen.
The Swiss franc had suffered initially as the Swiss decision was considered
poor for the Swiss economy and for Switzerland as an investment centre.
However, the buyers who finally prevailed believed capital flows were in no
danger, and a 'no' took Switzerland further away from any association with
trouble in the ERM.
That 'safe-haven' benefit came into play again as rumours resurfaced that
the French franc could be devalued. A press article saying that France was
prepared to devalue its currency struck a chord with a number of dealers.
Despite a strong denial from the French finance ministry, the franc slipped
to FFr3.408 against the D-Mark.
Sterling continued to push against DM2.50. By the close of dealing in London
the pound was at DM2.490 against DM2.4875. It also rose to Dollars 1.5875
after hitting a peak of Dollars 1.6020, some three cents above its opening.
Economists said the pound was still in favour for its isolation from the
tension in the ERM rather than a fundamental recovery in the UK economy.
However, it also received a boost from a higher than anticipated rise in
consumer credit spending.
Slovenia's tolar continued to strengthen against other currencies in former
Yugoslavia in October, the anniversary of its introduction, figures from the
newly-independent country's central bank show.
The tolar, introduced at parity to the Yugoslav dinar on October 8 1991,
averaged 17.85 per 100 dinars in October this year, the Bank of Slovenia
said in its November bulletin.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 27
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3365</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAEXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture (Farmer's Viewpoint): Dreaming
of a dry Christmas - Heavy rain and flooding have damaged the UK's potato
and sugar beet harvests and delayed the planting of next year's cereal crop
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID RICHARDSON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
I'M dreaming of a dry Christmas, just like the ones we had before. For if
Britain's weather does not improve very soon, losses of this year's crops
still in the ground, and some of next year's crops not yet planted, could
rise to alarming levels.
Some commentators have put part of the problem down to the complacency of
farmers. After a series of dry, easy autumns, they say, farmers thought that
this was the pattern for the future and forgot how to plan ahead and deal
with a wet one. Undoubtedly these allegations contain an element of truth.
But it should also be remembered that many areas have had a full average
year's rainfall in just four or five months and that some entire valleys in
Wales and the West Country have been flooded for many days.
In the east, where I farm, natural drainage through the soil has not been
able to cope with the quantities of rain that have fallen. The other day we
had reason to dig a hole in a field and, though the surface of the soil was
like thick soup, a couple of feet down the subsoil was only just moist. This
gives credence to the water authorities' claims that water tables have not
yet been replenished after four years of drought.
Worst affected have been root crops like potatoes and sugar beet. In order
to harvest them it is necessary to dig them out of the saturated soil.
Needless to say this has been a frustrating and at times impossible task
this year. Hundreds of horsepower has been harnessed to the front of lifting
machines and trailers in an attempt to drag them along and salvage such
crops. But still substantial acreages remain unharvested.
These, often abortive operations have damaged the soil structure
considerably. All over the potato growing areas there are part harvested
fields characterised by deep water-filled tractor wheel ruts.
Many of the potatoes which have been lifted under such appalling conditions
have themselves been so badly damaged and bruised that they would be
unlikely to keep in store. Pushing them on to the spot market while they
were still saleable has contributed to the rock bottom prices growers have
had to accept this year.
Indeed it has been a thoroughly bad year for potatoes. Yields grown have,
ironically, been far too high for profitable prices. At no time during the
season has there been any prospect of a shortage and, even if many of those
still locked in the land are never lifted, there will be plenty of potatoes
to satisfy demand.
And now the Potato Marketing Board (PMB) is under threat. Its statutory
powers to control the area grown are regarded by many farmers as vital to
the relative stability of the UK market compared with those in the rest of
the EC. As president of the Council of Agriculture Ministers, Mr John
Gummer, UK minister of agriculture, has proposed a so-called 'light' EC
regime for potatoes. If adopted, it would create a virtually free market,
with no controls.
Mr Jim Godfrey, the newly-elected chairman of the PMB, has rejected the
proposals and he claims they have also been rejected by most other European
potato growers on the grounds that the UK's system is envied all over the
Community and should be extended, not abolished. It seems unlikely, however,
that growers' antagonism will prevent the proposed EC regime, or something
very close to it, from being adopted.
But to return to the wet weather. A few days ago I received from British
Sugar, the monopoly processor of all the sugar beet grown in this country, a
letter reminding me that the optimum date for completing the beet harvest
was the fifth of December; that I should, by then, aim to have my whole crop
in clamps and covered to protect it from frost. For some of this year's big
crop of roots will have to be stored on farms until next March because the
processing factories will not be able to deal with them earlier.
A couple of very wet days later I learned that British Sugars' estimate of
the quantity of sugar beet still to be harvested was 30 per cent of the
acres planted. Clearly growers, myself included, had been unable to respond
to the message because of the wet soil.
We will now have to take every opportunity to harvest the rest of the crop -
if that proves possible. For some land is so badly waterlogged that it is
impossible to run a tractor across it, let alone pull heavy harvesting
machinery.
But it is the knock-on effect of all this that is potentially the most
worrying. Significant acreages of the land still carrying unharvested root
crops were planned to have been planted with wheat and winter barley for
harvesting next July and August. It has, in fact, been calculated that UK
planting is 20 per cent behind schedule and it is now highly questionable,
even if the roots are gathered successfully, whether it will be wise even to
try to plant cereal seeds into cold wet land that has been subjected to such
mechanical abuse.
Germination in near freezing conditions will be slow, if it occurs at all,
and potential yields will be much reduced. Indeed many of the autumn cereals
already planted are suffering from the cold and wet and this in turn makes
them more vulnerable to attack by predatory slugs.
This has, in fact, been the worst year I can remember for slug grazing
damage to cereals. Slugs love wet weather. They also enjoy the residues of
chopped straw in the soil which is now more widely available since the straw
burning ban. There is little doubt that this has combined to create an ideal
environment for the slimy little vandals.
All this means that next year's potential UK cereal harvest is already
severely reduced. Taken together with set-aside, it could mean that the UK
produces 25 per cent less than last year and that would take it from sixth
biggest cereal exporter to barely having sufficient to satisfy domestic
demand.
And given that the same kind of weather conditions have been experienced in
most of the northern European corn belt, it would not seem unreasonable to
suggest that the 1993 harvest across the Continent will be significantly
reduced. Indeed I will speculate that the combination of set-aside and bad
weather could cut the total EC cereal yield by at least 15 per cent and
perhaps up to 20 per cent.
Should that happen, the EC would go from an 'embarrassing surplus' of
cereals to modest shortage in just one year.
Is this what CAP reform was intended to achieve? Did the Euro politicians
really want to risk cutting production by that much? Or did they, as they
sat in their Brussels ivory tower, take it for granted that the farmers of
Europe together with the Almighty would continue to increase production no
matter what?
As an old farmer once said to me, the trouble with the Almighty is that he
has no sense of proportion.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 26
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3366</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAEWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: IWC says output of wheat will
recover
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID BLACKWELL
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
WORLD WHEAT production could recover further from the poor levels of 1991-92
to reach 575m tonnes in 1993-94, the International Wheat Council said in its
initial forecast for the coming year yesterday.
While this is still well below 1990-91's 594m tonnes, it marks a steady
advance from 544m tonnes in 1991-92 and 557m tonnes estimated for 1992-93.
The IWC expects CAP reform in the EC and the Gatt talks to have limited
impact on world production. The effect of EC reforms 'is likely to be
limited in 1993-94, particularly since most small farms will not have to
comply with set-aside provisions'. As for Gatt, further progress is
necessary 'before meaningful reforms can be implemented'.
Production improvements are likely to be concentrated in traditional
importing countries, the council suggests. 'Import demand might therefore be
expected to fall in some regions, notably in Africa, central and southern
America, eastern Europe and parts of Asia, including India.'
Therefore the council expects world trade in wheat to fall further in
1993-94 to between 98m and 100m tonnes from an estimated 104m tonnes this
year. But it points out that this year has demonstrated the unpredictability
of the grain trade, with imports lower than expected in China but higher in
India and Brazil.
Russia will continue to be a large importer, making the provision of credit
facilities by exporting countries crucial.
The CIS and developing countries account for about 85 per cent of the world
wheat trade. 'The limited prospects for renewed global economic growth, and
the continued high level of international debt of the world's poorest
countries, will again inhibit effective import demand.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 26
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3367</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAEVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / World Commodities Prices: Market Report
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
LME base metals largely built on earlier gains in the afternoon and closed
steady, while nickel prices ended firmer. Dealers said NICKEL continued to
trade within a wide range, with short covering emerging in the afternoon
after Chinese buying in the morning. COPPER ran into some late
option-related selling, which prevented three-month metal moving above the
Dollars 2,220-a-tonne resistance level. But prices still closed firmer after
early Chinese buying, with final business at Dollars 2,219, up Dollars 19.
London's COCOA closed near the day's lows as sterling's continued advance
kept the market under pressure in quiet conditions. Dealers said the
physical market was also subdued with little sign of any further origin
activity after small-scale Ivorian sales towards the end of last week.
Robusta COFFEE futures closed marginally lower with the market experiencing
a temporary halt in its upward trend. Dealers said it would probably now
take buying from roasters to generate further gains.
Compiled from Reuters
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 26
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3368</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAEUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Palladium surge linked to cold
fusion interest
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
PALLADIUM'S PRICE rose to its highest level for 27 months in London
yesterday and some analysts linked the surge with recently renewed interest
in cold fusion, which some scientists suggest might become a source of
limitless energy.
But some traders were more prosaic. 'Someone is squeezing the hell out of
the market,' one suggested. 'If this was one of the London Metal Exchange
metals, someone would be having their knuckles rapped for doing some naughty
manipulation.'
Whatever the reason, palladium was fixed in London yesterday at Dollars
105.75 a troy ounce, up Dollars 2.75 from Friday.
The market brushed off news that Russia, the world's biggest producer, had
denied rumours that it had been forced to buy metal on the market. Reuter
quoted Mr Nikolai Menshikov, director of Almaxjuvelierexport in Moscow, as
saying talk that Russia had been buying palladium from South Africa was '100
per cent not true'.
Palladium, used by the electrical and dental industries and by car catalyst
producers, reached Dollars 178.50 an ounce in April 1989, as industrial
users panicked after speculators had moved in following news that US
scientists claimed to have produced nuclear fusion at room temperatures
using electrodes of palladium in heavy water.
However, the excitement died away until October this year when scientists at
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone, which has one of the world's leading
industrial laboratories, said it had been able to repeat their cold fusion
procedure five times with identical results. Although different to the US
process, the Japanese also employed a plate made from palladium with one
side coated with palladium oxide.
Analysts pointed out that recent speculative buying of palladium originated
in Tokyo and was fueled by various rumours about shortages and interruptions
to supply. Also, in a recent study of the market, Johnson Matthey, the
world's biggest platinum marketing group, suggested there would be a
shortfall in supply of 110,000 ounces this year.
Mr Andy Smith, analyst at Union Bank of Switzerland, pointed out that other
platinum group metals had not benefitted from palladium's rise and neither
had silver, another 'white' metal. 'Demand is certainly not going up,' he
said.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 26
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3369</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAETFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Mine tender limited to Russian
bidders
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LEYLA BOULTON
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MOSCOW
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
RUSSIAN authorities are to put the country's biggest gold mine out to tender
to Russian enterprises, overriding claims to it by an Australian consortium
allied with a local Siberian mining company.
Mr Boris Yatskevich, deputy chairman of Russia's State Geology Committee,
showed the Financial Times an order from Mr Yegor Gaidar, the acting Russian
prime minister, for a tender for Russian bidders to be held by March 1.
The decision is likely to be challenged by Australia's Star Technology
Systems, which has claimed an inalienable right to the deposit thanks to its
31 per cent stake in Lenzoloto, the joint-stock company which owns land on
which the deposit has been found.
Mr Yatskevich said the decision over Sukhoi Log did not mean Russia was
turning its back on foreign investors. But he said that Russian enterprises
had to be given a crack at projects accessible to them.
The Udokan copper mine project, in contrast, was highly complex and would
require foreign participants. 'I'm only a bureaucrat who wants everything to
be done according to the law and in the national interest,' he said.
Mr Yatskevich said permission given in April by Mr Gaidar for Lenzoloto to
be turned into a closed joint stock company with rights to the mine did not
mean that these rights could be shared with Star. It is precisely on this
authorisation that Star is basing its case. Mr Yatskevich said Lenzoloto
also failed to confirm its licence to exploit the mine in accordance with
registration procedures issued this summer.
However, embarrasingly for the government, its own Committee for State
Property registered an open joint stock company in August with Star as a
shareholder.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 26
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3370</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAESFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Papua New Guinea wants 30%
stake in Lihir gold project
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KENNETH GOODING
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE NEW government of Papua New Guinea has indicated it wants a 30 per cent
shareholding in the Lihir Island gold project, which aims to develop one of
the world's biggest and lowest-cost deposits of the precious metal.
Until recently it was expected that the government would take a 20 per cent
stake. RTZ Corporation of the UK owns 80 per cent and PNG-based Niugini
Mining 20 per cent.
Mr Geoff Loudon, chairman of Niugini, said the partners in the project would
welcome government involvement at this level but he questioned PNG's ability
to pay.
Mr Loudon, talking to analysts in London yesterday, pointed out that the PNG
government would have to provide 30 per cent of the costs incurred so far -
totalling USDollars 125m - as well as its full share of development costs,
estimated at Dollars 760m.
He said the present disputes between the PNG government and the owners of
the Porgera and Mt Kare gold mines - which have sent share prices of the
mines' operating companies tumbling - obviously did not make it any easier
to raise money.
Mr Loudon suggested the PNG elections had delayed the start-up of Lihir
until 1996 because it was unlikely the government would issue the necessary
special mining lease until March or April next year. It would then take at
least 27 months and up to 33 months for construction of the processing plant
and underground mine.
There are 42.2m troy ounces of gold in Lihir's proven and possible reserves.
Production is scheduled to be an annual 620,000 ounces for the first few
years, rising to 1.3m ounces.
Lihir is expected to be one of the world's lowest-cost gold mines with total
costs of Dollars 248.75 an ounce in the early years (including Dollars
163.20 cash operating costs) but it will take several years for the partners
to cover their investment. Mr Loudon said this was acceptable for a project
with a life of 30 years already established.
He said negotiations for RTZ to sell some of its shareholding in Lihir were
going smoothly and RTZ's eventual stake would depend on the PNG government's
final decision about how much it wanted.
Niugini had first right of refusal on the RTZ shares and previously Mr
Loudon said his company would buy all that was available. Yesterday,
however, he said that if RTZ decided to sell its total holding in Lihir, 'it
would be unrealistic in present market conditions' for Niugini to buy all
the available shares.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 26
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3371</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAERFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Kazakhstan to sell three oil
concessions
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
KAZAKHSTAN is trying to speed up western investment in its oil industry by
offering three oil exploration blocks for competitive tender early next
year. Deputy prime minister Baikenov said in London yesterday that if the
first licensing round is a success, he will develop plans for offering other
areas for international exploration.
The three blocks on offer are in the Pre-Caspian basin: two in west
Kazakhstan and the third in the province of Aktiubinsk. The
newly-independent country is soliciting bids from the oil industry by May
1993 and the winners will be announced in July.
Mr Baikenov said a 640km stretch of the oil pipeline from Tengiz to the
Black Sea port of Novorossiisk would be completed in April, with a further
720 km to be added by November next year. He said this pipeline would be
operational by 1995.
He said the Kazakh authorities are eager to attract foreign investment for
the improvement and construction of oil refineries and petrochemicals plants
as well as for exploration.
Kazakhstan has secured several big deals with international oil companies
since declaring its independence from the former Soviet Union in December
last year. Mr Baikenov said 28 projects are currently under discussion with
foreign partners.
Chevron, the US oil company, is involved in a joint venture with
Tengizneftegaz to develop the huge Tengiz and Korolev fields in the
Pre-Caspian basin. British Gas and Agip, the Italian gas company, received
exclusive negotiating rights to develop the Karachaganak oil and gas field,
which is estimated to contain two to five billion barrels of oil.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 26
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3372</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAEQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / World Commodities Prices: Tea
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
There were 16,009 packages for the day, reports the Tea Brokers'
Association. Landed assams again met widespread competition and prices for
most descriptions advanced by 5 to 15p. Bangladesh teas were readily
absorbed at firm rates. Brightest East Africans remained fully firm to
dearer. Mediums attracted good support but were often barely steady on last
levels. Offshore good general demand at firm to dearer rates. The highest
price realised this week was 253p for a Kenya pd. Quotations: quality 210p,
nom good medium 170p, medium 150p and low medium 105p.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 26
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3373</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAEPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Government Bonds: Treasuries rally persists after positive
economic data
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PATRICK HARVERSON and SARA WEBB
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK, LONDON
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
US TREASURY prices firmed yesterday as investors continued to interpret
recent strong economic data in a positive light.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year government bond was up  3/8 at 101
31/32 , yielding 7.454 per cent. The two-year note was also notably firmer,
up  3/16 at 100 1/16 , yielding 4.574 per cent.
Although good economic news is normally bad for the market, investors have
welcomed the recent signs of strength because they believe it reduces the
chances that president-elect Clinton will introduce an aggressive package of
fiscal stimuli in his first few months.
During and immediately after the election campaign the bond market's biggest
fear was that a heavy programme of government spending by a Democratic
administration would widen the Federal budget deficit and push up interest
rates and prices. Those fears are now abating, although the underlying
concern about an overheated economy and widened deficit still exists.
UK government bond prices drifted lower across the yield curve as the
release of the latest credit figures dashed hopes of a cut in interest
rates.
Dealers said the UK credit figures, which showed a Pounds 76m rise in the
amount of credit outstanding by British consumers, provided a slightly more
bullish picture of the UK economy, with the result that hopes of a base rate
cut faded.
The Liffe gilt futures contract fell from 99.18 at the opening to 99.07 by
late afternoon on relatively low volume of around 15,500 contracts.
In the cash market, short-dated gilts fell by over a quarter of a point,
with the 10 per cent gilt due 1994 dropping from 104 21/32 to 104 11/32 to
yield 6.91 per cent. The 9 3/4 per cent gilt due 2002 slipped from 108 29/32
to 108 21/32 , resulting in a flattening of the yield curve.
French government bonds weakened on reports of an imminent devaluation of
the French franc and worse-than-expected money supply figures, but ended the
day little changed. The devaluation press reports were denied later in the
day.
French M3 money supply grew by 0.2 per cent in October, giving year-on-year
growth of 5.7 per cent - compared with 5.3 per cent in September. The Bank
of France has a target of 4 to 6 per cent for annual M3 growth in 1992.
The yield on the 8 1/2 per cent bond due 2023 opened at 8.67 per cent and
traded at around 8.70 per cent by late afternoon. On the Matif futures
exchange in Paris, the December bond futures contract closed at 110.18, up
0.12 from late Friday.
German government bonds drifted lower in thin trade ahead of Thursday's
Bundesbank Council meeting, with the Liffe bund future contract slipping
from 91.72 to 91.52 by late afternoon.
Dealers said bunds opened on a relatively firm note following Sunday's Swiss
referendum vote, which rejected a plan for a European Economic Area and led
to some uncertainty about tensions within the European exchange rate
mechanism. Reports in the German press that half of the Bundesbank Council
members are in favour of a cut in interest rates also helped to give the
bund market a push early in the session, but prices later drifted lower.
Swiss franc bonds ended higher, ignoring the decision by Swiss voters to
reject the European Economic Area treaty in the weekend referendum. Dealers
said the recovery in the Swiss Franc against the D-Mark helped to lift bond
prices. Japanese government bonds ended slightly firmer, helped by lower
money market rates and hopes of a cut in the Official Discount Rate.
The yield on the benchmark No 145 traded in a narrow range of between
4.585-4.60 per cent. In the futures market, the March contract ended at
107.81, up from Friday's close of 107.74.
Dealers said the market was hoping to see a cut in the Official Discount
Rate, especially as Friday's quarterly Tankan report on business confidence
is expected to show that the Japanese economy is still in a weak state.
The unsecured overnight call money rate slipped  1/32 to 3 27/32 per cent
yesterday, and dealers are waiting to see whether some of the commercial
banks will follow Sanwa Bank's example and cut their short-term prime rates.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3374</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAEOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / International Capital Markets: CIBC prunes payroll by 2,500
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT GIBBENS
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MONTREAL
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
CANADIAN Imperial Bank of Commerce has warned it will reduce staff across
the board, by 2,500 or 2.5 per cent, over the next 12 months, spotlighting
serious overcapacity in the financial services industry.
Most of the big Canadian banks have been pruning payrolls during 1992
because of intense cost pressures, but Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce
has clearly indicated it plans to reduce operations because of slow economic
recovery and the impact of further automation.
Mr Al Flood, CIBC chairman, said the cutbacks were designed to raise
productivity. 'We are responding to business realities of the '90s. It is
very different from the high growth and high inflation economy of the
1980s.'
CIBC has 48,000 employees, including 35,000 full-time and half the cutback
will be achieved through redundancies and early retirement.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3375</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAENFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / International Capital Markets: S&amp;P puts government of HK on
credit watch
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By BRIAN BOLLEN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
STANDARD &amp; Poor's, the US credit rating agency, has placed the government of
Hong Kong's implied long-term ratings on credit watch with negative
implications. The move reflects the rapid deterioration of relations between
Britain and China over the governance of Hong Kong during the past two
months, it said.
S&amp;P said that the implied ratings of government-owned Mass Transit Railway
Corp are also under review, although this does not reflect any change in its
stand-alone credit quality.
The credit watch listings affect the A senior foreign currency and A+ local
currency ratings of both the government and MTRC. Short-term ratings are
unaffected.
'The significance of this is not simply that the government is in surplus
and is likely to remain so,' explains Mr David Beers, a director at S&amp;P in
New York. 'The issue is: what are the political risks for the longer tem,
and their economic impact?'
S&amp;P's practice of awarding implied ratings to sovereigns which are not
attached to specific debt issues serves to establish a 'ceiling' for
would-be borrowers in that jurisdiction.
Meanwhile, Hong Kong remains an attractive location for overseas investment
in manufacturing, said Mr T. H. Barma, director-general of industry,
commenting on the findings of the latest survey on the subject by the
industry department.
The total value of overseas investment at the end of 1991 was HKDollars
34.4bn, 11 per cent more than in the previous year, he said.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3376</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAEMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / International Bonds: Citicorp ready to launch Dollars 2bn
offer
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TRACY CORRIGAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
CITICORP is preparing to launch a Dollars 2bn global offering of credit
card-backed securities later today, for pricing tomorrow.
The deal consists of Dollars 1bn of five-year floating-rate notes and
Dollars 1bn of two-year floating-rate notes, both issued with junior
tranches of fixed-rate bonds.
A Citicorp official said he expected the five-year notes to meet stronger
demand in Europe, while the two-year tranche is likely to perform better in
the US.
The deal is backed by Citicorp credit card receivables and arranged by
Citicorp and Salomon Brothers.
BCE, the Canadian telecommunications group which owns Bell Canada, yesterday
raised Pounds 125m in the sterling bond market. The financing is linked to
its Pounds 480m purchase of 20 per cent of Mercury Communications, the UK's
second largest telecommunications operator.
The five-year issue met a lacklustre response from investors, despite a
series of roadshows last week designed to promote the deal.
Traders said the pricing of the deal appeared reasonable, at a yield spread
of 70 basis points more than the comparable five-year gilt. But the spread
widened to about 73 basis points due to the lack of investor interest in the
issue.
Some investors were deterred by BCE's lack of credit ratings from the main
US rating agencies, although it is rated by Canadian agencies.
The weakness of the gilts market also proved a negative factor. But the
deal's disappointing performance was mainly due to investors' unwillingness
to buy more paper, as the end of the year approaches.
BCE's treasurer, Mr Fred Andrew, said the cost of the partial acquisition of
Mercury has already been met from disposals of assets in Canada, but the
sterling liability will act as a hedge for the Mercury investment.
He added that the company may return to the sterling bond market next year.
The acquisition is expected to go through in January.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3377</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAELFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / International Capital Markets: EC throws role of interdealer
broker into question
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD WATERS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE ROLE of interdealer brokers in financial markets throughout the European
Community has been thrown into question by a ruling from the Commission over
the activities of brokers in the international bond market.
Interdealer brokers (IDBs) act as specialist intermediaries between
marketmakers, helping to oil the wheels of financial markets. Rules in most
markets prevent them from dealing with anyone other than marketmakers.
The Commission has now told the International Securities Markets Association
that its rules governing IDBs are potentially anti-competitive and could
breach Articles 85 and 86 of the Treaty of Rome. The ruling led ISMA to
relax its rules at the end of last week, allowing IDBs to deal with
institutions other than marketmakers.
ISMA also dropped its requirement that IDBs open their books to inspection
to prove that they were not breaking the rules.
Restrictions similar to those which have been dropped by ISMA govern
specialist brokers in several national government bond markets, including
those in the UK and France, as well as the UK equity market.
The Bank of England said yesterday that it had no plan to allow IDBs in the
gilts market to deal with non-marketmakers. 'It's been a rule since 1986.
The Commission has known perfectly well what our rules are, and it hasn't
been troubled about them before,' the Bank said.
Marketmakers complain that it is unfair to allow IDBs access to other
institutions. 'They don't commit any capital and take no risks, and have
access to the best prices,' said Mr Jerry Goldstein, the chairman of ISMA's
council of reporting dealers.
Freeing them of restrictions would enable them to deal directly with the
marketmakers' own end customers, without forcing them to take on the same
marketmaking commitments.
The Commission officials responsible for the ISMA ruling could not be
contacted for comment yesterday. However, it is believed that there is no
immediate intention of extending the judgment to IDBs in the EC's domestic
markets.
ISMA, which is not covered by national regulation, had submitted its
rulebook to the Commission in the hope of getting a letter of comfort
stating that its regulations complied with EC law. The adverse ruling is
also believed to have been prompted by a complaint to the Commission from
one or more IDBs in the eurobond market.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3378</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAEKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / International Company News: BHP to cut debt after asset sale
raises ADollars 400m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By BRUCE JACQUES
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   SYDNEY
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
BHP, the Australian industrial and mining conglomerate, has sold ADollars
400m of assets to Westpac Banking, the Australian bank.
BHP said the company had sold a ADollars 400m (USDollars 277m) parcel of A
Redeemable Preference shares in Beswick and that further sales were
contemplated.
Beswick was the vehicle BHP used to buy its own shares in the mid-1980s when
the late Mr Robert Holmes a Court attempted to take over BHP. Beswick
controls around 20 per cent of BHP.
BHP is sitting on a large capital gain on the investment because the shares
were acquired at a price of around ADollars 7, compared with BHP's current
price of ADollars 11.30.
The Beswick vehicle was set up with a complex structure involving BHP
holding ADollars 990m in A Class redeemable preference shares, ADollars
73.3m in ordinary voting shares and ADollars 500m in non-voting convertible
preference shares. Other shareholders, in various classes of securities, are
Fosters Brewing, Westpac and ANZ Trustees.
The sales announced yesterday reduces BHP's holding in A Redeemable
preference shares to ADollars 590m.
BHP said it would apply proceeds of the sale to debt reduction. Earlier this
year BHP took effective control of Foster's Brewing for around ADollars
1.7bn.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3379</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAEJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / International Company News: Design problems plague Qantas
sell-off - The factors shaping the privatisation of Australia's 'flying rat'
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN BROWN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE long and increasingly convoluted privatisation of Qantas, the Australian
airline, reaches a crucial stage tomorrow when three foreign carriers are
expected to deliver detailed bids.
The bids - from British Airways, Singapore Airlines and Air New Zealand -
will lay the groundwork for the sale of up to 49 per cent of Qantas to
corporate and institutional investors. If all goes according to plan, the
government will float the balance on the Australian Stock Exchange.
The two-stage process should return about ADollars 1bn (USDollars 690m) to
the Treasury. However, after more than a year of uncertainty, it is unclear
whether the privatisation can be completed on schedule in March.
BA has not troubled to hide its irritation with the erratic behaviour of the
federal Labor government, which has changed its mind about the sale several
times.
Initial privatisation plans, announced in 1991, envisaged the separate sale
of 49 per cent of Qantas and 100 per cent of Australian Airlines, one of the
two main domestic carriers.
In June, Mr Paul Keating, prime minister, persuaded Labor to accept the
merger of the two airlines, at a cost of ADollars 400m to Qantas, followed
by 100 per cent privatisation. Last month, the government changed the rules
again, reducing the maximum shareholding of any one foreign airline from 35
per cent to 25 per cent, with a 35 per cent ceiling on aggregate foreign
ownership.
The latest announcement was badly received in London, where Sir Colin
Marshall, BA chief executive, said BA was 'uncertain' whether it remained
interested in Qantas. Some of the uncertainty was removed at a subsequent
meeting in New York between Sir Colin and Mr Ralph Willis, Australia's
finance minister, who is in charge of the sale.
But analysts say the government may have over-estimated Qantas' attraction.
In this case, it could be forced into a risky flotation of up to 100 per
cent of the airline next year.
Qantas has a great deal going for it. It has an excellent safety record and
it owns one of the newest fleets in the world. Its white kangaroo logo,
known in the aviation business as the flying rat, is one of the world's
best-known brands, especially in the fast-growing Asia-Pacific area.
Moves towards a common aviation market with New Zealand, due by 1994, have
increased Qantas' potential domestic base from about 17m people to 21m. The
merger with Australian Airlines also allows Qantas to feed domestic
customers more effectively into its international operations.
But the big attraction is Qantas' strong network in the Asia-Pacific region.
Qantas would be a very good fit with BA, which offers increased access to
Europe and North America in return for a stronger Pacific presence.
Such a scenario is in line with Sir Colin's view that global aviation will
be controlled over the next decade by half a dozen big airlines.
BA has given private assurances that it would use its shareholding to reach
mutually beneficial agreements with Qantas, rather than to dominate the
airline. But Qantas managers believe that effective control would inevitably
pass to London unless BA's influence was countered by an equally strong
shareholding in the hands of another airline.
BA is thought unlikely to agree to such an arrangement, and is believed to
be structuring its bid to allow for a 24 per cent initial shareholding in
Qantas by Australian institutions. Qantas managers, notably Mr John Ward,
managing director, would prefer a deal in which the available foreign
shareholding was split between Singapore Airlines and Air NZ.
Such a deal, sometimes called the 'tricycle option', would build on the
existing links between the three players: Qantas owns 19 per cent of Air NZ;
while Temasek Holdings, SIA's parent company, owns about 6 per cent of
Brierley Investments, the biggest shareholder in Air NZ.
The tricycle option makes strategic sense in the context of a common
Australasian market, and might give Qantas greater access to Singapore's
Changi Airport - one of Asia's two hubs. But, before any deal can be done
the government must reach agreement with the airlines on Qantas' value.
In addition to ADollars 1bn of shareholders' funds, the price must cover the
ADollars 400m cost of acquiring Australian Airlines, and Qantas'
recapitalisation to ease the balance sheet burden of its ADollars 3bn debt.
Mr Kim Beazley, the minister who initiated the privatisation, put the
recapitalisation requirements of the two airlines at ADollars 1bn, implying
a ADollars 2.4bn price for the merged airline.
But Qantas management is pushing for a larger recapitalisation to reduce its
ratio of debt to shareholders' funds from the present 75:25 to nearer 50:50.
According to Mr Ward, that would increase the sale price to as much as
ADollars 3bn. This means the airlines' bids will have to reflect their
judgments of Qantas' recapitalisation requirements, which may differ from
those of the government and Qantas management.
If the trade sale goes ahead, it will dictate the price of shares in the
subsequent flotation. That could make the issue difficult to sell unless the
Australian market rallies between now and then.
If the trade sale flounders, or if less than 49 per cent of the airline is
sold, the government will have to expand the planned flotation.
But there is another complication. The government must hold a federal
election by June, but Mr Keating has left open the option of an early
election between March and May. The uncertainty makes it difficult to ensure
that the flotation would not clash with the five-week campaign, suggesting
that it may have to be delayed.
'There are so many variables involved with this deal that it is impossible
to know what is going to happen,' says one of the half-dozen stockbrokers
advising the government. 'The airline is definitely saleable, but how and at
what price it is impossible to say.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3380</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAEIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / International Company News: Peregrine forms China venture
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By AP-DJ
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   HONG KONG
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
PEREGRINE Investments Holdings, the holding company of merchant banker
Peregrine Capital, has formed a joint venture in Beijing to provide
investment and consultancy services, AP-DJ reports from Hong Kong.
The group has applied to the People's Bank of China to open a representative
office - its first in China - in Shanghai in hopes of capitalising on the
growing equity-related businesses in one of the mainland's two fledgling
stock markets.
'Shanghai is going to be China's financial centre, and it's time we
established our presence there,' said Mr Louis Ying, a director of Peregrine
Capital (China).
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3381</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAEHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / International Company News: Packer to join Westpac
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   SYDNEY
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
WESTPAC Banking announced yesterday that Mr Kerry Packer and Mr Al Dunlap
are to join the Westpac board, Reuter reports from Sydney.
Mr Packer and Mr Dunlap are respectively chairman and managing director of
Consolidated Press, which recently acquired 8.3 per cent of the capital of
troubled Westpac for ADollars 434m (USDollars 301m).
Westpac announced last week that it planned to appoint Mr Peter Richie, the
chairman of McDonald's Australia, to the board.
Mr John Uhrig, Westpac chairman, said: 'These new appointments mean Westpac
will have a very strong board as it follows through with its announced
recovery programmes.'
Westpac said Mr Packer and Mr Dunlap would be formally appointed after
completion of the sale of Westpac's Network Ten television subsidiary to
CanWest Global Communications of Canada, scheduled for later this month.
The appointment of Mr Packer and Mr Dunlap would take the number of board
directors to 12 after recent resignations.
Former Westpac chairman Sir Eric Neal and four other directors resigned in
October, while
another director, Westpac Americas general manager Mr Tony Walton, resigned
after discovery of a USDollars 115m unexpected tax liability.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3382</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAEFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / International Company News: Deal set up to raise western
equity capital for Russia
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOHN LLOYD
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MOSCOW
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
A CANADIAN company and a UK securities house have set up the first attempt
to raise western equity capital for investment in Russia.
The deal, signed yesterday in London, creates a joint venture called
PeterStar, which is to provide international telecommunications for St
Petersburg.
The shareholders are LenTel, the city's telephone company (with 40 per
cent), the city authorities (10 per cent) and the Petersburg Long Distance
Telephone Corporation, a stock market listed Canadian company which has
changed its name from the NWE Capital Corporation.
Smith New Court, the UK broker, is to place 3.3m shares in a secondary
offering - the first time equity capital will be raised for investment in
what is essentially a Russian enterprise.
The company has secured as chairman Mr Gordon Owen, formerly group managing
director of Cable and Wireless. Mr Owen was in charge of the restoration of
telecommunication services in Kuwait after the Iraqi invasion.
The main customers of the joint venture will be tourists, who are expected
to use the hard currency telephone boxes now being set up in the city.
Western businesses and hotels will also have access to the network, with
local residents being offered the services at a later stage.
The venture expects to produce pre-tax profits of about Dollars 24m by 1995.
Although strongly backed by Mr Anatoly Sobchak, the mayor of St Petersburg,
the project has to overcome a number of financial and legal provisions.
At present, 50 per cent of hard currency earnings must be changed into
roubles - with pressure mounting for the government to introduce a 100 per
cent regime because of its need for hard currency.
Profit and value added taxes, as well as income tax, are currently at high
rates of between 30 and 40 per cent - while Russian auditing and accounting
standards are widely different from those in the west. Finally, there is no
secure system of enforcing property and other legal rights.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3383</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAEEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / International Company News: Goodyear to take one-off charge
of Dollars 1bn
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN FRIEDMAN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
GOODYEAR, the last surviving big US-owned tyremaker, said yesterday it would
take a one-time net charge of Dollars 1.01bn because of the early adoption
of two non-cash accounting changes related to retiree non-pension benefits
and income taxes.
The special accounting charge, which a number of US companies will be
taking, will cause a full-year net loss at Goodyear, since it will be
retroactive to the start of 1992.
The Ohio-based company has already restated its net earnings for the first
nine months of 1992, which now show a net loss of Dollars 746.1m, having
last October been reported as a net profit of Dollars 279.3m.
Mr Stanley Gault, chairman, said the company decided to take the one-time
extraordinary debit rather than spread the amount over 20 years because of
strong sales and operating earnings.
He said that even with the new charge, the company would achieve its planned
debt-to-debt-plus-equity ratio of 40 per cent by the end of 1993.
On Wall Street, Goodyear's share price fell Dollars 1 1/4 to Dollars 70 5/8
yesterday.
AMR, parent company of American Airlines, announced yesterday it would take
an after-tax charge of Dollars 525m, against 1992 profits, as a result of
adopting two new accounting standards, adds Nikki Tait.
The first relates to Financial Accounting Standard 106, requiring companies
to accrue future pensioners' medical and life insurance benefit costs over
the working lives of eligible employees.
AMR said this meant 1992 expenses would be around Dollars 60m (after-tax)
higher than under the old method, and there would be a further one-off
charge of about Dollars 600m as result of applying the new standard to
previous years.
The effect of FAS 106 will be partially offset by FAS 109, which changes the
way companies account for income taxes. This will produce a one-off benefit,
after-tax of Dollars 135m.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3384</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAEDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / International Company News: Solid State Farm rides out the
hurricane - How the US insurer can absorb billions of dollars of catastrophe
losses
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NIKKI TAIT
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ROGER Joslin, treasurer of the giant State Farm Insurance Company, looks
pained. He has just been asked about the size of the catastrophe claims
which the US's biggest car and home insurance provider has faced this year.
Mr Joslin does not know the precise figure, but a few clicks on the
calculator provide the answer: Dollars 3.24bn.
The bulk of this - more than Dollars 2bn - comes from Hurricane Andrew,
which devastated southern Florida in late-August. Even in the sanguine world
of insurance, where disasters are everyday business, Andrew caused
unprecedented upheaval.
Within days, State Farm, the largest writer of homeowners' policies in the
'sunshine state', had drafted in almost half its 4,000 loss-adjusters. By
late-October, it still had 2,300 extra employees in the area. In the
meantime, 110,000 individual claims had flooded in.
But if administering the disaster was an unparalleled immediate task, the
financial implications are a longer-lasting problem.
The cash drain from Andrew - which some estimates now put at around Dollars
14bn for the US insurance industry overall - not only followed large
catastrophe losses earlier in 1992, but came after a spate of tough years.
Most big US insurers flinched publicly when the hurricane compounded this
run of ill-fortune. Allstate and The Prudential, two of State Farm's largest
rivals, had their debt ratings lowered.
But State Farm, a mutual, owned by its policyholders rather than by
shareholders, made little public comment, despite the lack of catastrophe
reinsurance cover. Rating agencies made no changes: AM Best, for example,
which specialises in the insurance sector, retained an A-plus rating for
State Farm's fire and casualty arm, its second-highest level.
What kind of company can absorb multi-billion dollar losses? The answer lies
in the unassuming mid-west town of Bloomington, about 100 miles from
Chicago, where State Farm has its headquarters.
The business was founded in 1922 by a retired farmer, Mr George Mercherle,
who thought that existing insurers were offering country folk a bad deal by
charging them the same rates for car insurance as city dwellers. So, on the
back of cheaper premiums and using the federal Farm Bureau network as a
distribution source, he started State Farm.
The organisation quickly proved a success. It added a life insurance
division in 1929; had established a substantial local head office within a
decade; and finally set up an agency sales force in 1949.
Today, the scale of State Farm is difficult to grasp. In terms of market
share, according to A. M. Best, it accounted for 21.4 per cent of all
private passenger car premiums in the US in 1991, and 20 per cent of
homeowners' policies. This easily outstripped Allstate, its nearest rival,
which held 12.5 per cent and 12.4 per cent respectively.
State Farm's car and home insurance divisions are augmented by a large life
business and a much smaller health operation. Assets in the three main units
 -car, homeowners, and life - stood at Dollars 42.7bn, Dollars 11.9bn and
Dollars 14.1bn respectively at end-1991, while policyholders' surpluses were
Dollars 11bn, Dollars 2.8bn, and Dollars 1.64bn.
Sales are handled by about 18,000 independent, self-employed agents, who
keep a percentage of the premiums which they bring in.
But, solid and admired as State Farm may be, it has not always had an easy
ride. Its old-fashioned, mid-western culture has come under attack, and
competitors, long resentful of the insurer's go-it-alone stance in a
generally clubby industry, have been quick to point to the flaws.
Most notably, there has been a lawsuit which claimed the insurer
discriminated against the recruitment of women agents. In 1985, a judge
found State Farm liable, and earlier this year the company finally
negotiated a Dollars 157m settlement. It was the largest sum ever paid in a
case brought under the 1964 Civil Rights Act.
Management succession has been another touchy area. In the 1950s, the task
of heading State Farm passed from the Mercherles to the Rust family. But Mr
Edward Rust, the second generation in his family to run the company, died
suddenly in 1985. He was replaced by a third-generation Rust, Mr Edward B.
Rust Jr, who was just 35 years old when he took up the reins.
This raised eyebrows outside the company, although insiders say little has
changed internally. 'They've been very conservative, and they've pursued a
very straightforward, consistent strategy,' says Mr Jack Snyder, senior
vice-president of the property-casualty division at A. M. Best.
While such issues have niggled at the public image, State Farm has
confronted more fundamental problems in its main business areas.
Car insurance has become a fraught political issue - with the industry
anxious to push up premiums, citing rising claim costs and consumers arguing
that affordable insurance is virtually impossible in some areas. In
California, matters came to a head four years ago when the electorate passed
Proposition 103, demanding that local insurers 'roll back' their rates and
pay out rebates.
Some insurers - but not, so far, State Farm - have reacted to the problem by
walking away from certain states.
'We've certainly talked about it,' says Mr Joslin, though he admits that no
such move is seriously contemplated. The company is contesting a Dollars
235m rebate demand by the Californian insurance commissioner, claiming it
has never made an 'excessive' return on its business there.
Nevertheless, matters on the car front improved substantially last year. The
underwriting loss at State Farm's car division fell from more than Dollars
1.6bn to around Dollars 525m following improvements in claims experience and
rate increases. The division posted a Dollars 1.3bn profit after tax,
against a Dollars 261m loss the previous year.
By contrast, the fire and casualty business - which includes homeowners'
insurance - remains bleak, partly because of the catastrophe losses.
With underwriting losses increasing in 1991, this division produced an
after-tax loss of Dollars 235m last year, and the combination of Hurricane
Andrew, the earlier catastrophe losses, and subsequent storms (including
Hurricane Iniki) has put paid to any recovery in 1992.
'We'll face a substantial loss,' says Mr Joslin, 'but not one which will
destroy our financial foundation.'
But, for all these problems, the company seems to have little intention of
ploughing new furrows. 'We've prospered by sticking to our knitting,' says
Mr Joslin, looking askance when subjects like international expansion - even
as close to home as Mexico - are mentioned.
But, as Mr Snyder points out, 'there's still a lot of markets State Farm can
penetrate. There's still more scope for cross-selling. After all, everyone
with a State Farm car policy does not yet have a homeowners' policy.'
 ---------------------------------------------------------------
MARKET SHARES FOR STATE FARM  AND ALLSTATE (%)
 ---------------------------------------------------------------
                HOMEOWNERS                PRIVATE CAR
Year     State Farm    Allstate   State Farm     Allstate
 ---------------------------------------------------------------
1991       20.4          12.4        21.4          12.5
1990       19.0          12.4        21.0          12.4
1989       18.4          12.0        20.4          12.1
1988       18.3          11.5        19.5          11.7
1987       18.9          10.8        18.8          11.2
1986       17.5          10.4        18.9          10.8
1985       18.2           9.6        18.6          10.4
1984       17.2           9.3        17.7          10.5
1983       16.8           9.3        17.8          10.8
1982       16.4           9.6        17.5          11.0
 ---------------------------------------------------------------
Source: AM Best
 ---------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3385</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAECFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / International Company News: Canadian paper group to go
private
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT GIBBENS
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MONTREAL
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE Tribune Company of Chicago, is taking Quebec &amp; Ontario Paper, its
fully-owned Canadian pulp and timber subsidiary, public with a CDollars 125m
(USDollars 98m) share offer.
Tribune, which has owned the company for 80 years, will retain about
two-thirds control.
Q&amp;O, which has annual capacity of 815,000 tons metric of newsprint at its
Quebec &amp; Ontario mills, will change its name to Quno Corp.
Q&amp;O lost CDollars 54m on sales of CDollars 320m in the first nine months of
1992, against a profit of CDollars 4.9m on sales CDollars 370m a year
earlier.
Prices for newsprint ran at all-time lows after inflation, but are expected
to improve sharply in 1993-94 with US economic recovery.
Q&amp;O is a leader in recycling technology for newsprint production and the
Chicago Tribune will remain a large customer.
Wood Gundy heads the underwriting group for the public offer and will
announce the price shortly.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3386</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAEBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / International Company News: Apple plans dial-up services for
PC users
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LOUISE KEHOE
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   SAN FRANCISCO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
APPLE Computer plans to introduce dial-up information services for users of
its personal computers and future personal communications products.
The company has licensed the technology from America Online, the
fourth-largest US provider of computer information services.
Online information services give PC users access to a range of information,
such as stock market reports, news and weather.
They also provide electronic shopping and banking services and enable PC
users to communicate via electronic mail systems.
Use of such services is expected to grow rapidly with the proliferation of
portable PCs and a new generation of 'personal communicators' that combine
the functions of a PC, a cellular telephone and a facsimile machine.
Apple said it would manage and market its own information services, based
upon America Online technology. The two companies also plan to work together
to develop enhancements to America Online services and to establish the
technology as a standard.
Apple will use the America Online technologies to create an improved version
of its existing AppleLink global electronic communications system.
AppleLink, which enables Apple employees and the company's suppliers to
communicate electronically, is not available to the public. The system is
used by about 50,000 people, Apple said.
As part of the agreement between Apple and America Online, Apple received
warrants to buy around 10 per cent of the online services company's stock
for Dollars 1.3m over the next five years.
Apple will also pay royalties for the use of America Online's technology.
America Online currently has about 180,000 subscribers to its information
services.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3387</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAEAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / International Company News: Amax halves payout on 'abnormal'
prices
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
AMAX, the third-largest US aluminium producer, is halving its quarterly
dividend to 10 cents a share because of 'abnormally low' prices for the
metal.
The company will also take charges totalling Dollars 399m after tax, partly
offset by a Dollars 192m income tax benefit.
Mr Allen Born, chairman, estimates Amax, which makes about two-thirds of its
earnings from aluminium, will suffer a fourth-quarter loss of about Dollars
50m before special provisions.
The company reported a net loss of Dollars 49m, or 57 cents a share, for the
first nine months of 1992, compared with net earnings of Dollars 40m, or 46
cents, in the same period of last year.
Amax will take a charge of Dollars 97m (Dollars 61m after tax) to adjust the
carrying value of various non-core assets and provide for additional
'streamlining and downsizing' costs. Mr Born suggested these adjustments
would benefit future annual pre-tax operating earnings by Dollars 25m.
The company is accounting for the full impact of the Financial Accounting
Standard Board pronouncements in 1992. The effect of the employee benefits
costs obligation of Dollars 338m after tax would be partly offset by a
Dollars 192m benefit resulting from the adoption of the new rules for income
taxes.
Southern Peru Copper Corporation, which owns two mines and a smelter in
Peru, is paying a Dollars 7m dividend for the third quarter compared with
Dollars 4m in each of the previous 1992 quarters.
In 1991 it paid shareholders - Asarco (52.3 per cent) Marmon Group (20.7 per
cent) Phelps Dodge (16.3 per cent) and Newmont Mining (10.7 per cent) -
dividends totalling Dollars 60m.
Last year, the Peruvian company produced 300,200 short tons of copper, 3.1m
troy ounces of silver and 6.7m lb of molybdenum.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3388</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAD9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / International Company News: Upturn seen in US newspaper
advertising
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN FRIEDMAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
KNIGHT-RIDDER, the US newspaper and news agency service group, is predicting
a rise of between 3.5 per cent and 4.5 per cent in total US newspaper
advertising revenues during 1993.
Mr Jerry Tilis, Knight-Ridder's vice-president for marketing, made the
forecast yesterday at a seminar in New York.
He said the that bulk of the increase would probably be the result of higher
advertising rates.
During 1993, Mr Tilis said he expected revenues from both retail and
national advertisers in the US to rise by 3 to 4 per cent. Classified
revenues could grow by 4 to 5 per cent.
Mr Tilis said the total rise in US advertising revenues for the current year
was likely to be an anaemic 0.7 per cent, with national advertising revenues
some 2 per cent better than last year and classified and retail revenues up
by 0.5 per cent.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3389</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAD8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / International Company News: Secretive retailer extends its
tangled web of interests - David Waller looks at Metro's plans to acquire a
majority stake in Asko Deutsche Kaufhaus
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID WALLER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
METRO is one of the most secretive and most controversial companies in
Germany, if not the whole of Europe. It is getting bigger, more
controversial - and not a jot less secretive.
Metro, domiciled in Switzerland like Mr Otto Beisheim, the man who founded
the group 28 years ago and is still its biggest shareholder, last week won
approval from Germany's federal cartel authorities for its plans to buy a
majority stake in Asko Deutsche Kaufhaus, a large but financially-stretched
German retail group. This will take sales in Germany to DM60bn (Dollars
37.7bn) or more this year.
The transaction means that Metro will rival US companies Wal-Mart and K mart
as one of the world's largest retail groups. It will consolidate its
position as one of Germany's largest companies, a rival in turnover terms to
industrial leaders such as Daimler-Benz and Siemens.
The deal is likely to give the group a market share of 20 per cent or more
in the German food retailing sector, and large market shares in furniture,
textile and DIY retail as well. It will also accelerate the process of
concentration in the retail sector, leaving just three companies -
Metro/Asko, Tengelmann and Rewe, with total market share of about 50 per
cent.
It has revived grievances about what competitors call Metro's brutal and
unfair commercial tactics. The influential HDE, the association of German
retailers which represents 460,000 retail businesses, has been fighting
Metro in the courts for 7 1/2 years - accusing it of breaching numerous
retail laws - and has vowed to intensify the battle in the wake of the
federal cartel office's decision last week.
Size considerations apart, it remains unclear why Metro has made its latest
move, as the loss-making Asko is suffering the consequences of a takeover
spree in the late 1980s, culminating with the acquisition of Co-op in 1989.
With turnover of about DM20m expected next year, it has net debt of DM5bn
which it has to finance out of the slimmest of operating margins.
'I am convinced that the 1992-93 result will be a complete disaster,' says
Mr Hans-Peter Wodniok, head of German research at James Capel in Frankfurt.
Last year, the Asko parent company made a net loss of DM269m after a profit
of DM106m in 1990, reflecting high write-offs against acquisitions. 'It has
the worst balance sheet in the whole of corporate Germany, and a rights
issue would seem to be essential.'
In addition, the retail sector is plagued by intense competition.
The consumer spree of the late 1980s is over and prospects are blighted not
only by the economic slowdown but also by the likelihood that taxes will
rise and wage rises start to fall in the years ahead.
The deal could, some suggest, have positive tax implications for Mr
Beisheim, one of Switzerland's richest men. Alternatively, it could be a way
of ensuring that Asko does not sink under its debt burden. All are agreed
that it will add to the Metro group's already formidable purchasing power,
but questions are raised about where the money for the purchase will come
from.
There is no opportunity to put these, or any other questions to the company,
as the company does not speak to the press.
Mr Beisheim, 68, who founded the business in 1964 when he opened his first
store (modelled on the US cash and carry concept) has withdrawn from
day-to-day management of the business and leads a reclusive life moving
between homes in France, Italy, Switzerland, Florida and California.
All press enquiries are directed to Mr Erwin Conradi, the 58-year-old chief
executive who manages the business from an office above one of the group's
stores in Dusseldorf. Calls are put through to his secretary who politely,
but firmly, tells callers that Mr Conradi is too busy to respond.
The group's structure, like its public relations policy, is inscrutable, a
veritable tangle of holdings and cross-holdings giving the Swiss parent
control of an estimated 180 companies.
One of its biggest holdings is a majority stake in Kaufhof, one of Germany's
largest, quoted retail groups. Others include the Massa discount stores
group, the computer chain Vobis and Pelikan, the office supply group. Via
Asko, it controls Co-op, the AVA department stores group and the Adler
clothing stores chain.
Noteworthy among the web of interests are the group's links with
Westdeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale (WestLB), the aggressively-managed
public sector bank based, like Mr Conradi, in Dusseldorf.
The bank, one of the biggest in Germany and with an active approach to the
way it manages its extensive portfolio of industrial interests, owns a 10
per cent stake in Asko.
The precise scale of the group's influence is made all the more difficult to
understand by the lack of disclosure and takeover rules in Germany: there is
no obligation for the group to declare its hand until it has amassed a 25
per cent direct stake in a company.
It is widely suspected that Metro controls Asko via indirect stakes.
The only thing known for certain is that in the absence of a takeover code
for Germany, Metro is not obliged to make an offer for the company's
minority shareholders.
Metro's acquisition of Asko is going ahead after the federal cartel office
reversed its decision that the deal would be anti-competitive.
Metro and Asko agreed to sell stores with total turnover of DM1.2bn as the
price of the go-ahead.
This represents only a fraction of the group's total turnover and the cartel
office's decision has done nothing to still the controversy surrounding the
group's size and secrecy.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3390</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAD7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / International Company News: Creditors, unions to take over
control of TWA
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NIKKI TAIT
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE SURVIVAL chances of Trans World Airlines, the bankrupt US carrier owned
by Mr Carl Icahn, improved yesterday after he agreed to give up control of
the airline and give it financial support.
The former corporate raider reached the deal with the airline's creditors,
its three unions and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, the federal
agency which is required to guarantee payments from TWA's underfunded
pension plans.
Mr Icahn, who holds a majority of TWA's shares as well as certain debt
securities, will relinquish control over the airline and abandon all claims
relating to it.
If the company's formal reorganisation plan is approved next year, ownership
will pass to the company's three unions and unsecured creditors.
The unions will receive 45 per cent of the equity in the airline, in return
for a cut of 15 per cent in wages and benefits. The unsecured creditors will
share the remaining 55 per cent, in return for forgiving about Dollars 1bn
of claims.
Mr Icahn or his private interests will also provide Dollars 200m of
short-term financing to TWA.
The US pensions agency, which guarantees about Dollars 730m of TWA's
benefits, says the airline's plans are underfunded by Dollars 1.05bn.
Under the agreement, these pension plans will be frozen, and Mr Icahn will
become their sponsor, or responsible for their financial performance.
TWA will issue a Dollars 300m note, paying interest at an annual rate of 11
per cent over 15 years, to help make up the funding requirements. Mr Icahn
or his private interests must then supplement these payments by Dollars 20m
annually for four years.
Yesterday, the various parties said a plan of reorganisation should be filed
with the bankruptcy court in January, which could allow the airline to move
out of Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection next year.
This could pave the way for the proposed sale of international assets to a
combined USAir-British Airways, subject to approval from US regulatory
authorities.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3391</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAD6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / International Company News: Rationalisation helps Incentive
advance 57%
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   STOCKHOLM
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
INCENTIVE, the Swedish industrial group dominated by the Wallenberg family,
saw profits rise 57 per cent to SKr222m (Dollars 32.4m) in the first nine
months as rationalisation helped offset the impact of recession in key
markets.
The result compares with a profit of SKr141m in the first nine months of
1991 and is higher than the SKr218m profit achieved for the whole of 1991.
Profit per share, excluding non-recurring items, was unchanged at SKr5.50.
If income from Incentive's large shareholdings in Asea, Electrolux and Esab
are included, profits rose to SKr799m from SKr780m. This was in spite of the
impact of disposals and weaker markets, which reduced sales to SKr8.44bn
from SKr10.46bn.
Mr Mikael Lilius, president, said: 'The cost reduction and rationalisation
measures have increased operating margins. We have also had a more efficient
utilisation of capital and lower net financial expense.'
Incentive companies - construction and environment groups Tour &amp; Andersson
and Munters, plus camera group Hasselblad - advanced in spite of adverse
economic conditions.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3392</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAD3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Takeover Panel deems concert party at
Buckingham
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER PEARSE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE TAKEOVER Panel has deemed that members of the Jivraj family are acting
in concert in shares of Buckingham International, hotels and nursing homes
group.
The concert party consists of Jemma Trust Company and Naaz Limited, a
company owned by a trust of which Mr Nurdin Jivraj, Buckingham deputy
chairman, and Mr Nick Jivraj, his son and chief executive, and their
families are beneficiaries. A close relative of theirs is beneficiary of a
trust run by Jemma.
Naaz owns 29.96 per cent of Buckingham. The Panel said Jemma bought between
September 15 and 24 at up to 2 3/4 p per share some 10.4m ordinary
Buckingham shares, or about 8.6 per cent of its share capital. Together the
two holdings exceed 30 per cent at which level a takeover offer becomes
mandatory.
Buckingham said that Naaz and Jemma were in discussions with the Panel. The
party could appeal against the ruling; offer 2 3/4 p per share for the
outstanding stock and bid for the secured convertible redeemable loan stock;
or sell sufficient shares to reduce its combined holding below 30 per cent.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3393</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAD2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Ready to take a leap forward - Tadpole
Technology's move to the main market
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN CANE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
FOLLOWERS of Tadpole Technology, a small electronics company with
headquarters in Cambridge, England, and Austin, Texas, have waited long
enough to see their loyalty rewarded.
Now the moment of metamorphosis may be at hand. Tadpole, distinguished by
world class technology and intermittent profitability, last week leapt from
the over-the- counter market to a full listing, raising sufficient funds on
the way to put its finances on a sound footing for the first time since its
foundation in 1984.
The placing of just over 7.4m shares at 65p a share was fully subscribed,
leaving the company with Pounds 4.8m minus expenses.
The shares started trading yesterday, closing at 85p.
After clearing its accumulated debt, Tadpole will have some Pounds 2m to
buffer what could prove to be explosive growth.
Investors' hopes are pinned to Tadpole's disclosure last week that in
addition to an existing relationship with Sun Microsystems, one of the
fastest growing and most aggressive US workstation manufacturers, it has
secured a strategic alliance with International Business Machines, the
world's largest computer manufacturer, through which IBM will market a
yet-to-be-announced Tadpole product and the US giant will take up to 10 per
cent of the enlarged equity stake in the company.
Tadpole is one of an elite group of electronics companies founded in the
Cambridge area over the past two decades by graduates anxious to remain
within bicycling distance of their alma mater. Chief executive, Mr George
Grey, was 23 when he founded the company in partnership with Mr Martin
Jackson. Mr Jackson now works for EO, also based in Cambridge, which is
developing an innovative personal communicator.
Mr Grey says that from the first the company was technically overambitious
and undercapitalised. Its four-year track record - it lost money in 1989,
1990 and 1992 - is awful. In 1992 it incurred a loss of Pounds 1.69m.
Closer inspection reveals that turnover has been rising rapidly; from Pounds
5.7m in 1989 to Pounds 12.5m last year. And most of the company's business
is now either in the US (76 per cent in 1992) or mainland Europe and
Scandinavia (18 per cent).
What does Tadpole do that warrants such recognition abroad but has so far
failed to make it a commercial success? It is a specialist in the design and
fabrication of complex printed circuit boards, tailored to its customers'
exact specifications. US customers include GE, Unisys and Polaroid. Its
expertise is centred on the Unix-operating system, widely tipped to become
the world standard for business computing over the next decade.
The company is generating most excitement these days through its
developments in portable workstations.
Workstations are personal computers writ large - in performance terms
anyway. When aeronautical engineers put a Boeing 747 through maintenance
tests they taxi the jumbo jet into a hangar where it is connected through an
umbilical cord to a desktop workstation, typically made by Sun Microsystems.
Tadpole has exploited its board technology to develop a notebook-sized
version of the Sun workstation that can be carried aboard the airliner on
the runway.
Tadpole calls its computer the 'Sparcbook', after Sun's high performance
Sparc microprocessor chip. A few hundred have been sold for evaluation;
orders in lots of 1,000 or more are expected next year. An important feature
of Sparcbook is a software system which enables it to link into and form
part of the user's network while away from the office.
Last week Tadpole announced that it had agreed to develop workstation
notebooks for IBM based on the US maker's 'Power PC' designs. Tadpole will
develop the computers and IBM will market them.
The agreement is contingent on the completion of equity negotiations between
the two firms. IBM's total investment in Tadpole in equity and development
funds will be not less than Dollars 3m.
George Grey said: 'The Power PC architecture is one of the key
microprocessor architectures of the next decade'.
Mr Grey explains the company's precarious finances to date as the result of
an indulgence in research and development that was not supported by
corresponding sales. Changed accounting conventions resulted in one set of
losses; failure on the part of the US semiconductor manufacturer, Motorola,
to deliver a new chip on time was another.
The company has taken steps to strengthen its financial management,
appointing as deputy group chief executive Mr Jeremy Woan, a 32-year-old
former investment analyst with Citicorp Scrimgeour Vickers and Hoare Govett.
The group finance director is Mr Robert Booth, who joined in 1991 after 10
years in the pharmaceuticals business. Mr Richard King, who prior to
retirement was chief executive of Cambridge Electronic Industries, was
appointed non-executive chairman this year.
Could Tadpole emulate Microfocus, the UK software company whose share price
is now hovering around Pounds 24, pushed up by US investment? There are
strong parallels.
Both companies have bigger businesses abroad than at home and both sell key
components to large US electronics companies.
An ADR offering from Tadpole could be on the cards in a few years. The task
at hand, however, is to turn the company round and manage the anticipated
growth surge.
Observers think that pre-tax profits in 1993 could be about Pounds 1.3m, or
earnings per share of 6p.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3394</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAD1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Acquisition gives boost to Cranswick
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Cranswick, the USM-quoted pork products and animal feeds company, lifted
interim pre-tax profits by 47 per cent, from Pounds 659,000 to Pounds
968,000, in the six months to September 26.
Turnover was 31 per cent higher at Pounds 49.7m and the company said the
second half of the year had started well.
The improved performance was mainly due to the acquisition last November of
Yorkshire Country Pork. Sales of pork products jumped by Pounds 12.5m to
Pounds 17m during the period.
Earnings increased to 6.4p (6.3p) per share. The interim dividend is 2.4p
(2.3p).
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3395</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAD0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Morris Ashby advances strongly
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
As forecast at the 1992 year end, pre-tax profits of Morris Ashby, the
USM-quoted specialist aluminium diecasting and machining group, showed a
strong advance in the six months to September 30.
From turnover up by Pounds 1.3m to Pounds 8.13m pre-tax profits leapt by 33
per cent from Pounds 481,000 to Pounds 639,000.
Earnings per share were 5.5p (4.4p). The interim dividend is maintained at
1.7p.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3396</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Tarmac sells Feb to Sandoz for Pounds 14m
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Tarmac sells Feb to Sandoz for Pounds 14m Tarmac is continuing its
divestment programme with the sale of Feb International, the chemicals
manufacturer, to Sandoz of Switzerland for Pounds 14m cash. The price is
subject to adjustment depending on levels of working capital on completion.
Feb, based in Swinton, supplies the building and construction industries and
has sales of about Pounds 30m. Tarmac paid Pounds 8m for the company six
years ago when sales were about Pounds 20m.
Tarmac has retained Feb's site in Kent where it will make Aquaseal
bituminous-based products for Feb.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3397</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Wellman retreats to Pounds 321,000
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
WELLMAN, the West Midlands-based engineer, saw profits dip to Pounds 321,000
pre-tax for the six months to September 30.
The downturn from the previous Pounds 344,000 came on turnover of Pounds
13.4m (Pounds 13.7m), although Mr Geoffrey Iley, chairman, said comparisons
were distorted by the purchase in May of Midcast Engineering.
The acquisition, which took the group into the North American market, made a
contribution to trading profits on turnover of Pounds 900,000, although UK
deliveries were lower than anticipated; benefits from rationalisation were
being realised, Mr Iley.
Midcast has won orders worth Dollars 3.4m (Pounds 2.2m) from North America.
Other group businesses showed little change in profits, but overseas
subsidiaries in South Africa and Australia incurred small losses.
Fully diluted earnings fell to 0.6p (0.7p) per share. The interim dividend
is cut from 0.8p to 0.3p; a final of not less than 0.6p is forecast.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3398</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: South Wales Electricity jumps 43% to Pounds
29.7m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL SMITH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE comparative resilience of the local economy and the disposal of
loss-making retail activities helped South Wales Electricity raise interim
pre-tax profits by 43 per cent, from Pounds 20.7m to Pounds 29.7m.
The company expressed doubts about the possibility of signing one-year
contracts for coal-fired electricity before the energy white paper, in spite
of an apparent preference for this option by Mr Michael Heseltine, the
president of the Board of Trade.
Mr David Jones, managing director, suggested that one way of increasing the
market for coal would be to change the franchise non-competitive market
limit from 1mw in 1994 to more than the planned 100kw.
In the six months to September 30 turnover expanded from Pounds 256.5m to
Pounds 260.5m. Domestic unit sales grew by 0.9 per cent and commercial by
4.3 per cent, but industrial sales declined by 0.4 per cent.
The company became the first rec to become cash positive since
privatisation. Interest contributed Pounds 400,000, against payments of
Pounds 1.5m the first half of 1991.
Although the company was helped by the sale of the retail arm, which lost
Pounds 2.5m in the first half of 1991, Celtic Contracting incurred a loss of
Pounds 1m this time.
However, Mr Wynford Evans, chairman, said he expected Celtic to be back in
profit next year, following a restructuring of terms and conditions of the
200 employees which will see weekly hours increase from 39 to 42 and the
wage bill fall by 20 per cent.
In the core business there was a reduction of 7.7 per cent in staffing
during the period. Staffing across the whole group has fallen 14 per cent in
the last 18 months.
The interim dividend goes up to 6.6p (5.8p), payable from earnings of 20.5p
(13.6p) per share.
COMMENT
South Wales could scarcely have hoped to recreate the impact of the full
year results, when it became the first regional electricity company to cut
prices since privatisation, but it did its best. Buoyed by becoming the
first cash positive rec and by relatively impressive volume growth, it is
increasing its dividend more than other recs so far and the shares rose 8p
to 507p. Nonetheless, Celtic's losses are a reminder that contracting is a
cyclical business even if it does make money next year. A full year
distribution of 22p would give a prospective yield of 5.8 per cent, which is
slightly below the average and leaves little room for the company to
continue outperforming.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3399</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Vega
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
A series of new contracts helped Vega Group, the space engineering
specialist, report a 22 per cent rise in interim pre-tax profits to Pounds
631,000 in the company's first set of figures since its flotation in June.
Turnover for the six months to October 31 was Pounds 3.62m (Pounds 2.76m)
and earnings per share were 2.9p (2.5p). The interim dividend is 0.87p.
During the period, the company won contracts worth about Pounds 3m which
were in excess of the Pounds 15m of contracts included in the placing
document.
The shares lost 2p to 122p.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3400</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Midlands Radio
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The board of Midlands Radio said that it had noted the recent movement in
the company's share price . The company said it had received an approach
that may or may not lead to an offer. Following the announcement the shares
shares advanced to 119p finally closing at 114p, up 9p on the day after the
4p advance to 105p on Friday.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3401</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADTFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Rolfe &amp; Nolan
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Progress at Rolfe &amp; Nolan, the futures and options computer bureau and
software specialist, was checked in the six months to August 31.
After allowing for 100 per cent of the losses of Brokerage Systems Inc, in
which the group acquired a 19.9 per cent interest, pre-tax profits were only
marginally ahead at Pounds 707,000 compared with Pounds 704,000. Without BSI
they would have been a 15 per cent higher at Pounds 813,000.
Group turnover was Pounds 5.31m of which Rolfe &amp; Nolan contributed Pounds
3.89m (Pounds 3.28m), a rise of 19 per cent. Earnings per share, including
19.9 per cent of BSI's loss, increased to 8.9p (8.5p) and the interim
dividend is raised from 2.3p to 2.55p.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3402</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADSFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Total Systems
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Total Systems, the USM-quoted computer software and hardware company,
reported pre-tax profits up 21 per cent in the six months to September 30.
Turnover rose 6 per cent to Pounds 1.36m (Pounds 1.29m) for profits of
Pounds 425,000 (Pounds 351,000). Earnings per share came out at 2.85p
(2.38p) and the interim dividend is doubled to 1.5p.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3403</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Melville
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Melville Group, the exhibition services and interior fitting company,
yesterday announced preliminary results for the year to June 30 along with a
refinancing by way of a subscription and a 1-for-3 rights issue to raise
between Pounds 3.3m and Pounds 4.4m net.
Melville reported pre-tax profits of Pounds 593,000 (Pounds 3.13m) for the
year to June 30, after an exceptional loss of Pounds 1.42m on the closure of
Melville Espana's factory.
Extraordinary charges totalled Pounds 18.6m, of which Pounds 16.6m related
to property.
Losses per share were 1.36p against earnings of 4.81p; there is no dividend
(3.2p).
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3404</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Compco
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Compco Holdings, the property investment and development company, reported
pre-tax profits of Pounds 318,860 in the six months to September 25, an
increase of 33 per cent on last time's Pounds 239,860.
Mr David Pickford, chairman, said that net rental income had continued to
grow - up from Pounds 804,813 to Pounds 1.05m - despite the difficult
economic climate.
Earnings per share worked through at 8.21p against 7.05p.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3405</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Radio Clyde shows 30% advance
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
RADIO CLYDE Holdings, the USM-quoted broadcaster, increased pre-tax profits
by 30 per cent from Pounds 1.4m to Pounds 1.83m in the year to
end-September.
Turnover jumped 38 per cent to Pounds 13m (Pounds 9.45m), reflecting the
merger with Radio Forth in April last year and increases in local and
national advertising revenue, which contributed two thirds of overall
income.
Earnings per share improved to 13.2p (12.4p) the modest increase reflecting
the larger number of shares in issue after the all-share payment for Radio
Forth. A final distribution of 5.25p (5p) lifts the total to 8.5p (8.25p).
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3406</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Davies &amp; Newman wind-up battle
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JANE FULLER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
DAVIES &amp; Newman Holdings, parent company of Dan-Air, was given a rough ride
to its death by small shareholders at yesterday's extraordinary meeting in
London.
The initial count on the resolution to wind up the group voluntarily showed
44 against and only 10 in favour. Well over 100 people attended the meeting.
However, the dissenters were swamped by proxy votes in a poll, with 400
holders of 41.6m shares in favour and 244 holders of 1.18m shares against.
Liquidators from Price Waterhouse were appointed.
Shareholders in Davies &amp; Newman, rescued in both 1990 and 1991, have ended
up with nothing after the sale of Dan-Air, its main asset, to British
Airways for Pounds 1. They were told the only alternative was receivership.
About 750 employees sank Pounds 542,000, at 50p a share, in last October's
Pounds 49.3m rescue issue. It was these and other small shareholders who
dominated yesterday's meeting.
Their angry questions were fielded by Mr David James, company
doctor-chairman since autumn 1990.
Mr Peter Frankel said shareholders had been treated with contempt. He
questioned whether the Stock Exchange should have waived the requirement to
refer the BA deal to shareholders. Mr James replied that Davies &amp; Newman
would have gone bust before the procedure could be completed.
Having heard that an extra Pounds 10m would have enabled the company to shed
the cost-albatross of its Boeing 727s, Mr Frankel asked whether the Pounds
8.75m paid in special fees to the banks should have been used instead to
save the company. Mr James said Pounds 8.75m was 'a drop in the ocean'
compared with projected debt of Pounds 55m by next April.
Capt Robert Burgess, who used to fly one of Dan-Air's Boeing 727s, asked why
pilots had only received the statutory minimum redundancy pay, adding up to
perhaps Pounds 4,000, when he understood flight engineers got up to Pounds
35,000 and cabin staff up to Pounds 20,000.
He was told that different agreements had applied to different categories of
staff, and there was a limit to the restructuring costs that could be
attached to the BA deal.
Sir Ivor Broom, chairman of Gatwick Handling, in which Davies &amp; Newman had a
50 per cent holding, said employee-shareholders had been misled in a
September newsletter from Mr James pointing out that debt was low and cash
positive at that point - although both points were true.
According to the EGM circular it had been realised by late August that new
capital was essential to enable the group to trade beyond the third week of
October. Mr James said the September newsletter had pointed out that new
funds would be needed. Talks with Mr Richard Branson, of Virgin Atlantic
Airways, had raised hopes of fresh investment.
With Mr James contending that Dan-Air's dwindling charter business was the
main reason for its loss of independence, one shareholder asked how much had
been 'wasted on setting up new scheduled routes and then closing them down
because of recession?'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3407</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Radio Clyde on song with 30% advance
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MATTHEW CURTIN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
RADIO CLYDE Holdings, the USM-quoted broadcaster which has the lion's share
of Scotland's independent airtime, increased pre-tax profits by 30 per cent
from Pounds 1.4m to Pounds 1.83m in the year to end-September.
Turnover jumped 38 per cent to Pounds 13m (Pounds 9.45m), reflecting the
merger with Radio Forth in April last year and increases in local and
national advertising revenue, which contributed two thirds of overall
income.
Earnings per share improved to 13.2p (12.4p), the modest increase reflecting
the larger number of shares in issue after the all-share payment for Radio
Forth. A final distribution of 5.25p (5p) is recommended which lifts the
total to 8.5p (8.25p).
Mr James Gordon, chief executive, said the group was increasingly successful
in convincing 'advertisers south of the border that things are not so gloomy
in Scotland'.
Local advertising revenue rose 6 per cent, but national advertising climbed
10 per cent, and overall advertising revenue in the past two months was 10
per cent higher than a year ago.
He said the results would have been even better had it not been for a Pounds
468,000 extraordinary write-off and losses at Buzz FM, a Birmingham station
in which the group had built up a 97.5 per cent stake.
Clyde could no longer support the drain on its cash reserves, and by cutting
off financial support, had opened the way for a new backer or outright buyer
for Buzz.
Mr Gordon said the outlook for Clyde was good, but it was not clear yet
whether rising advertising revenue would return to the levels of 1989 and
1990.
The group had a strong balance sheet and was eager to expand, planning to
tender for two out of five newly-advertised regional licences, having missed
out so far on national tenders.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3408</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Overseas growth boosts Tunstall
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PEGGY HOLLINGER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
TUNSTALL Group, the manufacturer of emergency communication systems for the
disabled and elderly, reported a 21 per cent increase to Pounds 5.29m in
pre-tax profit for the year ended September 20. Sales rose 9 per cent to
Pounds 40.5m.
Mr Michael Dawson, chairman, said the group had performed well, 'despite
adverse economic conditions both in the UK and overseas'.
Part of the increase was due to the inclusion for nine months of Ohmeda
Schmelter, acquired for Pounds 3.3m in January and renamed Tunstall
ComSystem. The purchase contributed Pounds 5.3m to sales and Pounds 500,000
to trading profit.
About 20 per cent of Tunstall's sales were now overseas, against 5 per cent
last year.
The group also benefited from a Pounds 232,000 interest gain, against a
Pounds 96,000 charge last year.
Mr Dawson said the under-exploited German market would provide good
opportunities for growth in the coming years.
Tunstall's immediate opportunity, however, would be the introduction of the
UK government's Care in the Community programme.
The final dividend is raised to 3.75p, making 6p (5.35p). Earnings per share
rose from 17.4p to 21.6p.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3409</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Faber Prest expands by 53% to near Pounds
5m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROLAND RUDD
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A REDUCTION in cost levels and the sale of loss-making businesses helped
Faber Prest, the industrial and distribution services company, report a 53
per cent increase in pre-tax profits for the year ended September 30.
Profits increased from Pounds 3.14m to Pounds 4.8m, on reduced sales of
Pounds 66.1m (Pounds 76.7m), and were struck after exceptional charges of
Pounds 457,000 (Pounds 1.7m) relating to the loss from a disposal and
continuing legal fees from proceedings in the US.
Mr Roger Feaviour, who was brought in two years ago as chief executive, has
refocused the group around three core businesses; industrial services,
transport distribution and car retailing.
Two new executives have been recruited to run the first two businesses,
which the group hopes to expand.
Mr Ron Woodworth, who was a manager at Trafalgar House's Davy Corporation,
and Mr Len Minnikin, who worked for the National Freight Corporation, are
heading up industrial services and transport distribution respectively.
A group of smaller businesses, including truck franchises and heavy
engineering, which Mr Feaviour said were 'losing money handsomely' were sold
for about Pounds 2m.
The divestments, along with a Pounds 500,000 reduction in working capital to
Pounds 3.5m, helped reduce borrowings by Pounds 5.5m to Pounds 4m,
representing gearing of 20 per cent (53 per cent).
Industrial services, which takes the metal out of slag for steel producers,
reported a 13 per cent decline in operating profits, from Pounds 3.4m to
Pounds 2.9m.
Distribution, which provides services to the UK industry, reported a 36 per
cent increase in operating profits, from Pounds 1.48m to Pounds 2.02m,
working from one central site instead of three.
Car retailing produced profits in line with last year at Pounds 362,000
(Pounds 366,000).
Earnings per share increased to 36p (28.83p).
The final dividend rises to 7.7p (4.3p) making a total of 12p (8.6p).
COMMENT
A comparison with last year's figures was always going to flatter Faber
Prest given that reorganisation costs were taken through 1991's profit and
loss account.
That said, tight financial controls and reduced cost levels are making the
desired impact. The group's brokers are forecasting that next year's pre-tax
profits will rise to Pounds 5m, giving earnings per share of 33.5.
This puts the shares, up 15p to 345p, on a prospective multiple of about 10,
a significant discount to the market. The stock's illiquidity remains a
problem. There is nothing Mr Feaviour would like more than for the Prest
family, which controls 37 per cent of the group, to sell some shares to help
him attract new investors.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3410</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: In Shops falls to Pounds 0.9m but sees
recovery
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PAUL CHEESERIGHT, Midlands Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
IN SHOPS, the Birmingham-based property group specialising in retail centres
and serviced offices, reported reduced interim profits but predicted
recovery in its next financial year.
Pre-tax profits for the six months to September were Pounds 903,000, against
Pounds 1.05m, on turnover up at Pounds 12.2m (Pounds 11.1m). Earnings per
share were 1.7p (2.05p) but the interim dividend is maintained at 0.66p.
During the first half In Shops lost Pounds 250,000 on its serviced office
operations, but the retail centre business continued to expand.
New retail centres opened in Aberdeen and Paisley in Scotland and at Kings
Heath and Sutton Coldfield in the West Midlands.
Although the second half was likely to be only marginally more profitable
than the first, Mr Brookes believed the worst of recession had been seen but
that recovery would not be reflected in business confidence for at least six
months.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3411</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Opposition grows to Sugar's plans
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PAUL TAYLOR
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
AMSTRAD'S share price fell 4p to 24p yesterday amid further signs that Mr
Alan Sugar's 30p-a-share buy-back proposals for the consumer electronics
group faces strong opposition from individual and institutional
shareholders.
With today's 2.15pm deadline for the receipt of proxies for the company's
extraordinary meeting nearing, two more large institutional investors said
they had decided to vote against the proposals.
Standard Life, which holds 13.5m Amstrad shares, equivalent to a 2.3 per
cent equity stake, said it was joining other institutional investors led by
Prudential and Postel in opposing the deal. Another institution said it had
already voted against the proposals, but did not wish to be identified.
Meanwhile Mr Sugar said late yesterday that he thought it was 'highly
unlikely' that trend shown in proxies already received by the company would
be reversed before the Court and extraordinary meetings called to vote on
the buy-back plan in London on Thursday afternoon.
He said that 'quite a few more' proxy votes came in over the weekend, but
that an unofficial count of the proxies received by Saturday night showed
the same trend as those received by the close of business last Thursday when
almost 60 per cent were against his proposed 'scheme of arrangement'.
Mr Sugar, who has a personal 35 per cent equity stake in Amstrad, has warned
that the share price may fall sharply if his bid to take Amstrad private
again is defeated.
Commenting on the share price fall yesterday he said it appeared some
investors had already decided to 'dump' their Amstrad stock.
With about 1.5m shares changing hands the stock fell as low as 22 1/2 p
before recovering some of its losses.
Although proxies for Amstrad's EGM are due in today, proxies for the court
meeting which preceeds the EGM on Thursday and must also approve the scheme,
can be submitted up until the meeting itself.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3412</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Cowie swaps merchant banks
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MAGGIE URRY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
T COWIE, the motor group, has replaced its merchant bank, Noble Grossart,
appointing NM Rothschild.
Noble Grossart came in for criticism when Cowie's Pounds 32m bid for Henlys
Group failed in September. The appointment of a new merchant bank suggests
Cowie intends to pursue expansion by acquisition.
During the bid for Henlys, Cowie was asked by the Takeover Panel to make a
number of corrections and clarifications to statements made about its offer.
Cowie is not changing its broking and legal advisers.
At the time, observers felt that Noble Grossart, which is based in
Edinburgh, was not sufficiently experienced in hostile takeover battles.
Mr Gordon Hodgson, chief executive, said that Rothschild had been selected
from a shortlist of five merchant banks, and the final choice had been a
matter of personal chemistry between the company and the bank.
He said that Rothschilds' 'extensive experience will help Cowie
substantially in the evaluation of strategic acquisition and development
opportunities in Britain and mainland Europe.'
Cowie is keen to expand its vehicle leasing business into Europe where the
industry is not as well developed. It is the market leader in the UK.
Stockbrokers also believe Cowie could bid for Henlys again, once a year has
passed from the lapsing of its original bid, or earlier if another company
bids first.
Cowie retains a 9.9 per cent stake in Henlys, bought at about 73p a share.
This stake will be written down in Cowie's 1992 accounts, unless Henlys
shares rise from yesterday's close at 67p. Cowie's shares rose 2p to 142p
yesterday.
Analysts have cut profit forecasts for Cowie's profits this year from Pounds
25m, expected in the summer, to about Pounds 23m pre-tax compared to Pounds
18.2m in 1991.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3413</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Barclays set to complete refinancing at
Imry
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By Our Financial Staff
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BARCLAYS BANK is set to complete the refinancing of Imry, the troubled
property company that owes it Pounds 440m, within the next two weeks.
The financial restructuring, which will keep Imry out of receivership, is
likely to involve a provision against bad debts of about Pounds 240m.
It will also severe the company's ties with its chairman, Mr Wolfgang
Stolzenberg, a Canadian-based businessman who also controls Castor Holdings,
a property finance group that went into receivership this summer with
estimated losses of over CDollars 1bn (Pounds 500m).
Mr Andrew Buxton, chief executive of Barclays, said yesterday that some
disclosure of the bank's provision against loan loss in Imry would be made
as part of the company's restructuring announcement 'within 14 days'.
Mr Buxton said he did not know how explicit the disclosure would be, and
whether it would include details of the size of Barclays' provision.
He said the bank normally did not give figures for specific provisions
against company loans.
Barclays' involvement with Imry goes back to 1989, when Imry Merchant
Developers was the target of a highly-leveraged Pounds 314m agreed bid,
which was backed by a Pounds 215m loan from Barclays.
The decline in the property market forced Barclays to refinance the company
in June 1991. Barclays doubled its exposure by providing a new Pounds 200m
loan. Mr Stolzenberg bought out the other investors and took over as
chairman.
Barclays has already made provisions of some Pounds 140m on the Imry loan,
but it is likely to make a provision of about Pounds 100m in its results for
the second half of 1992.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3414</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Cupid shares fall as founder quits
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER PEARSE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SHARES IN Cupid plummeted from 85p to 53p as the USM-quoted bridal wear
group reported that Mr Michael Murray, its founder, had 'resigned from the
board and from his position as group chief executive following a
disagreement with the rest of the board'.
Mr Michael Fort, the director who runs the retail division and was the only
member of the board available yesterday, would not elaborate on the
announcement beyond pointing out the warning in the press release that the
outcome for the full year was 'unlikely to exceed last year's results'.
However, he did say that Mr Richard Lee, chairman and interim chief
executive, was in close contact with the group's institutional shareholders
about the share price fall.
The group reported pre-tax losses of Pounds 168,000 (profits Pounds 93,000)
for the six months to September 30, but Mr Fort said that customary seasonal
factors were exaggerated by Youngs, the formal wear business acquired in
mid-January.
Much of the inflowing cash was taken before the acquisition, though most of
the costs were incurred afterwards. Quilty, the nursery care division, also
dragged down the pre-tax outcome.
Mr Alex Williamson, Quilty's managing director, has joined the main board
which was strengthened by Mr Richard Shaw and Mr Robert Shepherd last
August.
Group turnover rose to Pounds 8.5m (Pounds 6.07m) and interest payable to
Pounds 184,000 (Pounds 129,000).
Losses per share were 1.27p against earnings of 0.85p and again there is no
interim dividend.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3415</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: BP finds will lift reserves by 600m barrels
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
British Petroleum will add 600m barrels to its oil reserves from discoveries
and appraisals completed this year, Mr David Simon, group chief executive,
said yesterday.
Mr Simon said the new reserves of oil and gas equivalent would more than
offset this year's production of 540m barrels which compares with last year
when BP only replaced 78 per cent of its production.
A company's ability to replace its reserves is a key measure by which the
stock market judges oil companies and BP has replaced only 80 per cent of
its reserves on average over the past three years.
Mr Simon said the new reserves would include an initial 225m barrels from
the Cusiana field in Colombia and 115m barrels from improved recovery from
fields in Alaska.
The Cusiana find is important for BP which said yesterday that development
plans were progressing well. Work on the first phase of full-scale
production is expected to begin next year with output increasing to 150,000
barrels a day by 1995.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3416</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Growth dependent on drugs - Zeneca's hopes
for the future
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PAUL ABRAHAMS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE FUTURE of pharmaceuticals is critical for Zeneca, Imperial Chemical
Industries' biosciences company, given the bleak immediate outlook for
company's agrochemicals and speciality chemicals businesses.
The company's drugs pipeline has been criticised for being thin, with few
new chemical entities. However, in a presentation yesterday described by
analysts as up-beat, Mr David Friend, pharmaceuticals chief executive, said
extending the number of new diseases that existing products could treat was
more important than introducing new drugs that could generate only limited
sales.
Mr Tom McKillop, research and technology director, considered the
pharmaceuticals pipeline to be the most promising for many years. The
division aimed to bring a new chemical entity for licensing each year. There
would be no new compound launched next year, but Zeneca expected to receive
seven new US drug approvals and make nine new submissions.
Four drugs were in regulatory development, said Mr McKillop. These included
Merrem, an antibiotic, Casodex, an anti-cancer agent, Accolate, an asthma
drug, and a compound called 204636, designed to treat schizophrenia.
Analysts said the last two, which had been briefly described last year, were
extremely promising but were some way from launch.
Mr Friend said profit growth presented the division with a singular
challenge because of the rapid collapse in sales of Tenormin, the heart drug
and the world's fifth best-selling drug. The rapid decline had been in spite
of the preparations made well in advance of the expiry of its US patents.
He admitted the 12 generic versions of Tenormin had captured about 50 per
cent of the market within a year, instead of the expected two years.
Tenormin had proved the largest ever target for generics, he said.
ICI's own generic version had generated some sales until April, when prices
had deteriorated. A programme called Wellspring, designed to create customer
loyalty, had proved a rather limited defensive strategy.
Mr Friend said there were signs that the generics' progress was decelerating
and Tenormin would end up with more than 25 per cent of the market.
He added that the division should be back on its normal growth track by
1994. The group was far less dependent upon a single product and would be
far more stable in the long-term.
Meanwhile, Zeneca's new drugs had progressed well, said Mr Friend.
Diprivan, the world's most important anaesthetic by value should generate
sales this year of about Pounds 140m, an improvement of approximately 50 per
cent. It enjoyed 65 per cent of the worldwide market for intravenous
induction of anaesthesia. The company was looking to introduce the drug into
the market for maintaining anaesthesia and sedation.
Zoladex, a cancer treatment, should generate revenues of Pounds 100m this
year, a rise of about 50 per cent. The group said it hoped to gain approvals
for the drug to treat hormonal tumours and benign gynaecological conditions.
The market was becoming increasingly competitive, Mr Friend warned, but
efforts to find a longer-acting formulation remained a high priority.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3417</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Tomkins' Pounds 935m bid for RHM secured
after first closing date
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD GOURLAY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
TOMKINS, the conglomerate, has secured its recommended Pounds 935m bid for
Ranks Hovis McDougall, the milling, baking and grocery products company.
As of the first closing date yesterday, Tomkins either owned shares or had
received acceptances in respect of the ordinary offer amounting to over 50
per cent of RHM's ordinary shares.
The offer was declared unconditional as to acceptances.
With Barclays de Zoete Wedd still counting acceptances, it was unclear last
night what proportion of shareholders had accepted the shares and cash
ordinary offer, the all cash alternative or the all share alternative.
Mr Greg Hutchings, Tomkins chief executive, said he was 'ecstatic' with the
outcome. On Wednesday, Tomkins would go into RHM to begin the work that
would repay the shareholders for their support.
Tomkins is partially paying for RHM via a Pounds 653m rights issue.
Shareholders last week paid the first Pounds 384m tranche.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3418</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Lower exceptionals behind Westland rise
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PAUL BETTS and DAVID WHITE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
WESTLAND, the helicopter group, is raising its annual dividend from 4p to
4.25p, with a proposed final of 3p, against 2.75p, after reporting an 11 per
cent rise in pre-tax profits for the year to October 2.
A halving of exceptional charges to Pounds 3.8m (Pounds 7m) as a result of
lower restructuring costs was behind the profit rise to Pounds 26.3m (Pounds
23.7m). Turnover fell 10 per cent to Pounds 422.1m (Pounds 467.4m). Earnings
per share were 13.2p (13.1p).
Mr Alan Jones, chief executive, said the company had reached the bottom of
the trough caused by the fall in helicopter orders as well as the recession
in civil aviation.
He saw the future 'with a degree of confidence' after the intake of orders
had trebled in the year to Pounds 1.18bn. Since the year end orders worth
Pounds 550m for helicopters had been received from the Ministry of Defence
and Canada.
Westland, the future of which was at the centre of a cabinet crisis six
years ago, is pinning its prospects on the development of the Anglo-Italian
EH101 large military and civil helicopter as well as a possible order to
manufacture McDonnell Douglas's Apache attack helicopter for the British
army.
Mr Jones said Westland was also continuing to increase its activities in the
civil aerospace sector by producing components for new widebody and regional
airliner programmes.
Despite its determination to focus new investment on civil activities,
largely based on the Isle of Wight, Westland remains heavily dependant on
defence helicopters. The new orders and an expected order of 16 naval
versions of the helicopter from Italy would lead to an increase in the
group's 70 per cent dependence on military helicopter business over the next
few years.
Mr Jones said Westland's future lay in an increasingly close relationship
with Agusta, the state-controlled helicopter company which is its Italian
partner in the EH101. This would create a counterweight to the Franco-German
Eurocopter partnership between Aerospatiale of France and Deutsche
Aerospace.
Westland does not envisage any further radical reduction in its workforce of
8,500 after cutting about 150 jobs in the last financial year.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3419</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCADAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Opec's message to oil traders falls on deaf ears: Why the
price of crude has fallen
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
NERVOUS futures traders in New York and London have sent the oil price down
after the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries has failed to
convince them it can discipline the production of oil.
The price of North Sea Brent crude has tumbled by almost Dollars 1.50 a
barrel following Opec's meeting at the end of November, adding up to a drop
of Dollars 3.50 a barrel since October.
The price of Brent for January delivery was Dollars 18.15 a barrel in London
last night.
The problem for Opec members - most of who urgently need higher oil revenues
to revive their struggling economies - is that market traders have little
confidence that the producers' club can staunch the flow of oil from its
members' pumps. In spite of agreeing to cut production in Vienna, Opec
members saw prices fall rather than rise by Dollars 1 or Dollars 2 a barrel
as they had hoped.
Opec's task of talking up oil prices has been made more difficult by a rise
in stocks of oil products such as gasoil, or diesel, which are held by
companies and consumers over the winter. This has been accompanied by milder
weather than was forecast, depressing demand.
Companies do not like to tie up their cash by holding stocks when demand is
low and spring is approaching.
Traders fear that this extra oil could start flooding on to the market early
next year if there is no recovery in demand.
Traders have been nervous since October when stocks started to increase, an
unusual event for that time of year. Refineries in Europe and the US were
running at high production rates which, combined with depressed demand, led
to excess supply. European stocks of fuel oil, for example, rose to 144m
barrels at the end of October, compared with 137m barrels at the same time
last year, according to one market observer.
Opec members were also flouting September's agreement to trim output.
Most members pumped as much as they could with the result that production
was more than 25m barrels a day (b/d) in November rather than the agreed
ceiling of 24.2m b/d.
Now Opec wants oil traders to believe that it will slice into its output to
cut production to 24.58m b/d between December and March to bring supply and
demand into a steadier balance. It has even shared out production
allocations among members to reinforce their commitment to the agreement -
the first time it has managed to do this without any country making an
official objection to its share since the Gulf war.
But the Opec accord, like most of the club's recent deals, has massaged
production figures to try to gain acceptance for the deal from among the
cartel's fractious members.
This means the accord does little more than sanction current
over-production.
'The Opec agreement just does not go far enough. The market has no faith
that Opec can make the cuts needed,' said Mr Andy LeBow, a New York trader
with ED&amp;F Mann, an international trading house.
The latest accord excludes Ecuador which has opted to leave the producers'
club.
Ecuador was producing around 300,000 b/d in November and once this is
deducted from Opec's overall output that month of 25m b/d it brings
production to 24.7m b/d. This implies a cut in production for the remaining
Opec members of just over 100,000 b/d for the first quarter of next year to
reach the new ceiling of 24.58m b/d - hardly the substantial reduction that
traders had been expecting.
Moreover, Kuwait has been given room to exceed its production allocation of
1.5m b/d if market conditions allow. The emirate has said it wants to
produce 1.75m b/d as it rebuilds its oil industry after the Gulf war. Iran
is intent on building its capacity and has previously flouted production
constraints.
'The market always expects too much from Opec,' said Mr Joe Stanislaw, at
Cambridge Energy Research Associates, the industry consultants, 'this
agreement is the best that could be achieved given the conflicting political
objectives. But it is not enough.'
Political conflicts within Opec have partly stymied the organisation's
attempts at managing oil supply. Since the Gulf war, Saudi Arabia and Iran
have been involved in a tussle for oil market share which has dictated Opec
policy.
Both countries have resisted making cuts in their own output. In fact, Iran
has been engaged in a drive to increase its production capacity which it
says could reach 4.5m b/d by March. This has led to resentment among many of
the smaller, debt-laden producers.
'If you have the ability to do damage in the market, you are listened to at
Opec,' said Mr Taiwo Idemudia, general manager of the Nigerian National
Petroleum Company's London office.
The market could really be weakened if member nations do not implement even
the modest production cuts envisaged in the November deal.
In February, when Opec meets again, demand for its oil will be fast
declining as the industry prepares for warmer weather.
The organisation must agree to bigger cuts then, if it is not to see a
full-scale price collapse.
'I think we will face a big fight in three months,' said Mr Hacene Mefti,
Algeria's energy minister, after the last Opec meeting.
The fight is likely to come over market share when Opec gets around to
dividing up a much smaller production ceiling among its members.
More painful cuts will also have to be made once Iraq is allowed to export
oil again. Baghdad is currently barred from the export market by United
Nations sanctions imposed after the Gulf war. When it returns to the market,
other nations will have to implement cuts to accommodate it.
Mr Vahan Zanoyan, senior director of the Petroleum Finance Company in
Washington, believes that Opec could achieve production cuts necessary to
boost prices if it is desperate enough.
'Opec's failures have rarely been because of a lack of arithmetical
solutions to their problems but because of a lack of political will and
differences in short-term price objectives.' The organisation has, in the
past, been jolted into decisive action by an imminent crisis in the market
such as a big price collapse.
Opec could still be helped out by colder winter weather which would push up
oil usage, or a threat to supplies from a political crisis in Russia - the
world's biggest oil producer.
But what is really needed for a sustained recovery in prices is a
faster-than-expected economic recovery.
Recent economic statistics from the US suggest that there the recession may
be ending. The market was also encouraged by demand estimates from the
International Energy Agency, the Paris-based monitoring body, on Friday
which expects world demand to reach 68.6m b/d in the first quarter. This is
higher than Opec's own estimate for demand of 66.48m b/d.
But there is unlikely to be any rapid rise in oil prices: for the next month
at least uncertainty over action by Opec members, combined with full stocks
and weak demand is likely to keep prices low.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3420</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAC9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Companies in this issue
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
 -----------------------------------
UK
 -----------------------------------
Acal                        19
Airtours                    17
Amstrad                     18
BP                          18
Barclays Bank           18, 17
Calor Group                 12
Clarke Foods                20
Compco                      19
Cowie (T)                   18
Cranswick                   20
Cupid                       18
Davies &amp; Newman             19
Faber Prest                 19
Forte                       17
Henderson Admin             18
ICI                         18
Imry                        18
In Shops                    19
Marley                      12
Melville                    19
Midlands Radio              19
Morris Ashby                20
RHM                         18
RTZ                         26
Radio Clyde                 19
Rolfe &amp; Nolan               19
Scottish &amp; Newcastle        17
South Wales Elect           20
TV South West               19
Tadpole Technology          20
Tarmac                      20
Tomkins                     18
Total Systems               19
Touche Remnant              18
Tunstall                    19
Vega                        19
Wellman                     20
Westland                    18
 -----------------------------------
OVERSEAS
 -----------------------------------
AMR                         22
Amax                        22
Apple Computer              22
Bayer. Vereinsbank          21
Credit Suisse               22
Dresdner Bank               21
Goodyear                    22
Hafnia                      21
Incentive                   21
Jacobs Suchard              22
Knight-Ridder               22
Metro                       21
Niugini                     26
Sandoz                      20
Star Technology             26
State Farm Ins              22
TWA                         21
Tribune Company             22
 -----------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3421</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAC8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Barclays to review top management roles
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOHN GAPPER, Banking Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MR ANDREW BUXTON, chief executive of Barclays Bank, promised yesterday that
the bank would respond to shareholder pressure to split the roles of
chairman and chief executive by devising a new senior management structure.
Mr Buxton said the bank would alter its corporate governance 'in the long
term'.
This might mean appointing a new chief executive after Mr Buxton becomes
chairman in January, or giving the power to dismiss the chairman to a
committee of non-executive directors.
'In the long term, we will take notice of what shareholders are saying, and
we will take steps to split the job,' Mr Buxton said in an interview. He
said institutional investors had signalled acceptance of this in meetings
with the bank.
He said he could not specify when a decision would be made. Controversy over
the dual role had only emerged in the past two months. A company of the size
and complexity of Barclays could not alter its management structure 'without
thinking through the ramifications'.
The controversy over the combined role has grown with speculation that the
bank could be forced to cut its final dividend because of poor results.
It has also been fuelled by Sir Adrian Cadbury's report on British corporate
governance. He favours dividing the roles of chairman and chief executive.
Mr Buxton said he was 'unlikely' to become chief executive under a new
chairman. But the bank would consider a suggestion from investors that he
might become executive chairman reporting to a committee of non-executives.
'I think that kind of thing might be quite possible,' he said. The bank had
to consider the best way of altering its proposed structure under which four
heads of divisions - three of them titled 'chief executive'  - will report
to him.
Mr Buxton said the bank had started to put in place new strategies to
restore its profitability over the next five years. Mr Buxton believed that
it would take two years before it achieved his planned changes.
Imry refinancing, Page 22
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3422</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAC7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Recession takes toll at Scottish &amp; Newcastle
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PHILIP RAWSTORNE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
FIRST-HALF pre-tax profits from Scottish &amp; Newcastle, the brewing and
leisure group, declined 6 per cent from Pounds 115.7m to Pounds 108.4m as
the recession bit deeply in the north of England and Scotland.
'While the continuing low level of consumer confidence, and the consequent
reluctance to spend, were more restricted last year to the south, this year
they have been much more widespread,' said Mr Brian Stewart, chief
executive.
'In terms of fundamental underlying economic conditions, it must be
recognised that there has, to date, been no consistent evidence of any
significant upturn,' he added.
Fully-diluted earnings per share for the six months to November 1 fell from
18.2p to 18p. The interim dividend is raised 4.5 per cent to 5.76p.
Taxable profits were hit by a Pounds 3.3m increase in interest charges and a
Pounds 2.2m reduction in the surplus on property disposals.
At the trading level, group profits were 2 per cent down to Pounds 118.2m on
turnover 4 per cent ahead to Pounds 760.7m.
A 31 per cent increase in bad debt provisions to Pounds 6.3m contributed to
a reduction in beer profits from Pounds 54.2m to Pounds 51m.
Turnover rose from Pounds 430.7m to Pounds 445.6m. Volume sales were 0.5 per
cent lower against a market fall of about 2 per cent.
The performance of the group's premium brands - McEwan's Export, Theakston's
and Beck's - all of which achieved volume increases of more than 10 per
cent, had 'given cause for considerable satisfaction', said Mr Stewart.
Sales to the take-home market were buoyant. Margins improved after a 30 per
cent cut in the second half of last year but were still lower than a year
ago.
Retail profits dropped from Pounds 29.4m to Pounds 28.4m on marginally
higher turnover of Pounds 145.4m. Rigorous cost control helped to offset the
impact of more difficult trading conditions, and investment continued in the
development of the group's pubs.
Leisure operations recorded an increase in profits from Pounds 37.1m to
Pounds 38.8m on turnover 7 per cent higher at Pounds 169.7m.
Center Parcs, with occupancy levels of more than 90 per cent, continued to
achieve 'outstanding profit growth'. Bookings strengthened after some early
weakness in the Benelux market; and operations in France, where a new centre
will be opened next year, consolidated 1991 improvements.
However, Pontin's UK earnings fell because of the recession. Occupancies
were 13 per cent down and there was a marked dip in bookings after the
October announcement of pit closures.
Lex, Page 16
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3423</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAC6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Airtours looking for acquisitions after 32.7% profit rise
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER, Leisure Industries Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
AIRTOURS, the tour operator, announced full-year pre-tax profits up 32.7 per
cent to Pounds 36.5m in the year to the end of September.
It also disclosed that it was examining possible purchases of travel
companies in the UK and on the European continent.
Mr David Crossland, chairman, said the company carried 1.7m passengers
compared with 1m in 1991.
He said this gave Airtours a UK market share of 13-14 per cent, compared
with 29 per cent secured by Thomson, market leader in UK package tourism,
and 15 per cent by Owners Abroad, the second-biggest company by passenger
numbers.
Turnover was up 40 per cent to Pounds 405.6m. Mr Crossland said the
reduction in profit margin was the result of price-cutting which had
occurred in the holiday market last May and June.
The final dividend is 6.7p (up from 5.25p), bringing the total to 7.25p (up
from 5.75p). Earnings per share were 27.47p (up from 24.68p).
There was no contribution from Pickfords, the UK's third largest travel
agency chain, which Airtours bought from NFC, the transport group, for
Pounds 16m last September. Mr Crossland said Pickfords made profits of
Pounds 2.7m in the year to end-September.
Airtours was investing in new technology at Pickfords to provide the group
with more information about the state of the travel market, he said.
At least 18 of the 150 rack spaces in the average Pickfords branch now
displayed Airtours brochures, compared with four before the acquisition.
Airtours' net cash balance fell to Pounds 65m at its lowest point last
February and ended the financial year at Pounds 155m, compared with Pounds
103m last year.
Airtours is interested in buying more UK travel agents to add to its 334
Pickfords outlets. The company is particularly keen to increase its network
in the north of England.
Airtours is also considering buying a travel business in Germany.
Mr Crossland said that the tourism business in Germany was similar to that
in the UK, but the average price paid for holidays was higher. Airtours
would proceed cautiously.
Mr Crossland said bookings for winter 1992-93 were ahead of last year. By
the end of October, Airtours' summer 1993 bookings were up 3 per cent
against a 3 per cent fall in the market.
Lex, Page 16
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3424</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAC5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Forte to retain stake in Gardner Merchant
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER, Leisure Industries Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
FORTE yesterday announced the sale of its Gardner Merchant contract catering
subsidiary to a consortium led by venture capital company CinVen, but said
it would retain a 24.8 per cent stake.
It also said it was acquiring 52 motorway restaurants and four hotels in
France from the Accor hotel group for FFr540m (Pounds 63.8m). Forte will
announce details tomorrow of a joint venture with Agip, the Italian
state-owned petrol company, to manage 18 hotels in Italy.
Forte will receive Pounds 342m in cash for Gardner Merchant, including
repayment of inter-company loans. It will also get Pounds 29.6m in deep
discount bonds and Pounds 28.6m in redeemable preference shares. It will
receive Pounds 1.9m in ordinary shares and convertible redeemable preferred
ordinary shares which will represent, on a diluted basis, 24.8 per cent of
Gardner Merchant.
Forte said Mr Garry Hawkes, Gardner Merchant managing director, would
continue to run the business and, together with other senior staff, would
subscribe for 8 per cent of the company.
Mr Rocco Forte, Forte chairman, said his group had been offered the
alternative of more cash but had decided to take a higher equity stake. He
said the investors in Gardner Merchant hoped to float the company in four
years' time.
Mr Forte said the purchase of the restaurants in France would give Forte a
40 per cent share of the country's motorway catering business, second only
to Accor.
Lex, Page 16
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3425</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAC4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / US troops due in Somalia tomorrow
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JULIAN OZANNE
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MOGADISHU
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
TWO American F-14 fighter jets flew low over the Somali capital Mogadishu
yesterday, giving anxious Somalis their first glimpse of the US military
force poised to land in Mogadishu tomorrow to protect relief efforts.
The reconnaissance came on a day when 48 people were killed and 50 were
wounded in fierce clashes yesterday between rival Somali clans vying for
control of Baidoa before US troops arrive.
The clashes involved rival families apparently struggling for control of the
famine-hit town.
Two hours after the F-14s had flown over Mogadishu, Mr Robert Oakley, US
ambassador-at-large, and Marine Brigadier General Frank Libutti flew into
the city to liaise between US force commanders, relief agencies and
Somalia's warlords on the American-led multinational intervention which is
expected to number 28,000 to 36,000 troops by Christmas.
'This is a humanitarian operation, not a military operation. It is the
opposite of Desert Storm,' in which US-led troops retook Kuwait, Mr Oakley
said after meeting aid agencies. 'We hope it will remain a humanitarian
operation,' he added.
The final contingent of an advance party of 1,800-2,000 US marines and
western correspondents completed its transfer last night from the Lt Jack
Lumus to the USS Tripoli, a helicopter assault ship which is part of the US
flotilla of five ships lying 30km off the Somali coast. The Lt Jack Lumus, a
supply ship, also had a number of M1A1 Abrams tanks on board.
An expeditionary French force coming from neighbouring Djibouti may land at
first light today either at Mogadishu airport or in the southern port city
of Kismayo, scene of some of the worst inter-clan violence.
France yesterday appointed Marine General Rene Belhome to lead the
2,000-strong force. Mr Pierre Joxe, the French defence minister, has said
the French force will secure Kismayo and be the first troops to land on
Somali soil. France will also supply helicopters and aircraft.
In Mogadishu yesterday secret police operating under the authority of
General Mohamed Farar Aideed, Somalia's fiercest warlord, seized an Italian
water expert working with Unicef, the United Nations children's agency. He
had not been released by evening. Aid workers have suffered constant
harassment and intimidation by Gen Aideed's forces for several months.
As the two aircraft from the USS Ranger carrier dropped flares, excitement
spread rapidly across the city. Somalis poured out of their houses and
looked to the sky in expectation of an imminent landing. Hundreds flocked
towards the airport where US troops are expected to land, shouting: 'America
 -come America.'
Heavy weaponry and armoured trucks with mounted anti-aircraft and anti-tank
weapons were meanwhile being moved out of the city. Mr Dick Cheney, the US
defence secretary, has said US forces will disarm the gunmen and marauding
gangs which have terrorised Somalia for two years and prevented western food
aid from reaching the starving.
Somali traders scent a bonanza when US troops arrive, Page 4
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3426</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAC3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Borrowing figures point to upturn
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By EMMA TUCKER, Economics Staff
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BORROWING by UK consumers picked up in October, adding to patchy evidence
that a recovery in retail sales is under way.
Official credit business figures yesterday showed that consumers borrowed a
net Pounds 76m in October, reversing two successive months of net
repayments.
New credit advanced by British finance houses, building societies and on
bank credit cards was a seasonally adjusted Pounds 3.84bn, down from Pounds
4.37bn in September. This figure was in line with market expectations, but
the growth in net consumer credit surprised economists. They had forecast a
rise of only Pounds 20m.
The drop in new credit advanced means the rise in net borrowing reflected a
slower rate of repayments by consumers rather than a big rise in the number
of new debts taken on.
Although this latest figure is encouraging and will fuel expectations that
the economy is slowly recovering, it is too early to say that the trend in
consumer borrowing is upwards.
In the three months to the end of October, consumers repaid a net Pounds 20m
against net borrowings of Pounds 91m in the three months to the end of July.
The monthly growth of Pounds 76m compares with growth of more than Pounds
200m a month at the end of 1990.
The figures from the Central Statistical Office account for only about 15
per cent of total private sector debt, as they do not include mortgages.
The Central Statistical Office plans to aim its press releases at wider
audiences. At a conference on economic and business statistics, Mr Bill
McLennan, the director of the CSO, said the office aimed to publish more
trend estimates and increase the analytic content of its press releases.
Government bonds, Page 24
Currencies, Page 27
London stocks, Page 36
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3427</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAC2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Rail sell-off rules may be eased: Government to make
privatisation plans more attractive
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD TOMKINS, Transport Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE GOVERNMENT yesterday gave the clearest indication yet that it was
prepared to bend its rail privatisation plans to make them more attractive
to would-be train operators.
It said it was ready to drop its insistence on open access and allow
operators effective monopolies on some lines, particularly British Rail's
Network SouthEast commuter routes.
It also suggested that some companies would be granted 'vertically
integrated' franchises which would allow them both to operate trains and
control tracks and stations.
The hints of a shift in the government's approach follow strong criticisms
of the privatisation plans from private sector companies which have
expressed an interest in operating trains.
The Department of Transport wants as many companies as possible to bid for
passenger train franchises, so that privatisation will be seen as a success.
Mr Roger Freeman, minister for public transport, yesterday emphasised that
the government remained fully committed to rail privatisation. Legislation
was ready to be introduced as soon as the necessary paving bill had cleared
the Commons, he told a conference in London organised by The Economist.
However, royal assent would come in October rather than the summer, and it
would be a long time before franchising spread to all of British Rail's
services. 'It will take a number of years to cover the whole of Great
Britain,' he said.
Publication of the rail bill is expected to form part of a vigorous campaign
by the government to defend its privatisation plans at the beginning of the
new year. Other announcements will include the publication of the
track-charging regime and the naming of the first half-dozen or so
experimental rail franchises.
Mr Freeman said he recognised that some private sector operators might be
reluctant to bid for franchises unless they were exclusive. But on some
routes, it would be impossible for other operators to set up in opposition
because there was no spare track capacity.
'The reality is that on Network SouthEast the franchise will effectively be
on an exclusive basis,' he said. However, that might not necessarily apply
to Regional Railways or InterCity routes.
Mr Freeman said the government had not ruled out the idea that some
operators might be allowed control of signals, track maintenance and
development of stations. This was most likely in the case of self-contained
lines such as the London Tilbury &amp; Southend, the Isle of Wight railway and
perhaps some rural branch lines.
He also appeared to confirm that some branch lines could be at risk of
closure because privatisation would expose the size of the subsidies they
were receiving. The resulting debate might 'shift the emphasis a little as
between one line and another', he said.
Mr Freeman said the government had no plans to franchise out the operation
of the channel tunnel express trains due to enter service between London,
Paris and Brussels in 1994.
Speaking after the conference, he rejected suggestions that the introduction
of track charging would result in the large-scale transfer of freight from
rail to road.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3428</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAC1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / The Lex Column: Airtours
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The problem facing Airtours this year was always going to be what it could
produce by way of an encore. After lifting its profits four-fold and share
price six-fold in 1991, as it picked over Mr Harry Goodman's collapsed
International Leisure Group, Airtours has since been faced with the far
harder task of expanding in a sticky market full of prickly competitors.
Unsurprisingly, therefore, its shares have disappointed this year. Even
after full-year profits growth of 33 per cent, Airtours' forward multiple
continues to languish at less than nine.
This summer's erosion of trading margins as a result of a flurry of
discounting was certainly a potent reminder of one of the industry's nastier
habits. Airtours can, however, count on the benefits from the Pickfords'
integration and boasts cash in the bank to fund continued expansion of its
travel agency arm. As a vertically-integrated operator, Airtours should be
well-placed to pick up extra business as well as improve its utilisation
levels, which are crucial for the industry's profitability.
City sentiment may mellow as the travel industry matures and the regulatory
authorities impose tougher financial straitjackets to the detriment of the
fly-by-night merchants. Airtours' record of cautious management would
certainly justify the benefit of the doubt; the industry's worrisome
history, however, suggests investors are unlikely to be so charitable.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3429</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / The Lex Column: S&amp;N
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The market was obviously prepared for something rather worse than a 6 per
cent drop in pre-tax profit at Scottish &amp; Newcastle. The northward spread of
the recession is apparently affecting S&amp;N less than other brewers. But it
would be wrong to get carried away. Yesterday's 3 per cent jump in the share
price is more a correction of recent underperformance than a sign that any
particular corner has been turned.
There is no disputing S&amp;N's natural advantages - strength in the take-home
trade, premium brands and geographic business spread. Equally, though, the
recovery of margins in the off-trade remains fragile, while devaluation must
sooner or later eat away at the margins on Beck's. Arguably, too, the
company has been a little slow in exploiting the food and thematic scope of
its retailing side.
In an ideal world, diversification into leisure would have compensated for
lack of growth in beer. Yet Pontins seems to have become caught up in the
recession. The company is vague about the growth rates being achieved by
Center Parcs. Occupancy rates remain high and presumably the spend per
visitor will pick up with the economy in the UK. However with the recession
clouds gathering over the continent and incipient recovery in the US, it is
just possible S&amp;N may, for a while at least, look with envy on Bass's
investment in Holiday Inn.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3430</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / The Lex Column: A fortifying deal
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
It must have come as a relief to Forte to have found a buyer for its Gardner
Merchant contract catering business after the embarrassing collapse of its
deal with Compass. In theory the way is now open for the long-mooted
diversification in continental Europe. As if to underline that point, Forte
also yesterday announced a motorway restaurant deal with Accor in France.
Later this week will come the formal announcement of its hotel venture with
Agip in Italy. At long last Mr Rocco Forte has a firm answer to investors
who have accused him of dithering over strategic direction.
One looks in vain, however, for much by way of additional earnings in the
short run. True, the Gardner Merchant sale will produce a one-off
contribution above the line of some Pounds 250m after adjustment for
goodwill. The proceeds will reduce group debt, but the interest savings will
be more than offset by the loss of Gardner's contribution. Forte is
targeting a 30 per cent annual return for its residual equity stake, thanks
to the high gearing involved in the venture. It will have to wait until
flotation in four years' time to realise much of that gain.
As for Europe, Forte is positioning itself to become a leading player in
motorway services but its hotel strategy is less convincing. Investment will
be needed in both areas before they make a significant contribution. Forte
has discovered some ingenious ways of expanding in Europe without committing
much cash but necessity is the mother of invention. Interest cover will
remain low despite the Gardner Merchant sale. Forte still badly needs a
recovery in its basic hotel business and it is starting to look as though it
could be 1994 before that takes strong hold. On that basis the shares look
over-priced.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3431</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / A country split along its deepest fault line: Religious
riots are shaking India's stability and threaten the secular foundations of
the state
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By STEFAN WAGSTYL
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Just before dawn today Mr P. V. Narasimha Rao, India's prime minister, moved
to wrest control of the ruined mosque in Ayodhya, in northern India, from
Hindu militants who had reduced it to rubble when they took it over at the
weekend.
Paramilitary police were used to dislodge the militants. First reports said
no shots were fired. However, the apparent ease with which the authorities
regained control did not dispel fears of further bloodshed. The reimposition
of the rule of law in the wake of yesterday's nationwide riots - which
caused hundreds of deaths - is, however, less of a challenge than that faced
by Mr Rao in restoring India's shattered political stability.
The weekend storming of the mosque has shaken India along its deepest fault
line - the division between Hindus and Moslems. The ability of the two
faiths to co-exist has been the greatest triumph of Indian democracy. Not
for nothing did the ruling Congress (I) party describe the demolition of the
ancient shrine as 'one of the greatest challenges India has faced since
independence'.
Some commentators saw the takeover as a more serious threat to political
stability than even the assassinations of Mrs Indira Gandhi and Mr Rajiv
Gandhi because the two former prime ministers had died at the hands of
easily identifiable political enemies - Sikh and Tamil terrorists. The
mosque's destruction stirs much deeper passions dating back at least as far
as the 16th century when Moslem invaders conquered northern India. There was
an almost primeval anger in the eyes of the young fanatics as they assaulted
the mosque on Sunday, their faces daubed in paint and carrying tridents,
symbols of Ram, the oldest god of Hinduism.
Certainly, in the heat of the moment, hyperbole is easy. It is also easy to
forget the troubles that independent India has overcome - including
partition and two wars with Pakistan, the arch-enemy. India's Moslems had
the sense to keep their heads down then - and were rewarded by tolerance
from the Hindu majority. India, with its 850m people and decentralised
political structure, can absorb great shocks.
But a tradition of tolerance did not prevent Sunday's assault at Ayodhya.
Nor will it easily defuse the tensions it has created. To tackle the crisis,
Mr Rao and other political leaders must deal with its causes.
The upsurge of tensions over Ayodhya is primarily due to the political rise
of the Bharatiya Janata Party, the right-wing militant party, which has
grown rapidly since its formation in the mid-1980s to become the largest
opposition party.
The BJP was founded by militant Hindu activist groups with a long and
sometimes violent past, including the assassination of Mahatma Gandhi. These
activists sensed a growing disillusion with the ruling Congress (I) party's
self-avowed secularism, under which the interests of different religions are
balanced for the sake of national unity. Secularism had been a powerful
force during the fight to build post-independent India. But with the
independence struggle now a distant memory, it has grown sterile.
So the militants launched an ill-defined but emotionally powerful mission of
turning India into a Hindu state. To give substance to this aim the militant
leaders chose an issue with the widest appeal - a campaign to reclaim
Ayodhya, a holy town where a mosque was built in the 16th century on the
reputed site of a temple marking Ram's birthplace.
Thus political opportunism revived a long dormant dispute. Successive
national governments tried to stave off confrontation by referring the
arguments about the mosque to India's courts. But pressure mounted as the
BJP increased its presence in parliament and won control of four provincial
state governments - one of which was Uttar Pradesh, which includes Ayodhya.
Simultaneously, the BJP stirred its supporters by mounting huge rallies at
Ayodhya in October 1991, July 1992 and again last weekend. Mr Rao
prevaricated. Instead of surrounding the mosque with enough police and
troops to defend it, he relied on the BJP's promises to control its
supporters. This worked before. But this time the BJP's inability to control
its radical wing meant the policy failed.
Mr Rao's immediate task was to re-establish control of the site. He was also
preparing last night to bow to Moslem demands to ban the BJP's activist
support groups, though not the party itself.
Mr Rao has taken a first step by imposing direct rule on Uttar Pradesh. But
many MPs, including some in his own party, doubt whether the prime minister,
with his reputation for indecisiveness, is the man for the job. As Mr Jaipal
Reddy, of the opposition Janata Dal party, said: 'We can't trust him to
fight fascism.'
Some Congress (I) MPs would like to replace Mr Rao with Mr Arjun Singh, the
human resources minister, who has stated his opposition to appeasing the
BJP. Whatever happens to Mr Rao, it is unlikely that the crisis will upset
Congress's control of the government, not least because the BJP is in no
position to offer itself as a successor and other parties are too small.
However, the survival of Congress rule will do nothing to address deeper
uncertainties about India's future. The assault will damage India's fragile
relations with Pakistan and Bangladesh. It will also tarnish India's image
as the world's largest democracy and its claims to moral leadership in the
developing world.
But these concerns pale in comparison with domestic considerations. In the
past 18 months, India has gone some way to modernise its economy by opening
long-restricted links with the outside world. Mr Lewis Preston, the
president of the World Bank, himself praised India's progress on a recent
visit.
Increasingly, western companies are seeking to develop interest in tapping
India's markets. But political stability is a prerequisite for long-term
investment, particularly for overseas companies.
The argument that Kashmir and even Punjab - provinces affected by terrorist
violence - are isolated exceptions to India's general stability carries
weight. But India's 120m-strong Moslem population - the second largest in
the world after Indonesia's - forms such a sizeable group that what happens
in Ayodhya matters everywhere. Curfews were imposed yesterday in New Delhi,
Bombay, Calcutta - the three largest business centres. Nationwide protest
strikes are due to be held today.
India is still a long way from civil war and even from prolonged, general,
violent unrest. Indeed, there were some hopes in Delhi last night that the
government could take advantage of the BJP's manifest disarray to rally the
moderate majority which politicians of all parties believe still dominates
India. But the failure to rally such support before last weekend is one from
which India may take a long time to recover.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3432</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Letter: BT price structure aims to stimulate use of
under-utilised network
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr MICHAEL HEPHER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, BT's latest price freeze is part of our regular, normal review of
prices and not a response to actions by competitors (Letters, December 4).
Unfortunately, BT's network is greatly under-used, with customers, on
average, making only four minutes of calls a day. Whether the network is
being used or not, BT still has the costs of providing and maintaining all
the equipment in the exchanges and the lines to customers' homes; offering a
24-hour, seven-days-a-week, fault-reporting service with guaranteed repair
times; operating telephone exchanges; running a free customer inquiry
service, manned from 8am to 6pm, Monday to Saturday; and providing free
phone books. All of these are included in the price of the line rental,
equivalent to just over 25p a day.
For historical reasons, the line rental charge has, for many years, been
kept below the true cost of providing these services by being
cross-subsidised from income from calls. This has meant that prices for
calls have been higher than necessary. For the past few years, BT has been
trying to change this imbalance by increasing the line rental and making
calls cheaper.
BT is also using its price structure to encourage greater use of its
under-utilised network by offering discounts on volume use and innovative
schemes such as the Sunday special offer. This offer, where calls made
within the UK on Sundays between 3pm and midnight are charged at the local,
cheap rate, runs until the end of December. For the whole of January next
year BT will be running a Europe special offer.
Simply on the basis of economies of scale, the more calls that are made, the
cheaper the cost of providing them becomes, allowing BT to reduce its
charges still further.
It is true that customers who use the network less will benefit less from
our recent price changes. But for the very low user, BT offers its
Supportline giving half-price line rental and 30 free call units a quarter.
Of course, those who use the network more will still pay more overall than
people making little use of it. But high users can benefit from either the
automatic or optional discounts that BT offers.
It is sound and common commercial sense, practiced by many companies in all
fields of business, to offer discounts to those customers who purchase a
higher volume of the goods or services offered.
Michael Hepher,
group managing director,
BT Centre,
81 Newgate Street,
London EC1A 7AJ
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3433</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Letter: Balkan questions for the west to consider
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr PETER SEILERN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, Why is it that western powers, particularly Britain, need the
Organisation of Islamic Conference to make them realise what has been so
painfully obvious for the last 18 months? Why do western powers need mass
starvation in Bosnia, unchecked ethnic cleansing by the Serbs and the
decidedly close threat of involvement by countries such as Iran to wake up
to the reality of the Balkan problem? Why is it so easy to send 30,000
US-led troops to Somalia when the Bosnian tragedy is infinitely more
dangerous to world peace? Why can the British government not look at the
European map, work out the consequences of conflict between Serb-supporting
Greece and Bosnian-supporting Turkey and act like the world power it claims
to be?
Apart from all these questions there is the undisputed fact that a
communist-led terror regime has shown violent aggression towards the
internationally recognised territory of an independent sovereign
neighbouring nation.
Peter Seilern,
6 Church Row,
Moore Park Road,
London SW6
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3434</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Observer: Dirty weekend
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
There must be easier ways of winning a weekend for two in Paris.
Adams-Hydraulics, whose sewage-handling equipment is fitted to the QEII, has
launched a competition to find the oldest Adams automatic sewage ejector
still operational in the UK. Date of installation and serial numbers,
please, to PO Box 15, York YO1 1XA.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3435</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACTFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Observer: Upside down
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Even though Midland Bank is under new ownership, it cannot throw off its
accident-prone image. Take the latest issue of its Meridian magazine.
The editor has written a guide to help Midland customers understand
financial jargon and notes that a price-earnings ratio is calculated by
'dividing the earnings per share by the price of one share'. An easy mistake
to make, and Midland says it was 'purely a printing slip'.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3436</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACSFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Observer: Basket cases
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Back in 1981 the FT floated the idea of designating the Mars Bar as an
alternative currency. Observer has heard no whisperings in Treasury
corridors about resurrecting the idea, but now the ubiquitous market
research organisation Mintel has come up with a variation on the theme, by
looking at the prices of 22 everyday consumer products across 13 countries.
Bargain-hunters need to travel to Mexico where the basket of goods -
including rice, coffee, tea, shampoo, detergents and cigarettes - can be had
for just over Pounds 20. India is next cheapest, at Pounds 24.01.
But steer clear of Iceland, most expensive of the lot, where the basket
costs Pounds 76.81. Britain proved fifth most pricey (after Belgium, France
and Italy) at Pounds 42.
However, though India seems a relative bargain, those who wish to get stuck
into a Mars Bar should do so in the UK; it costs twice as much in New Delhi
as in London.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3437</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Observer: Pitched in
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
After a heady two years trying to run a brewery, Graham Axford, one-time
corporate finance boss at James Capel, has returned to the trade he knows
best. He has been made head of UK corporate finance at Credit Lyonnais
Laing, which is getting a bit of a reputation as a rest-home for yesterday's
go-getters.
Until last week, Axford was chairing the tiny Wiltshire Brewery - makers of
Old Grumble and Old Devil beers - which he helped to bring to the stock
market in 1990. However, his big plans for multiplying the market
capitalisation of the 130-year-old brewery, in which he had a sizeable
stake, don't seem to have worked out and after some hefty losses, control
has passed to UB Group, the Indian drinks giant.
The new hand on the pump at Wiltshire is one O'Neil Nalavadi who, in one
sense, has already made a name for himself. On the day Nalavadi was born 31
years ago, the distinguished Australian cricketer, Norman O'Neill, scored a
double century at Bombay cricket ground. Nalavadi's father simply linked
custom - which said his son's name had to begin with an N - with his love of
cricket. What a good thing Australia's rugby players do not tour India -
imagine starting life as Ofahengaue Nalavadi.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3438</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Observer: Book rights
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
What's the difference between Tom Paine, the left-wing political writer, and
Jeffrey Archer, the right wing Tory peer? While Lord Archer's fat tomes have
been available in Swedish for years, only now is a Swedish version of
Paine's revolutionary work, The Rights of Man, hitting the bookshops of one
of the world's oldest democracies.
Just goes to show that for all Sweden's belief in individual rights, the
country doesn't like rebels. Then again it might also show that the
egalitarian Swedes have always been jolly good at reading English.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3439</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Observer: Ganging up
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
It's been a rough year for Japanese gangsters. They have been accused of
consorting with the country's scandal-tainted politicians, and have watched
in frustration as their often large, if speculative, investments in golf
resorts landed deep in the bunker of bankruptcy. Perhaps nothing has angered
the yakuza more than the acclaimed film-maker Juzo Itami, who mocked their
manhood in a perceptive work entitled Minbo no Onna.
For his wicked wit, Itami was done over by five thugs in a car park last
May, leaving him physically and mentally scarred - last week five gentlemen
were arrested for the crime and gave their place of work as Goto-gumi, an
affiliate of the country's largest gang, the Yamaguchi-gumi.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3440</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Observer: Taking the Miki
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
It is hard to remember a former British prime minister who has worked so
hard at making serious money as Lady Thatcher. It is reckoned that she can
command Pounds 30,000 for a speech in the US, and when her globe-trotting
takes her further afield the fees are rumoured to be higher still.
However, Observer was rather surprised to learn of her latest plans to save
the world in a two-page advert in Japan's Nihon Keizai Shimbun. In a special
interview with Toshikazu Kadota, president of Miki, a relatively unknown
firm which is diversifying into the field of women's wear, Lady Thatcher
gives her thoughts on everything from personal happiness - 'having a
wonderful family life and a job you love' - to saving the environment.
Like many former leaders, Lady Thatcher is held in much higher esteem abroad
than at home and her address to the Miki International Ladies' Forum only
seems strange to a British audience. Even so, even Lady T might wince at
knowing that her thoughts on saving the planet have been repackaged into a
double-page spread promoting Miki prune extract. . .  .
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3441</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Letter: BBC's finances under control and no programmes
cancelled
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Sir MICHAEL CHECKLAND
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, I have read reports in your newspaper of a BBC apparently out of
financial control ('BBC says TV budget overran by Pounds 60m', December 4).
As this is not the case, I would like to give the context in which the audit
committee of the board reported on the budgetary performance of Network
Television in London.
In 1991-92, the income of the BBC from licence fees and profits from BBC
Enterprises was Pounds 1,399m. We spent Pounds 1,390m - Pounds 9m less than
the income and Pounds 39m less than we had planned to spend in the year. The
television problems in London, which we have made public as part of our
determination to be more accountable to the public, were more than absorbed
by underspendings elsewhere. No programmes had to be cancelled or
productions stopped.
In 1992-93, our expected income from licence fees and our profits from BBC
Enterprises will be Pounds 1,478m. Our expenditure is forecast to be Pounds
1,475m - Pounds 3m less than our income but Pounds 13m (0.9 per cent) more
than we have so far budgeted to spend. We have therefore made a small number
of adjustments to our television transmissions and productions including
moving some into next year. We make almost 6,000 network programmes a year.
We are also incurring exceptional expenditure on major structural change as
we reduce our resource base and staffing levels - more than 3,000 jobs have
gone in the last 20 months. The cost of these changes, including redundancy
costs, is being met from reserves and by borrowing within limits agreed by
parliament.
I hope that licence payers will be reassured by the BBC's overall record and
its continuing commitment to provide a full range of radio and television
programme services within the income they provide. The recent National Audit
Office report should give similar assurances on the proper use of grants
from general taxation to finance the World Service.
Michael Checkland,
director-general,
British Broadcasting
Corporation,
Broadcasting House,
London W1A 1AA
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3442</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Letter: Equitable view of tax allowance
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From D Q MILLIGAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, Mr. Michael Pattison (Letters, December 1), in opposing mortgage
interest relief, is surely coming at the issue from the wrong direction. It
is not so many years ago that there was a simple rule; interest received was
taxable and interest payable allowable against tax.
The fairness of this can be seen from the example of two people, each with
Pounds 30,000 in a bank deposit account. The first uses his to buy a house
outright; no tax is payable or refundable as there are no interest earnings
orpayments.
The second leaves his deposit intact, but takes out a Pounds 30,000 loan. He
thus has Pounds 30,000 earning interest liable to tax and a Pounds 30,000
mortgage, interest on which gets tax relief. This is also tax neutral.
Without mortgage interest relief, he would be taxed on his interest earned,
but denied tax relief on the equivalent interest paid, which hardly seems
right. Why should he be at a disadvantage to the first person?
The real unfairness is that all interest outgoings are not allowable, thus
to mirror taxable interest earnings.
D Q Milligan,
Chute Lodge Cottage,
Chute Forest,
Andover, Hampshire SP11 9DG
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3443</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Forced to find common ground: Germany's declining economy is
raising hopes of a pact between government, unions and employers
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By QUENTIN PEEL
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
When gloom overtakes the German economy, it always seems to come with a
vengeance. And yet this time, the very sharpness of the downturn is forcing
erstwhile political foes to agree on a remedy.
The principal economic indicators have been looking dejected for months, but
the series of dismal statistics in the past couple of weeks takes some
beating.
Real gross national product fell 1.5 per cent between the second and third
quarters of the year, investment spending fell 3 per cent, and consumer
demand was down 0.5 per cent. Unemployment was up in November to almost 3m
in east and west Germany combined.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl even dared to use the 'R-word' - recession - to
describe the state of the German economy in an unscripted insert in his
budget debate speech at the end of last month. This merely confirmed what
most economists have been saying for months.
Particularly worrying was the failure of inflation to continue its gradual
downward trend in November - not least for those in the rest of Europe
looking for a relaxation in the Bundesbank's tight monetary policy. Figures
from the country's regions suggest inflation will remain at a stubborn 3.7
per cent for the country as a whole. In January, a 1 per cent rise in VAT
will push inflation back over 4 per cent.
And then came another sharp drop in industrial orders in October - down 5.1
per cent from September, and 9.7 per cent compared with October 1991. The
respected IFO economics institute says 1992 will show the first real decline
in manufacturing output for a decade, down 1.5 per cent, and that will
accelerate to 3 per cent in 1993.
The truth is that the extent of the downturn has been aggravated by the
short-lived surge Germany enjoyed after unification, which also delayed the
realisation in the west that the international recession was going to hit it
too.
The forecasters have sharply reduced their expectations for the coming year,
but they still expect recovery to begin from mid-year. Thus the five leading
economic institutes, in their autumn report, were still predicting a GNP
growth of 1 per cent next year (just 0.5 per cent in the west). In
mid-November, the five 'wise men' who provide independent advice to the
government, were putting it at zero growth overall.
Behind their caution lies the question of whether the unique economic
upheaval caused by German unification, and the subsequent collapse of east
German industry, is not going to cause something more profound than a
temporary recession. The combination of a weakening western economy, and a
devastated eastern economy requiring a total structural overhaul, presents
German leaders with a daunting challenge.
Chancellor Kohl's response has been to propose a high-risk, peculiarly
German political strategy: to negotiate a 'solidarity pact' between
government and opposition, trade unions and employers, to finance the
long-term costs of unification without sending the economy into a tail-spin.
The idea is to seek western restraint to finance eastern recovery: wage
restraint from the unions, cuts in public spending from central and state
governments, an extra boost in eastern investment from the private sector,
and all of it financed in an equitable, socially-acceptable way. It is a
tall order under any circumstances.
Mr Kohl has set himself a deadline of Christmas to reach a deal, with a
fall-back position of January. And thanks to the welter of economic gloom
from the statisticians, his chances of success are greatly increased.
The importance of the solidarity pact goes far beyond the borders of a
united Germany, as indeed the currency market traders are acutely aware. For
if it succeeds, it contains precisely those ingredients - credible wage
restraint and budgetary discipline - which will persuade the Bundesbank to
move much faster in cutting interest rates. If it fails, the prospects of
early relaxation will sharply recede.
So far, the signs of progress have been better than expected. The chancellor
has had a series of secret meetings with four top trade unionists, details
of which only began to leak out late last month. He has had a first round of
talks with Mr Bjorn Engholm, leader of the opposition Social Democrats
(SPD), from which both emerged saying they wanted to do a deal. And he has
presented the insurance and banking industries with a plan to spend DM1bn
(Pounds 400m) apiece on new housing in the east.
The clearest indication of a breakthrough came three weeks ago, when the
chancellor was talking to industrialists in Schwerin, capital of the eastern
land of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, the poorest of all the eastern lander. There
he indicated a U-turn in government policy: he was no longer going to insist
on 'privatise or close' as the motto for eastern enterprises, he said. To
prevent an outright collapse of eastern industry, the government was ready
to consider keeping a variety of 'key enterprises' going on direct
subsidies, if they could be 'restructured' over the longer term.
It was precisely what the trade unions, and the SPD, had been calling for:
an industrial policy to preserve at least some portions of the east German
industrial heartland.
Some say it is too late. Mr Wolfgang Roth, economy spokesman of the SPD,
fears that eastern manufacturing is almost beyond rescue. 'So much is
already destroyed,' he said. 'By the end of next year, there will only be
400,000 manufacturing jobs left in a labour force of 6m. That is a tragedy,
and it was avoidable.'
Nonetheless, the trade unions are convinced that a belated industrial
rehabilitation effort is better than no effort at all. The problem is
identifying precisely where it begins and ends.
'The question is how you choose which firms qualify,' according to one
senior government official involved in the talks. 'It is difficult to
explain why, say, 100 enterprises should be saved, and not 120. Then it is
extremely difficult to decide how long they should be kept afloat. Many are
competing with western companies, who are themselves being forced to cut
back.'
The Treuhand privatisation agency had sold off 10,403 separate enterprises
by the end of October, leaving 3,189 still on its books. The biggest ones
are the biggest problem. Almost 224,000 workers are employed in companies
with 1,500 workers or more, out of the 549,000 on the Treuhand's books.
Mr Franz Steinkuhler, boss of the big IG-Metall engineering trade union, has
proposed an all-embracing engineering holding company to preserve the bulk
of the eastern industry. There seems little chance that Mr Kohl would be
prepared to go so far. But he has asked Mr Steinkuhler and his colleagues to
come up with their own list of the enterprises which should be saved.
The very fact that Mr Kohl is talking about an industrial intervention
strategy has raised the hopes of the unions. 'Mr Kohl is making our speeches
for us now,' says Mr Jorg Barczynski, spokesman for IG-Metall.
In return, the unions are clearly moving towards a policy of wage restraint,
even though they are very loath to talk precise figures. The OTV public
sector union, whose leader, Ms Monika Wulf-Mathies, is also involved in the
top-level negotiations, has tabled a claim for 5 per cent in west Germany
next year - with most analysts expecting a settlement down towards 3.0 to
3.5 per cent. Several union leaders, including Mr Steinkuhler, have talked
of holding their pay claims down to the rise in the cost of living. The
employers are sceptical - they want productivity, not inflation, as the
measure - but the direction is clearly down from last year's settlements.
Mr Kohl very much wants wage restraint in the west, above all in the public
sector. But he equally wants big concessions in the east, where the wage
problem is if anything more critical. Wage equalisation with the west has
run far ahead of productivity, so that wages now stand at some 70 per cent
of western levels, and productivity at only some 30 per cent.
The argument therefore is that the unions, and especially IG-Metall, should
water down their negotiated wage contracts which provide for continued rapid
wage equalisation, reaching 100 per cent by 1994.
Mr Steinkuhler has flatly rejected any statutory move to re-open the wage
contracts, as proposed by Mr Jurgen Mollemann, the free-market economics
minister. But he is clearly prepared to consider some form of case-by-case
relaxation. He argues that productivity levels vary widely from company to
company in the east, and no single statutory solution would be appropriate.
In spite of union-government movement on those issues, the stickiest area
remains: financing the policies, and cutting back spending in the west to do
so. Mr Theo Waigel, the finance minister, has just endured an agonising
exercise with his own supporters in the coalition government, attempting to
cut some DM6bn out of spending from next year's DM435bn budget. He still
needs to find savings to finance the proposed industrial policy in eastern
Germany, but budget officials say the only big areas they can now cut
involves social spending. And that is anathema to the trade unions.
Latest leaks from the negotiations suggest that Mr Waigel is proposing to
reduce unemployment benefits. He is also pushing for a 2 per cent ceiling on
pay rises for civil servants, the one group which has not had to pay
increased unemployment contributions for the labour market measures
introduced in the east.
Now the negotiations are likely to get down to the really hard bargaining.
But if there is no deal on public sector restraint, given soaring public
sector deficits, the Bundesbank is going to keep the screws on monetary
policy, according to the signals coming out of Frankfurt.
The key to a deal remains Mr Kohl's own readiness to bargain. At talks last
month, Mr Steinkuhler savaged Mr Mollemann for understanding less about
economics than his 12-year-old son, when he wanted more pocket money. The
chancellor intervened on behalf of the union leader, and told his minister
to go away and do his homework.
'The truth is that the chancellor wants a deal. He knows he cannot win the
next elections in 1994 without support from east Germany,' according to one
trade unionist. 'That means he has got to tackle the unemployment problem,
and we are the only ones with the policies to help him do so.
'It may be true that the chancellor does not understand very much about
economics. But he understands a great deal about power.'
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                    Labour market in east Germany
                                                            ('000)
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   1990    1991     1992     1993
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Economically active               8,868   7,179    6,170    5,900
Short-time work                     758   1,616      370      190
Early retirement                    239     543      820      830
Full-time retraining                 11     223      420      400
Unemployed                          240     913    1,190    1,240
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Economic institutes, Council of Economic Advisers and Federal
Statistical Office
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3444</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Re-regulating investment
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
MR ANTHONY Nelson, the Treasury minister responsible for the financial
services industry, has acknowledged that changes are needed in the way the
sector is regulated. He is adding his voice to a swelling chorus.
Like almost all the figures who have offered their thoughts on this subject
in recent weeks - including Mr Mick Newmarch of the Prudential, Lord
Alexander of National Westminster Bank, and Mr Andrew Large of the
Securities and Investments Board - Mr Nelson is better at diagnosis than at
cure.
He wants the interests of investors, rather than the financial industry, to
be at the heart of the system. Yet he has also said there will be no
wholesale change in the regulatory structure, and clearly wants to avoid
fresh legislation. Can such a shift of the regulators' priorities be
achieved without radical change?
The current system muddles together four largely separate aims: the
detection of fraud; the protection of consumers against unscrupulous selling
practices; the prudential supervision of financial services business, to
make sure they are financially strong enough to sustain the risks they are
taking on; and the enforcement of 'fair dealing' in markets dominated by
professional traders.
Responsibility for enforcement has been divided among the SIB, a lower tier
of Self-Regulating Organisations, a third tier of exchanges, and the Serious
Fraud Office. And there has been a marked lack of leadership on precisely
the issue that Mr Nelson identified, as a backbencher nearly seven years
ago, as the most important one: the interests of the investing public.
The current state of regulation is a huge improvement on what went before.
Its biggest problems lie in the area that every country in the world finds
difficult to regulate: the selling of financial products to retail
investors.
Strong enforcement
A new approach to regulation must separate out the objectives that the
current act muddles together. That means providing, in the first place, for
strong enforcement of laws and regulations. This especially requires a
serious attempt to seek and expose full-scale fraud. But it also means
achieving a better record of enforcement in professional markets, where the
attempt to bring the full weight of the criminal law to bear on traditional
less-than-edifying practices has led to delay, confusion and - ultimately -
injustice.
Second, it means the creation of clear, straightforward consumer protection
regulations, backed by a workable compensation scheme. Both the structure of
supervision, and the compensation scheme, should be easily explicable to the
general public, without creating a belief that risk has been abolished.
And third, a new approach to regulating the industry requires light
regulation of true inter-professional markets, coupled with simple
prudential supervision.
If that is what is needed, how should we deliver it? Pace Mr Newmarch, it is
a pipedream to think that direct government regulation is the answer. A main
reason for the current act was to get regulation out of civil servants'
hands.
Single-tier structure
It is also mistaken to believe that imitating the US Securities and Exchange
Commission offers an instant solution, since many of the UK's most
intractable problems fall outside the SEC's remit. Still, there are some
useful lessons to draw from the SEC. Its independence, the strength of its
board, the quality of its staff are all worth learning from.
It may only be possible to achieve those aims by creating a single-tier
regulatory structure, one which unites the work currently being done by the
SIB and the SROs. Simplicity, the need for a single point of contact for
complaints, the desire to recruit the very highest calibre of staff all
argue for a single institution.
This body, a strengthened SIB, should organise itself not sector-by-sector,
as the current SROs do, but issue-by-issue. It should apply the three
priorities outlined above as three dimensions of policy, applied across the
board. That means, for example, that it needs a proper enforcement director,
to work in co-operation with the SFO, but also drawing on - as Lord
Alexander has recommended - a system of civil penalties similar to that
available to the SEC.
On the retail side, the new SIB needs a private investor protection
director, to work with the Office of Fair Trading and other similar
government bodies. The task would be to focus on selling practices,
regardless of the type of investment institution responsible and to put
investors' interests first.
Such an organisation would not be easy to run. But, by separating out the
priorities of policy quite explicitly, it would have a better chance of
achieving them. Mr Large and Mr Nelson should bend their minds to such
fundamental issues. They will be amply repaid for the effort.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3445</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Cost of Norfolk claret
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOE ROGALY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
If the global climate does warm up during the next half-century, the effect
on the world's food supply will be dramatic, but mixed. Our children or
grandchildren could see flourishing vineyards in southern England, abundant
sunflower crops in northern Europe, a shift in the balance of food
production from Texas and Oklahoma to Minnesota and the north of New York
state - and a disastrous fall in the third world's ability to grow cereals.
None of the above is certain. All of it is indicative of the growing level
of complexity of the research into the likely effects of global warming.
Some of the work in progress was discussed at a conference on 'Energy for
the 21st Century' at Brocket Hall, a commercialised country house in
Hertfordshire, at the weekend. The host was Nuclear Electric. Several of the
old reliables of environmental discourse were present, including Sir John
Houghton, chairman of the greenhouse effect working group of the UN's
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Sir Crispin Tickell, who turned
Lady Thatcher green, and Professor David Pearce, a proponent of the use of
market instruments to foster good practice.
Anyone who attended and heard out the 11 speakers could only deduce that
there almost certainly will be an unprecedented rise in average temperatures
across the planet. What is not so well established is by how much, or
whether, during the first century of getting hotter, the losses will be
outweighed by unforeseen gains. Work on both these conundrums has been
extended since the US played for time at the midsummer save-the-world
conference in Rio.
Fascinating preliminary results, upon which I built my opening fancy about
Norfolk claret and Berkshire champagne, have come from Oxford University's
Environmental Change Unit (ECU), headed by Professor Martin Parry. The
latter's findings are derived from a three-year study commissioned in 1989
by the US Environmental Protection Agency, and conducted jointly by the ECU
and the Goddard Institute for Space Studies. Some 50 scientists in various
parts of the world were involved.
The professor's computer models say that, depending on the degree of
warming, world cereal production may be reduced by between 1 per cent and 7
per cent by 2060. Poor countries would become poorer, with an average fall
in crops of around a 10th. In hot regions wheat, rice, maize and soybeans
are already grown near to their limits of temperature tolerance. In low
latitudes, yields of these foods, which account for 85 per cent of the
world's trade in grains and legumes, would be badly affected by higher heat
and humidity. An additional 60m to 360m people would be more likely to
starve. The worst effect would be in Africa.
That is the bad news. It should lead to the early adoption of precautionary
measures against the emission of greenhouse gases that cause global warming.
Bring on a carbon tax, you might say. Unfortunately for those of us who
believe that this is an urgent necessity, the findings are presented as
tentative. They are dependent on variables about which we cannot be sure.
They are emphatically not a forecast. Even more unfortunately for us eager
greens, rich countries may actually gain from global warming. The
energy-profligate Europeans and Americans are the very countries that must
tax themselves to reduce emissions.
Once again it is demonstrated that fate knows nothing of justice. Under most
versions of the ECU model, crop yields increase in the rich countries. That
is, I suppose, good news. At higher latitudes greater warmth can benefit
farmers currently held back by cold weather and short growing seasons. This
effect is not only global; it is also apparent within regions. In Europe
everything moves a few paces north, including grains, grapes, sunflowers,
soya plants - and the deleterious effect of the Sahara. If firmly
established by further research, and if believed, Professor Parry's maps
could change the balance of European environmental politics. Germany,
Scandinavia and the Netherlands may become less green; Italy, Spain, half of
France, and Greece more so. A similar shift within the US may also be
visualised.
A disaster, or the appearance of one, could change all that. The
successively stronger conventions on phasing out chlorofluorocarbons were
given their initial impetus by a satellite photograph of the hole in the
ozone layer. The global warming debate began to be taken seriously in the US
after the serious drought in the mid-west in 1988. A succession of iffy
scientific studies, hedged about with necessary precautions, will never
shape public opinion. Another drought in the US might, however, ratchet the
entire debate a notch forward - perhaps to the point where closing coal
mines, and generating power by nuclear means, will come to be regarded with
favour by the green and the good.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3446</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Saying no to Mr Sugar
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
IT NOW looks highly likely that Mr Alan Sugar's attempt to take the Amstrad
electronics company private will be defeated at Thursday's shareholder
meeting. It is not a reflection on Mr Sugar to say that this is to be
welcomed. Any public company founded on the talents of one person has its
special features. But the market has tended in the past to exaggerate this:
to conclude that if the founder has tired of the public arena, other
shareholders can do nothing but shrug in resignation and indulge the whims
of genius.
When the entrepreneur goes public, a community of interest is established
with other shareholders. The obligation this creates is reciprocal. It
deserves to be durable as well. Indeed, it is precisely when the founder
tires of the relationship with shareholders that shareholders may feel it
most worth retaining. On the one hand, it seems wholly plausible that
Amstrad has run its course: that the opportunities in electronics which
allowed such extraordinary growth in the early 1980s no longer exist. On the
other, Mr Sugar has given his fellow investors almost no clues on how he
proposes to retrieve the situation. But it is perfectly logical for them to
conclude that, whatever his plans, they are likely to be in the best
interests of shareholders as a class.
Chief loser
Mr Sugar has calculated that the company is worth a given price - 30p a
share - when loaded with debt for the purposes of the buy-out. It is hard to
see how it can be worth much less as a debt-free public company. If his
offer is rejected, he has said he might sell his shareholding at the offer
price. But any buyer at that price would presumably see his own way to
making a profit, thus once more benefiting other shareholders. Again, Mr
Sugar has said that as a public company, Amstrad could not pay significant
dividends. If he were obliged to remain public, the chief loser from such a
policy would be himself.
The risk in such cases is that the entrepreneur might deliberately seek to
drive the share price down and then return with a lower offer later on. This
is where the case for better corporate governance becomes unanswerable.
Board representation
Perhaps the single most objectionable aspect of the Amstrad affair has been
the absence of even a single non-executive director to give shareholders
disinterested advice. If shareholders decide to make Mr Sugar stay on and
face the music, they should insist on board representation while they are at
it. It might be objected that this would run counter to the whole notion of
the entrepreneur as free spirit. But if the 1980s have taught investors
anything, it is that when the going gets rough, the running of companies has
less to do with unfettered genius than with the humdrum skills of
professional management.
If the stock market were denied the talents of entrepreneurs such as Mr
Sugar, it would certainly be the poorer for it. But the lesson of this case
and others like it is that such talents need not be obtained wholly on the
entrepreneur's terms. Mr Sugar has earned the displeasure of investors in
various ways: by unloading shares in advance of a downturn in his company's
fortunes, by denying shareholders independent advice and by withholding any
real details of his plans for the company as a private entity. It would be
senseless to block his offer as a mere act of revenge, but it would serve a
useful purpose if it stood as a warning against businessmen dipping in and
out of public ownership when it suited them. With luck, it might also prove
less expensive than shareholders are disposed to fear at present.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3447</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Arts: Survivors of the Pop-Art phase - The work of Patrick
Caulfield and Tom Phillips
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By WILLIAM PACKER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Is it a symptom of the fading year, or something more particular, that
affects me every autumn after the Turner Prize? The fatuity of the
conventional assumption that the new is necessarily better than the
well-established, that the avant-garde position is the infallible mark of
originality and achievement, that the young must ever be encouraged, is
increasingly borne in on me. The young, like the poor, are always with us
and need no encouragement.
Patrick Caulfield, who is now 56, first attracted critical notice some 30
years ago, along with Hockney, Boshier, Jones and Blake, as a leading light
of the young Pop-Art movement. Since then, Pop-Art has come and gone, but
Caulfield has gone steadily on, quietly developing in his work and maturing
as an artist. It is a truth too often forgotten that, beyond their immediate
convenience, such general groupings mask great divergences and
contradictions. The more we look into them at a decent distance, the more
they fall apart or fade away. With Pop-Art, the whole was always less than
the sum of its parts. Yet within its broadly accepted range of interests,
Caulfield found the formal material and expressive means that have sustained
him ever since.
The obvious comparison is with the two Americans, Andy Warhol and Roy
Lichtenstein, artists, as is the American way, of infinitely larger
international reputation.
All three drew upon a similar stock of imagery, second-hand imagery taken
from magazines and newspapers and distanced from immediate experience by
process and technology. What these artists share is an ironical and
dispassionate approach to the treatment of that material, more or less
uninflected on the surface, disinterested and ambiguous in its engagement
with experience. All three are stylists, dandies, aesthetes.
The difference is that, as the two Americans became ever more decorative and
superficial in their work, relying on gratuitous effects of scale or subject
or conceptual context, Caulfield remained, and remains, close to his
original subject, which is the still-life.
The equivalents of the Caulfield office desk, the hotel bar or lobby, the
full plate on the table, the awful currency of polite taste and modern
design, have been the stuff of still-life through the centuries. The
difference is only that his is an image of an image of reality, and an
idealised reality at that, which he then puts through the several hoops of
graphic and painterly mannerism. He does so with a consummate elegance,
linear severity held in counterpoint with photo-realist particularity, the
broadest scale with the closest focus.
Do we begin to see a certain uncertainty, a hint of self-doubt creeping into
the more recent work, with its drop in scale, its increased abstraction and
concern with textured surfaces? The hope must be rather that Caulfield, with
all his true artfulness, does not withdraw into the merely arty,
self-referential and solipsistic.
If only he would bring himself to subsume his cleverness, his art-historical
and stylistic knowingness, which will never leave him, in the scrutiny of
what is really there before him - the room, the plate, the glass, the flower
on the table.
Tom Phillips is 55, and had he come to his vocation a little sooner - he
digressed to Oxford - he too would be considered still a Pop artist. As it
is, his public debut coincided with the short-lived ascendancy of
photo-realism on the one hand, and with conceptualism on the other - the
idea itself that is the realised work of art - which two disparate isms he
has so often sought to reconcile in his work.
As with Caulfield, the work is nothing if not a contrived and self-conscious
artefact, meticulously executed, the difference only that Phillips has none
of Caulfield's easy elegance. But there are other virtues; his intelligent
persistence and technical application are no less admirable. Such
difficulties as there are rise less from what the works are as from their
subject, which has always been centred upon the artist himself, whether
examining the processes of his own art, or his own life.
It was perhaps a mistake to give over an entire gallery to the extended
'Curriculum Vitae' sequence, which is nothing less than an autobiographical
text, and was shown in any case at the National Portrait gallery three years
ago. This is manifestly a grand public statement, and Phillips' best work
has always been the more intimate and personal, and that which is more
speculative and open in its handling.
Here it is salutary to see how well so much of the early work stands up,
that had seemed fussy, over-literary and unpainterly in its time - the park
benches and the reworked post-card sequences especially. And the 'Humument'
too, that jokey, quirky, sly, inventively deconstructive annotation of the
novel of 1892, A Human Document, by one WH Mallock, seems fresher than ever.
Worked on now over some 25 years, it remains perhaps the truest thing to his
spirit as an artist that Phillips has ever done.
He is an obsessive artist, a maker of series and sequences, a slave to
system and habit who is still capable of trapping himself in the grandiose
and the self-conscious, over-proud of his erudition and copious curiosity.
It is as though he does not trust his hand and intuition without such
intellectual props. Yet these are engaging vulnerabilities, and when he so
forgets himself as to trust his hand to itself, as in the recent pastel
drawing, 30 feet long, that investigates 'the beginning of language' no less
 -a typical Phillips gloss - the work springs to life.
Patrick Caulfield: Paintings 1963-1992 Serpentine Gallery, Kensington
Gardens W2 until January 17.
Tom Phillips: Major works 1970-1992, Sackler Galleries, Royal Academy,
Piccadilly W1, until December 20.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3448</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Arts: Massenet's 'Cendrillon' - Opera
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD FAIRMAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
The competition between the music colleges in Britain is as intense as ever.
Following the wide acclaim that greeted its spring term production of
Vaughan Williams's The Pilgrim's Progress, the Royal Northern College of
Music in Manchester has gone into the lead by ambitiously putting out a
complete live recording of the opera on CD - surely a first in student
circles.
There is every sign that the RNCM sees itself as the music college that
intends to go to the ball. For its winter opera this year it has chosen
Massenet's version of the Cinderella story, Cendrillon, an enchanting but
flawed minor masterpiece, which has never won the popularity it craves. It
has rarely been staged in Britain, though by chance the Royal College of
Music also put it on for their students a couple of years ago.
The comparison mostly goes London's way. There the opera was given a sleek
modern look, which admittedly seemed questionable at the time. At the RNCM
the producer Stefan Janski and his designer Richard Marks just threw open
the gates of Walt Disney world and plunged in. The show was so heavy
handedly twee, it had to be tongue-in-cheek. Indeed, by the end the
ghastliness of it all had become quite compulsive: surely those sets were
the very same as at my local theatre when they put on a panto called
'Cinders' in the early 1960s?
Massenet's score, however, does not support a send-up, as it includes some
of the most enchanting fairy-tale music to be found in French opera. David
Lloyd-Jones dealt with those pages in a heavy-handed fashion, though he drew
extremely fine playing from his student orchestra. He deserves our thanks,
too, for including the ballet music, which is usually cut, for dancers of
the Northern Ballet School.
As for the young singers, the RNCM fielded an impressive team, as usual. The
title-role was taken by Sara Fulgoni, who has a deep mezzo which stretches
up to a high D no less, a voice with a range, strength, and colours unusual
for a student singer. The future would seem to hold various long-term
possibilities (might she perhaps be a soprano?). For the present, though,
she really is not right for Massenet's fragile waif of a Cinderella.
It might have been better to follow the composer's original intentions and
have the tall, elegant Miss Fulgoni play a mezzo Prince Charming. Instead,
that role went to Stephen Chaundy, who should prove a tenor worth watching,
though he has a set of contorted French vowels that would give Jacques
Delors nightmares. Kathleen Wilkinson made a strong impression as the
haughty stepmother and Craig Smith offered a useful high baritone as her
husband.
In the role of the fairy-godmother Louise Walsh, dressed as head-girl fairy
waving a huge magic wand, ran up and down her sparkling high scales with no
trouble. Each time she appeared, there were clouds of dry ice, ballet-girl
fairies did pirouettes and hordes of pixies galumphed around, but all to
little avail. As a true revival of Massenet's lovely Cendrillon, this was an
evening when the RNCM's magic dust refused to do its tricks.
Further performances: December 9, 12
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3449</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Arts: Faure at the Wigmore - Weekend concerts in London
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD FAIRMAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
More than the other London concert-venues, the Wigmore Hall can claim a
history that is valuable in its own right. The signed photos on the walls of
the new Bechstein room, a meeting-place for sponsors created out of the old
basement during the recent refurbishment, recall some of the great names who
have appeared there.
It was an excellent idea to take up the potential of that historical
tradition in this re-opening season. The Nash Ensemble has put together a
'Commemorative Wigmore' series of six concerts, all of which feature
programmes performed at the hall between 1910 and 1944. Audiences can
reflect on the changing expectations of music-lovers over the century and
also muse on some of the marvellous performances that must have been heard.
What a temptation to think oneself back to June 9 1925. That was the date of
the Wigmore's memorial concert to Gabriel Faure, who had died the year
before. The roll-call of artists who appeared (Cortot, Lionel Tertis, Henry
Wood, to name but three) was long and prestigious. Programmes of this kind
were generous in those days, too, and the Nash Ensemble's re-construction on
Sunday afternoon stretched into the early evening.
Tertis's place was taken by the Nash Ensemble's Roger Chase, modestly
eloquent in the Elegie for viola, Op. 24. Cortot's seat at the piano was
occupied by the Ensemble's Ian Brown, who played the Theme et Variations,
Op. 73, most likely without the idiosyncracies of his great predecessor.
The main part of the programme, however, was given over to the melodies. And
rightly so, for this is where the heart of Faure's music palpably beats. The
constant pleasure in each of these small groups of songs was the playing of
Malcolm Martineau, who had the right drawing-room atmosphere at his
fingertips - especially when he was accompanying the soprano Yvonne Kenny,
the most stylish of the afternoon's three singers.
From recordings of the great Faure interpreters, Bernac and Souzay above
all, we know that it is possible to find more sunset luxuriance in 'Soir',
more resentment in 'Prison'; but Kenny sang the songs simply and with
beauty, except when the voice hardened a bit at the top. Felicity Palmer has
the measure of the deeper songs, but with her mezzo the hardness became
intrusive; Adrian Thompson pushed the music, and his tenor, too forcibly.
At either end of the programme the Nash Ensemble gave splendid accounts of
the favourite Faure Piano Quartets, the joyous ending of the C Minor sending
the audience out on a wave of those elating harmonies so typical of the
composer at his happiest. A fine start to the series: the next three
concerts, taken from the Wigmore's war-time years, look especially
fascinating.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3450</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Arts: Background for Evelyn Glennie - Weekend concerts in
London
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PAUL DRIVER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
The Royal Philharmonic Orchestra provided the backing for virtuoso
percussionist Evelyn Glennie at the Royal Festival Hall on Sunday night, as
part of a programme conducted by Paul Daniel and also including Stravinsky's
Petrushka and Britten's Young Person's Guide to the Orchestra.
This last was played with crisp decisiveness: I had not heard it in years,
and was thrilled to bits by the utter simplicity and mastery of Britten's
musico-pedagogical scheme. The section in which the percussion are displayed
 -each instrument, down to gong, block and whip, instantly and subtly
characterised - had more to say musically as well as pedagogically than the
whole of the percussion concerto by the 60-year old Dane, Per Norgard, which
followed.
For a Change is a work in four movements - the inner pair much briefer than
the outer - developed in 1983 from a solo percussion piece, I Ching, which
Norgard composed the previous year. The movements have I Ching-like titles
referring to states of being, such as 'The Gentle, The Penetrating' for the
third movement, in which the soloist concentrates on the kalimba (ie sansa
or mbira), an African metal-bar glockenspiel-ish instrument, played with the
thumbs; or 'Thunder Repeated: The Image of Shock', which speaks for itself.
Quite a variety of percussion was used, though more pitchless than pitched.
Glennie in stockinged feet slid from one to another of four performance
stations at the front of the platform, sometimes engaging in dialogue with
members of the orchestra - exquisitely so when kalimba-ing with the two
flutes - but alarmingly often breaking into long cadenzas and going bananas
on the tom-toms. The orchestral parts had a disappointing tendency to turn
into vamping after just a few bars of strict notation; and the work's
problem, in a nutshell, was that it was too much percussion and not nearly
enough concerto.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3451</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Arts: Today's Television
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTOPHER DUNKLEY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BBC radio looks interesting in the first half of the evening. Partners In
Crime (7.20 Radio 4) is a 'File On 4' special about the Mafia which, it is
said, controls 4m votes and dozens of MPs. Gerry Northam investigates the
links between organised crime in Italy and the legal and political systems.
Radio 2 offers Imagine John Lennon Was Dead, (9.00) which seeks to establish
why David Chapman, a Beatles fan, wanted to kill Lennon. In Troubleshooter 2
(9.50 BBC2) Sir John Harvey-Jones considers Charles Letts, the company which
published the world's first diary in 1812. Six generations later, the
business is still a family firm. BBC1 shows the concluding part of its
Omnibus profile of Western director John Ford (10.25), and BBC2 shows the
second episode in its repeat run of Peter Watkins' remarkable portrait of
the painter Edvard Munch (11.20). BBC1 has the original (1933) and much
copied but never surpassed Hollywood version of King Kong with Fay Wray as
the screaming heroine in the paw of the giant ape. Technical innovations for
this film include large scale rear projection and the optical printer, to
combine special effects and live action. (11.15).
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3452</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Arts: A new piano to conquer - Weekend concerts in London
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID MURRAY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
The renewed Wigmore Hall boasts a gleaming new Bosendorfer, grand as could
be and sumptuous in tone. It sounds as though visiting pianists will need
some time to master the beast: even Gyorgy Fischer, a week ago, had trouble
keeping Rossini's lightest accompaniments from challenging Cecilia Bartoli's
light mezzo.
On Friday, Imogen Cooper put her best foot forward in one of Schubert's
enchanting chains of 'German dances', D. 783, and in five Smetana polkas.
For Schubert she got the instrument to sing, and her Smetana pranced and
careened with a good measure of unbuttoned cheerfulness. Janacek's Sonata 1:
X: 1905, a stark torso, had some intense feeling, though it moved a bit
stiffly. His sudden black gestures of rage and protest are no part of Miss
Cooper's natural mode.
Schubert's limpid devices, however, are - or ought to be; and it was sad to
hear the great B-flat Sonata, D. 960, emerging so shyly and wanly from her
instrument. Every bar of it bespoke an intelligent musician with a deep
(even paralysing?) respect for the music, but they added up to a performance
very short of depth, breadth or specific gravity. The Scherzo and the Finale
plucked up a little courage, but too late.
In her anxiety not to let the piano roar, one suspected, she had reduced it
to an anaemic mumble. It was not enhanced by her chosen preface,
Schoenberg's Six Little Pieces op. 19 (for which she decreed that there
should be no applause): after exemplary recent performances by Katharina
Wolpe and Mitsuko Uchida, cleanly etched and taut, Miss Cooper's
watercolours sounded just well-meant and over-pedalled.
On the following evening the Domus piano quartet were unquenchably lively in
Mozart - particularly in the boy-composer's 'concerto' adaptation, K107/2,
of a JC Bach keyboard sonata - and Richard Strauss. As usual, Susan Tomes'
bright fingers lent fine point and rhythmic electricity to the 18th-century
exercise, and all four players between them solved whatever problems of
balance there may be in Strauss's early, lusty C minor Quartet. But for
three or four passages that want a franker warmth than comes easily to
Domus, whose precise tingle is on the brittle side, this was a performance
of impeccable spirit.
The showpiece of the concert was meant nevertheless to be the long-forgotten
piano-quartet version of Mozart's inspired E-flat Quintet for piano and
winds, K. 452. It may or may not be from Mozart's own hand; probably not,
but it was creatively rewritten for the alternate medium, and actually
published before the original was. The loss of the bold wind-colours is
plain, of course - but the performance here was no fair test of the success
of the more homogeneous score, which was not conceived for anything like a
modern grand piano.
A lighter period instrument was sorely missed. Miss Tomes did not overplay,
quite the contrary; and yet the string trio was reduced almost to marginal
wittering, with the result that the most striking effects of the
wind-version were all too conspicuous by their absence. Mozart's two 'real'
piano-quartets are designed to give the solo instrument its head. In the
Quintet with forward winds the jovial competition is much more even, whereas
the string-version supplies the piano with only tame foils. I want to hear
Domus play it with Miss Tomes at, say, the keyboard of an old Broadwood.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3453</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / People: Calor resignation
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Alistair Pate has resigned as finance director of Calor Group, the container
gas company, with effect from the end of the year. His resignation is a
consequence of the reorganisation of the group - completed earlier this year
 -which involved a substantial reduction in the number of headquarters
staff, following the company's decision to move accounting and customer
service functions to six regional offices.
Pate's day-to-day responsibilities will be assumed by John Taylor, group
financial controller who is also financial director of Calor Gas, the
company's main UK subsidiary.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 12
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3454</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCACAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / People: Haines for hospital trust
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Michael Haines, a senior partner with KPMG Peat Marwick, is to become
chairman of the Royal London hospital trust in January.
The Royal London, the biggest hospital in London's east end, has survived
the government's Tomlinson review which will lead to widespread hospital
closures in the capital. Under the Tomlinson proposals, services of St
Bartholomew's in the City - which is recommended for closure - would be
amalgamated with the Royal London,
Haines, 56, lives in east London and is deputy chairman of the Hackney
Business Venture. At the Royal London, he will succeed Sir William Staveley,
who has been appointed chairman of North East Thames regional health
authority.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 12
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3455</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAB9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Technology (Technically Speaking): High costs wipe GIS off
the map
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN CANE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Geographical information systems, one of the most promising developments in
information technology in recent years, are failing to fulfil their
commercial potential in the UK. A primary cause may be the government's
attitude to the price of information, which is biased towards recovering the
total cost of collecting and disseminating the data.
This contrasts strongly with the situation in the US where the price of
information collected by government agencies is related only to the cost of
dissemination and is, for the most part, copyright free.
The consequence, as a study* by Michael Blakemore, senior lecturer in
geography at Durham University and Gurmukh Singh, chairman of the UK
Association for Geographic Information, points out, is a healthy GIS
industry in the US while its UK equivalent is failing to thrive.
GIS is an analytical tool of remarkable power which has applications
throughout government, business and industry. The systems ally the
processing and imaging power of the computer to physical maps and survey
data. Cross relationships between many kinds of data can be investigated and
analysed in spatial terms.
An example of the kind of question which is particularly well suited to
analysis by GIS is the provision of hospital beds in the London area.
Existing provision can be mapped against a variety of factors - incidence of
disease, general practitioners' prescribing patterns, social security
benefit payments, housing and so on.
The UK position on charging seems to derive from the 'Rayner' doctrine of
the 1980s, interpreted as meaning that the collection of statistics was
primarily for government use and that other organisations wishing to use the
data would have to pay the full cost.
Earlier this year, however, Norman Lamont, Chancellor of the Exchequer, made
it clear that official statistics were produced not just for the government
but for the benefit of business and the public at large. He did not,
however, indicate any change in charging practice.
In the US, Blakemore and Singh argue, low-cost dissemination of information
has had a positive effect on the US economy. They give as example the Tiger
project developed by the US Bureau of the Census. A computer mapping file of
boundaries, roads, transportation, rivers and so on, it was designed to save
costs in the enumeration of the US Census.
It is available at low cost and free of copyright; some 71 companies are
already indicating interest in offering value-added products based on the
data. Blakemore and Singh argue: 'It is highly unlikely that, even reducing
for size of economy, the UK 1991 Census will stimulate such a level of
activity and this lessens the opportunity to employ more people and to
create more tax revenue.'
While there are arguments to be made on both sides of the equation, it does
seem that charging full cost for the raw material of GIS is misguided.
First, the information has already been paid for out of public funds and
only the cost of further dissemination should have to be recovered - even in
the depth of a recession.
Second, there are concerns among GIS providers that government departments
could compete against them with the opportunity to use their privileged
position unfairly.
Third, the market will be seriously skewed if the price of information is
set by cost recovery targets rather than by what the market will bear.
The argument is not only about fair treatment for GIS companies, however.
GIS is one of the critical IT disciplines and not one in which the UK should
allow its skills to deteriorate or lie fallow. Market testing of the
collection of government statistics could be a first step towards the level
playing field.
*Cost-Recovery Charging for Government Information. A False Economy?
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 12
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3456</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAB7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Technology: Redefining the boundaries - How digital mapping
systems can help companies win new business
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DELLA BRADSHAW
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
With the decline of coal as a fuel for heating Britain's homes, Northern
Electric, one of Britain's privatised regional electricity companies, has a
once in a lifetime opportunity. 'We have to convert these homes to electric
central heating,' says Ian Homer. 'If we don't, gas will.'
Such commercial urgency has given a fillip to Homer's business area. At
Northern Electric, he is the engineer responsible for geographical
information systems. Otherwise known as digital mapping systems, these bring
maps to life on a computer screen.
His department is now considering how to overlay marketing information on
those maps, which cover 14,500 square kilometres of north-east England from
Northumberland to North Yorkshire. The result would be to convert a system
designed for maintenance and emergency use into a marketing tool for winning
new business.
The marketing data, garnered from a survey of the local electricity users,
has meant Northern Electric can identify homes which need central heating, a
new washing machine or a dishwasher. But the marketing department cannot
identify which areas have the electricity infrastructure to supply the extra
power needed to run them. This information is stored on the GIS,
appropriately named Iliad. The Iliad may have been a saga of gloom and doom
but, says Homer, 'we hope to re-write the history book'.
Such optimism about the power of digital mapping systems has fired Britain's
utilities, with gas, water and electricity companies switched on to their
uses. But compared with the US, take-up in industry and commerce has been
patchy.
Although the cost of hardware has dropped in recent years - the minimum
requirement for a GIS department is a large screen and colour graphics, says
Richard Green, director of sales and marketing at equipment supplier
Smallworld - digital maps are expensive.
'A company our size has to put Pounds 1m into maps before we even start,'
Homer points out. 'And that is for data we've already got in paper map
form.'
On top of that is the question of copyright. In addition to the purchase
costs, Northern Electric has to pay royalty fees for using the data. That
comes to a further Pounds 250,000 to Pounds 300,000 a year - the equivalent
of 25p for each of its 1.4m customers, and up to three times what it costs
for paper maps.
This royalty figure is agreed between the utility and the Ordnance Survey,
the prime source of mapping information in the UK, on the basis of the
number of times the customer is likely to use the maps.
Although the bulk of users - not unpredictably - believe that the up-front
purchase cost of these maps is too high, they acknowledge that the OS has to
answer to government in fixing these prices. The government requires that
the OS recoup 70 per cent of the costs of maintaining and digitising the
maps from sales. And by 1997 all the OS's costs will have to be met from
commercial ventures.
But on the question of paying for the copyright, there is much debate.
Gurmukh Singh, chairman of the Association for Geographical Information,
believes royalty payments should be removed completely. He likens the
situation to books or records: users pay once for buying them but are not
charged for every time they listen to the record or read the book.
Others, such as Alistair Keddie, GIS mapping services manager for Imass,
part of Northumbrian Water, believe it is the mechanism for charging which
is 'extremely subjective' and therefore at fault because companies cannot
predict costs. 'Many people can see clear benefits in digital mapping, but
when they put up a feasibility study they have to show the capital costs and
the operating costs,' he points out. 'In the present scenario we are very
much in a haze as to what operating costs will be.'
Dissatisfaction is compounded because for many existing users the OS map is
just a background on which assets are placed. 'We use the map as a reference
point for placing our assets and to get the spatial links,' says Keddie. 'In
essence, we could then switch off the map. It's irrelevant.'
The question of copyright becomes even more confused as this happens. If a
utility annotates a map with its own data, who owns the resulting product?
'It's a question which will keep the lawyers alive for many years,' jokes
Homer.
Keddie believes that the existing approach will force companies to go to
other sources for their data - aerial photos, say - which could in turn
prove to be to the detriment of the archive material and eventually
jeopardise the future of the OS.
The OS acknowledges it has an image problem among its biggest customers and
has frozen prices for digital maps. But copyright, says Peter Wesley, head
of marketing, is a particularly vexing question.
To do away with the rolling copyright charges, as Singh suggests, would
result in what Wesley calls 'boom and bust' economics. 'The issue is money
today as against money in the future,' he says. In addition, Wesley points
out, a single digital map could be used by a large utility with 30,000
computer terminals or a small surveyor's office with a single PC, and to
charge them the same would be unfair. As a result, he believes that the OS
formula of a standard fee enhanced by the number of terminals on site is as
equitable as possible.
The OS is looking for other ways to increase its revenues, notably through
growth in the market. To that end, the OS is planning to get together with
other companies to market products based on its digital maps. One particular
scheme under consideration is to build a PC-based product using a less
detailed version of the OS digital maps.
Such systems, from companies such as Logica Industry or Pinpoint Analysis,
are already proving popular where highly detailed OS maps are not required -
with retail outlets or banks which want to know where to site their latest
megastore or cashpoint machine, for example. The sources of their
geographical data are companies such as the street map producers or the
Automobile Association.
Axa Equity &amp; Law, for example, is using a PC-based mapping system to help
bring together customers and financial advisers. By plotting the postcode of
the customer on to a map already annotated with the whereabouts of the
agents, the nearest agent can be found. 'I doubt whether we could have
undertaken this exercise without the use of GIS,' says Graham Taylor,
database marketing manager at the financial services company.
Because Axa Equity &amp; Law only needs to match customers and agents across a
relatively wide area - within a town, say - the level of detail provided by
a PC system is adequate.
Suppliers overcome the copyright problem by licensing their digital maps in
the same way as traditional software. A single PC licence would be issued
for a single user or a site or multi-site licence for more general use, says
Berry Winter, associate director at Pinpoint.
Only with these PC-based systems will there be an explosion in digital
mapping, believes Bob Walters, GIS group manager at Logica Industry. 'The
explosion will come when the casual guy can get access to market research
information on a wide area network to his PC. And that is seriously starting
to happen now.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 12
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3457</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAB5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Business and the Law: Competition for fairness - Why the UK
government is about to change the law on anti-competitive behaviour
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT RICE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Last week's announcement by the UK government that companies indulging in
anti-competitive behaviour may shortly be liable to swingeing fines looks
like good news for small and medium-sized businesses struggling to get a
toehold in the market.
Mr Michael Heseltine, the UK trade and industry secretary, launched a green
paper setting out three options for a change in the law covering abuse of
market power. At first sight, he appeared to be addressing a relatively
minor problem, judging by official statistics of the number of
investigations into alleged abuse by individual companies in recent years.
The Office of Fair Trading has investigated just 35 complaints of
anti-competitive behaviour by a dominant company under the terms of the 1980
Competition Act. In 13 cases the complaint proved unfounded. In a further 10
the dominant company gave undertakings not to reoffend and in 10 instances
the case was referred to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission for a full
investigation. The MMC also carries out between six and 12 monopoly
investigations each year under the 1973 Fair Trading Act.
The problem, however, may be much larger than appears from the statistics,
according to Mr Michael Reynolds, a partner in City law firm Allen &amp; Overy.
Many companies believe that they have to live with a dominant supplier and
it is better not to rock the boat, he says. Others may view the present UK
regime as so ineffectual that it is not worth complaining to the OFT.
In contrast to the European system for tackling abuse of a dominant
position, the current UK system is weak on deterrents. There are no
financial penalties, and injured parties have no right to sue for damages. A
business accused of anti-competitive behaviour will not be penalised until
it has been investigated by the competition authorities and has subsequently
broken undertakings not to offend again.
The system is slow and cumbersome. By the time the competition authorities
decide that a monopoly is operating against the public interest or a company
is guilty of anti-competitive behaviour, the victim may have been forced out
of business.
In addition, companies that feel they are the victims of anti-competitive
behaviour face considerable difficulties in persuading the authorities to
investigate.
They need evidence not only of abuse but also of intent. Without some form
of documentary proof that the dominant company is deliberately trying to
stifle or eliminate competition, the authorities are unlikely to act.
Proving a refusal to supply or the existence of an unlawful tied-product
agreement is relatively straightforward, but establishing that a dominant
company is deliberately pricing its product at less than cost in order to
squeeze the competition out of the market is more complex.
Although predatory pricing has not been much of an issue in the UK, it could
now become more of a problem. Privatisation, particularly of the utilities,
could alter how such behaviour is defined.
The government has stated that the utilities should not be placed in a more
favourable position than other parts of industry. But, at the same time, it
acknowledges they should not be penalised for doing something such as
cutting prices which they are specifically authorised or required to do
under their regulatory regimes.
The problem in predatory pricing cases is deciding where to draw the line
between legitimate response to new competition and unlawful action.
Competition authorities know that too lenient an approach would make it easy
for dominant firms to eliminate competition. But too interventionist a
stance could hamper the vigorous competition between companies which
competition policy is designed to promote.
Following the European Court decision last year in the Akzo case, when the
Dutch chemical company was fined Ecu7.5m for predatory pricing, it is clear
that pricing at below average variable cost by a dominant company in order
to eliminate a competitor will be treated as unlawful. The Court also ruled
that pricing below total cost but above average variable cost would be
treated as abusive where it was part of a campaign aimed at eliminating a
competitor. But that left a grey area where prices are set between variable
and total cost and there is no discernible campaign to drive a competitor
out of the market.
The extent to which businesses find themselves under scrutiny for alleged
predatory practices or other anti-competitive behaviour will depend on how
dominance is defined under the UK's new law.
The UK currently takes a broader approach than the EC to the definition of
market power. A business is deemed to have a simple monopoly if it has 25
per cent of the market, irrespective of whether it has real market power. In
Europe actual dominance - the degree of market power which allows a company
to operate without taking into account the activities of its customers or
competitors - is the issue.
The Commission takes the view that a dominant position exists when a
business has at least 40 per cent of the market and its rivals have
significantly less. Other factors such as barriers to entry for new
competitors are also relevant.
The UK government has indicated that if it opts for a general prohibition on
abusive market behaviour it will look at the feasibility of extending the
prohibition to catch abuse by companies with a lesser degree of market power
than is implied by the EC's 40 per cent test. Significant technical and
legal hurdles would have to be overcome, but if the UK succeeded in making
any company with a market share of a minimum 25 per cent liable for
anti-competitive practices, the impact on UK industry could be far reaching.
Mr Reynolds' advice to companies which suspect they may be treated as
dominant under the new regime is to give serious consideration to the
adoption of a competition law compliance programme. Companies inclined to
dismiss such advice as not entirely disinterested, or tempted to ignore the
dangers of falling foul of a new prohibition system should take a look at
the recent case concerning Tetrapak, the Swedish packaging group, he says.
Last year the Commission fined Tetrapak a record Ecu75m for abuse of a
dominant position following a complaint by one of its competitors. Few
industries can afford to take fines of up to 10 per cent of turnover in
their stride. But if a company breaches the law the existence of a
compliance programme can be a significant mitigating factor in the level of
fine imposed, he adds.
The consultation period for the new UK legislation, which will almost
certainly be included in next November's Queen's Speech, runs until the end
of February. There is little doubt that the government and the UK
competition authorities favour the third option. But it is equally clear
that running two systems in parallel - the EC's general prohibition while
retaining the monopoly provisions of the Fair Trading Act - could lead to
considerable confusion and uncertainty for industry.
For many businesses, knowing how and against what criteria their behaviour
will be judged is the most important factor. Option two, which would bring
UK practice more closely into line with EC competition rules, offers the
greatest degree of certainty.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                  THE THREE OPTIONS FOR CHANGE
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Retain existing case by case approach under 1973 Fair Trading Act and
1980 Competition Act for dealing with anti-competitive practices. OFT
to have stronger investigatory powers. Businesses liable for damages
and possible civil penalties for continuing abuse.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Introduce general prohibition on abusde of market power backed by tough
investigatory powers and fines up to 10 per cent of worldwide turnover.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Introduce prohibition, tough investigatory powers and financial
penalties, but retain monopoly investigation provisions of Fair Trading
Act.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 11
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3458</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAB3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Business and the Law: Discontent among the judges - Legal
Briefs
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
London's commercial court judges and leading City institutions are
continuing their unprecedented joint campaign to persuade Lord Mackay, the
Lord Chancellor, to appoint more commercial judges.
Mr Justice Saville, head of the Commercial Court, has been joined by City
institutions such as the Baltic Exchange in warning that the shortage of
judges threatens London's future as a leading centre for commercial
litigation.
The shortage of judges has led to severe congestion in the timetable of
commercial cases, says Mr Justice Saville. Unless this is speedily remedied,
he says, foreign companies could turn to other countries such as Hong Kong
and Singapore to settle their commercial litigation. That would result in
the loss of hundreds of millions of pounds in invisible earnings for the UK.
The Lord Chancellor has stated in parliament that he is aware of the
problems caused by the shortage of commercial court judges. He has given an
assurance that two posts currently vacant will be filled as soon as
possible. Mr Justice Saville is not convinced.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 11
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3459</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAB2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Business and the Law: Court highlights danger of default -
European Court
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Irish fishing rules containing residence and nationality conditions were
declared unlawful last week by the European Court of Justice (ECJ) in a
judgment which clarified the extent to which an EC state may be liable to
individuals for breaches of obligations under Community law.
Although the Irish rules were revoked nine months before the judgment, the
ECJ ruled that there was still an interest in pursuing the action in order
to establish the basis of liability which could be incurred by a member
state which was in default of its obligations either towards the community,
another member state or private parties.
C-280/89: Commission v Ireland, ECJ FC, December 2 1992.
Implementation date crucial for direct effect
EC citizens can only rely on provisions in Community directives in cases
before their national courts once the date for their implementation has
passed, the ECJ ruled last week. The case involved the 1980 directive on
protection for salaried workers against the insolvency of their employers
which did not have to be implemented by member states until October 23 1983.
Italy failed to implement the provisions of the directive in time. The
applicants all left their jobs due to non-payment of their salaries. Their
employers were all subsequently declared to be insolvent but at dates before
October 23 1983. The applicants sought to rely on the provisions of the
directive for protection of their rights.
The ECJ held that as the relevant acts of insolvency all took place before
the directive had to be implemented, the provisions of the directive could
not be relied on by the applicants.
Joined cases C-140/91, C-141/91, C-278/91 and C-279/91: Suffritti, Fiori,
Giacometti, Dal Pane and Balletti v Instituto Nazionale della Providenza
Sociale, ECJ 1CH, December 3 1992.
Milk quota decisions.
The ECJ was asked in two cases to decide issues arising out of the Community
rules relating to milk quotas.
In the first, an Irish farmer had agreed not to market milk for five years.
Some years after the expiry of this undertaking, he increased the amount of
land he farmed. He then asked for a milk quota from the Irish authorities. A
quota was awarded to him, but based on the amount of land he had operated at
the end of the five-year marketing ban. He brought an action against this
decision, claiming to be entitled to a quota based on all the production
units operated by him, including those on new land.
The ECJ held the relevant Community provisions allowed for account to be
taken of production units added to a holding after the end of a
non-marketing undertaking and before the provisional decision of the
authorities, provided that the original holding operated at the time when
the undertaking was entered into was still being operated in whole or in
part by the producer concerned.
In the second case, a German farmer who had been granted a milk quota sought
to have it increased on the grounds that he had bought more land. At the
time of purchase, the land had been subject to an undertaking to convert
from dairy cows to cattle, but which now could be used for dairy production.
The German authorities disallowed this request on the grounds that he
already had a quota.
The ECJ held that the Community rules which disallowed an ordinary quota
producer from benefiting from the special quota rules applicable to
conversion undertakings were unlawful in that they breached the legitimate
expectations of the producer concerned.
C-86/90: O'Brien v Ireland, the attorney-General and the minister for
agriculture and food, ECJ 3CH, December 3 1992.
C-264/90: Wehrs v Haupzollamt Luneburg, ECJ 3CH, December 3 1992.
Other cases
A national decision could not be the subject of judicial review under the
Rome Treaty rules, the ECJ held. The correct forum in which such a decision
should be investigated was the national court.
C-97/91: Oleificio Borelli Spa v Commission, ECJ 5CH, December 3 1992.
The Rome Treaty rules of non-contractual liability covered acts of the
European Investment Bank, as well as the other EC institutions.
C-370/89: SGEEM and Roland Etroy v European Investment Bank, ECJ FC,
December 2 1992.
BRICK COURT CHAMBERS, BRUSSELS.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 11
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3460</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAB1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Management (The Growing Business): Lessons in new language
of VAT
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHARLES BATCHELOR
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
With less than a month to go until the launch of the European single market,
companies are still attempting to modify their value added tax accounting
procedures, writes Charles Batchelor.
From January 1 border controls and customs posts will be replaced by a
system whereby companies record their own VAT information and compile their
own trading records.
A range of manuals and guidebooks has been produced to help companies
understand and implement the changes. They include: Guide to the Single
European Market*, a booklet from Tetra, a software company. This provides a
brief introduction to the new system and explains the terminology that is
being adopted.
A Guide to UK VAT &amp; Customs Procedures for the Single Market* by N Mohr and
I Wardleworth provides a full account of trading procedures, VAT, trade
statistics and excise questions. It describes existing systems of customs
clearance, the changes which will occur and includes a glossary of terms and
extensive lists of useful addresses.
The VAT Accounting Compliance Manual** from ITMP Business Information
Services and the London Chamber of Commerce, is intended more for
information technology and financial managers than for general management.
It takes a 'system audit' approach, leading users through a series of
questions on areas such as sales order processing, sales ledger reporting
and inventory-work in progress. Appendices list VAT rates throughout the EC,
European VAT numbers and reporting thresholds.
*Tetra Ltd, Pre-Sales Department, The Cynosure Centre, Vanwall Business
Park, Maidenhead, Berks SL6 4UB. Tel 0628 770939. Free. *Mohr &amp; Associates,
15 Cyprus Road, London N3 3SD. Tel 081 349 4434. Pounds 20. **London Chamber
of Commerce, 69 Cannon Street, London EC4N 5AB. Tel 071 248 4444. Pounds
285. See also this page October 13.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 9
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3461</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAB0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Management (The Growing Business): Ethics arrives on
enterprise agenda
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Ethics has long been regarded as a concern of large companies, but
increasingly it needs to be taken seriously by the smaller firm, according
to several conference papers.
They may have to deal with a competitor who is unfairly disparaging their
products to gain business, with an employee who has been diagnosed as being
HIV positive but did not disclose this to the company, or with a customer
copying designs without permission.
Unlike a large company, the small firm may not have a policy thought out to
deal with these questions or experienced, specialist staff.
Instead of starting from scratch, small businesses should be able to call on
the expertise of large companies, argued Derek Archer of consultants Archer
&amp; Archer. He suggested the creation of a register of ethical management
practice which would allow small businesses to consult a large company which
had experience of the same problem.
Far from being remote from the concerns of small businesses, ethical
questions have a direct impact, according to Ian Smedley of the Institute of
Directors. Individual moral responsibility can be clearly seen in the small
firm and the entrepreneur's personal moral decisions will be fundamental to
the attitude and activities of the business.
Ethical conduct can be enforced by the operation of self-interest which
ensures that businesses co-operate with each other by behaving honestly.
Companies which develop bad reputations tend not to flourish while
successful reputations and brands are valuable assets.
Business needs rules not because it is inherently a less ethical activity
but because it is competitive, Smedley argued. It may, however, need to set
limits to the application of ethical goals.
If businesses accept ethical constraints on their activities and acknowledge
special responsibilities to stakeholders or the community this may have a
negative effect on performance. They may well end up harming the general
good rather than advancing it.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 9
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3462</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Management (The Growing Business): Thinking the unthinkable
 -Academics believe it may be time to shift resources from encouraging
start-ups to supporting established businesses
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHARLES BATCHELOR
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Do small firms make a significant contribution to the economy or has their
role been overstated? Are we doing too much - and not, as is often claimed,
too little - to help them?
Such unthinkable challenges to the enterprise orthodoxy of the 1980s are now
being raised with increasing insistency.
Further evidence of a questioning of accepted attitudes emerged at the 15th
National Small Firms Policy &amp; Research Conference held in Southampton at the
end of last month. Several of the 60-plus, mainly academic, papers reflected
a shift away from the idea of encouraging more start-ups and towards support
for the established, if still small, firm.
Should we abandon support for start-up businesses? asked David Storey,
director of Warwick University's Small- and Medium-Sized Enterprise Centre.
Putting public money into encouraging more start-ups was less cost-effective
than helping established small firms grow faster, he argued.
Much funding for start-ups was wasted because very small, new businesses
were more likely to fail while only a small number would generate jobs in
any number. The problem for policy-makers was to identify which would be
successful. 'In short, assistance to start-up businesses is a lottery,'
Storey concluded.
Even if successful small businesses could be identified in advance they
might not be the best means of promoting economic growth.
Policy-makers had taken the mistaken view that by stimulating new businesses
they would promote greater wealth and more jobs, Storey said.
But while Britain experienced a far greater increase of self-employment in
the 1980s than other developed countries - and created more new businesses
than most of its international competitors - there was little evidence that
this had any impact on total employment.
Britain should shift its business support policies away from start-ups and
towards growing businesses, Storey suggested. Since picking winners at the
start-up stage was difficult, government policy should target businesses
between three and five years old and with at least 20 employees.
A similar questioning of the contribution of small businesses to the US
economy was carried out by Paul Joyce and Adrian Woods of the University of
North London.
They looked at 40 years of data on the US economy from 1946 to 1986. In the
mid-1940s businesses were being set up at the rate of 133,000 a year; by
1986 the annual rate was 700,000.
But were small firms saving the US economy? the researchers asked. Business
start-ups had increased at a time when the performance of the US economy was
deteriorating. Corporate profits fell as a proportion of gross national
product and net exports declined as a share of profits.
At face value, the growing importance of small businesses did not seem to do
much for the US economy's overall health, though it could be argued that
things would have been worse but for the growth in new businesses, they
acknowledged.
Why did this happen? The two authors looked at the role of small businesses
and concluded that in periods of growth, often connected with increases in
the availability of consumer credit, small firms exploited new market
opportunities or acted as a target for acquisitive larger companies.
In a recession they provided a lifeline for unemployed executives or
'salvaged' markets and resources abandoned by large companies.
But new firms created in periods of boom might then hold back economic
growth over the longer term because they would be more likely to fail and
come to represent a wasted capital investment, the authors suggested.
One of the main UK schemes launched during the 1980s to reduce unemployment
levels and boost new business starts, the Enterprise Allowance Scheme, may
have contributed to a waste of resources or at least not have made the best
use of resources, according to Nigel Meager from Sussex University's
Institute of Manpower Services.
Schemes similar to the EAS were launched in many European countries in the
1980s. Some were focused on the long-term unemployed or other disadvantaged
groups while others were more general in scope.
Some provided an income over a period of time while others gave participants
a lump sum at the outset.
The German Uberbruckungsgeld support scheme insisted that participants
should be capable of generating reasonable minimum levels of income from
self-employment, while the EAS in Britain appeared to accept that many
participants would earn very little.
This approach led to criticism of the EAS for encouraging the unemployed to
enter low-margin, highly competitive sectors where they had little chance of
survival or where they would make life difficult for already-established
self-employed people.
A study of the hairdressing and beauty sector showed that the 'displacement'
effect was nearly 100 per cent.
Schemes which provided an initial capital subsidy to participants were more
likely to encourage people to set up in markets with higher initial barriers
to entry but with better long-term prospects for earnings and survival.
Participants in the British scheme tended to be concentrated in activities
such as car repair, hairdressing, distribution, hotels and catering.
In contrast, the French chomeurs createurs scheme, which provided an initial
capital sum, led to the setting up of a much larger number of manufacturing
businesses.
Since responsibility for the Enterprise Allowance Scheme has been handed
over to the Training and Enterprise Councils many have brought in different
criteria for allocating EAS places. But more needed to be done to provide
support for the 'mature' small business, according to David Smallbone of
Middlesex University.
Forty-five per cent of the businesses surveyed by Smallbone had made no use
of external sources of help over the previous 10 years. Of the remainder
very few made regular use of outside assistance. While the larger, more
successful firms did make more use of outside consultants there was some
evidence of a 'support gap' and of unexploited potential.
Help for established businesses needed to recognise their more specialised
requirements, particularly in areas such as marketing or planning, which
involved far-reaching changes in the business.
Smaller businesses frequently had problems implementing consultants'
recommendations so consultants needed to establish a longer term
relationship. Consultants must develop the skills for dealing with smaller
clients, Smallbone said.
Small business academics frequently complain that policy-makers ignore their
findings when devising new initiatives. But the government's plan for a
nationwide network of business advice centres, unveiled last week, does
reflect changing priorities. The new one-stop shops will concentrate their
activities on helping established small firms.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 9
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3463</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: MPs set to urge BCCI repayments
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID OWEN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A COMMITTEE of backbench MPs is poised to recommend that customers who lost
money when Bank of Credit and Commerce International collapsed should
receive compensation.
The move will increase pressure on the government to provide additional
funds for the bank's UK depositors.
In an unusual supplementary report, understood to be in the process of being
drafted, the Treasury and Civil Service committee is also expected to urge
the Bank of England to shoulder a greater share of the blame for the
collapse.
The report follows last month's appearance before the committee of Mr Robin
Leigh-Pemberton, governor of the Bank, and two other senior Bank officials.
At that meeting, Mr Leigh-Pemberton and his colleagues endured a fierce
cross-examination by MPs over the Bank's supervision of BCCI, including
repeated questioning over why he or another senior official of the Bank had
not resigned.
The report, which may be published before MPs rise for the Christmas recess
on December 17, is not expected to put a figure on the amount that should be
paid to BCCI's former customers.
Mr Giles Radice, the Labour MP for Durham North who acted as committee
chairman for the purposes of last month's examination, is thought to be
anxious to secure the unanimous support of all committee members, including
Conservatives and Mr Alan Beith, the lone Liberal Democrat.
Mr Radice was called to the chair when Mr John Watts, the Tory MP for Slough
who is the elected chairman, declared an interest, saying: 'One of the
clients of my accountancy practice suffered a substantial loss in the
collapse of BCCI.'
In October, Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor,rejected calls for extra
compensation to be paid to BCCI depositors in the UK, saying the existing
depositor protection scheme had already paid out Pounds 50m to about 9,000
people and the total might reach Pounds 85m.
This followed publication of Lord Justice Bingham's report into the affair,
which criticised the Bank for failing to take appropriate action after
receiving a series of warnings over many years that fraud was taking place
at BCCI.
The report, commissioned by the Bank and the government, was also critical
of Price Waterhouse, BCCI's auditor, for failing to brief the Bank fully
about the extent of the fraud it had uncovered there in early 1991, and of
Abu Dhabi, the Gulf state which had a majority shareholding in BCCI.
In February, Abu Dhabi agreed a compensation deal with BCCI's liquidators
which could lead to a payment of up to Dollars 2.2bn to creditors.
During last month's examination, Mr Leigh-Pemberton said the Bank should not
have waited until BCCI's closure before tightening supervision, but he could
not 'take absolute responsibility for every bank.'
Although the Bingham report criticised various aspects of how BCCI was
handled, it never stated that the Bank was 'negligent,' he said.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3464</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: Pensions changes 'under discussion'
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By IVOR OWEN, Parliamentary Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
CONSULTATIONS have been initiated to establish the extent of the changes
needed to provide improved protection for the 5m participants in
personal-pension schemes, Miss Ann Widdecombe, junior pensions minister,
told the Commons last night.
She said she had recently met Lautro (the unit trust and life assurance
regulator) Imro (the investment managers' regulator), the Securities and
Investments Board, and Fimbra (the regulator of independent financial
advisers) to discuss 'what may or may not be going wrong'.
Miss Widdecombe again insisted that personal-pension schemes were 'an
undoubted success', and said she did not want to give the impression that
the government had been inundated with complaints of malpractice or
inefficiency.
Mrs Llin Golding, shadow pensions minister, withdrew a Labour amendment to
the Social Security Bill which would have introduced a strengthened
regulatory system requiring personal-pension schemes to guarantee a minimum
level of benefit .
Miss Widdecombe maintained it would be rash to rush into an entirely new
regime.
The first task, she said, was to establish 'the extent of the problem, its
nature and whether or not looking at existing regimes of control, and
perhaps other issues, would result in a sufficient tightening-up'.
Miss Widdecombe emphasised that nearly 70 per cent of those who retired had
occupational pensions, whose average value was nearly as great as the state
pension.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3465</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: Review ordered after Clinton case
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALISON SMITH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A REVIEW of Home Office guidelines for dealing with press inquiries about
individual cases was ordered yesterday by Mr Kenneth Clarke, the home
secretary, amid political unease over the searching of immigration files for
information on US president-elect Mr Bill Clinton.
Answering questions from the cross-party home affairs committee of MPs, Mr
Clarke said that ministers had not been consulted and Mr Clinton's
permission had not been sought before a check was made to see if he had
applied for British citizenship during the Vietnam war. During the US
election campaign, Mr Clinton was accused of 'draft-dodging' to try to avoid
military service in Vietnam.
Mr Clarke told the committee that in October his department's press office
had been approached by journalists asking if Mr Clinton had applied for
citizenship. The press officer had said that such matters were confidential,
but had then had the files checked and advised journalists - in an
off-the-record statement - that there was no point in pursuing the story.
The guidelines will be reviewed with the Home Office chief press officer, Mr
Clarke said, as he emphasised his view that individual cases should not be
discussed without permission.
One likely outcome of Mr Clarke's review is that such a politically
sensitive press query should not in future be met without the consent of the
person concerned, even where the inquiry draws a blank.
Mr Clarke said that he was satisfied that 'no improper use' was made of the
Home Office.
After reports of coolness between Downing Street and the incoming US
administration - which have been denied by Number 10 - Mr Clarke also
emphasised that he had made sure that the background to the case was
available to the British ambassador in the US.
He said there was no need for disciplinary action, since the motives of the
press officer concerned had been 'sensible' and no confidential information
had been disclosed.
Mr Tony Blair, the shadow home secretary, tabled parliamentary questions
yesterday asking for a full statement of the circumstances and what changes
were being considered to prevent a recurrence.
Labour's anxiety was intensified by the fact that two Tory party advisers
had worked on the election campaign of President George Bush.
In the Commons, Mr David Winnick, Labour MP for Walsall North, said
government departments must not be allowed to become an 'extension of
Conservative Central Office'. He called for a ruling from the Speaker 'on
the need to separate the daily workings of the department of state from
purely party matters'.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3466</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: Inquiry to probe royal fire
measures
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE GOVERNMENT is to conduct an inquiry into the adequacy of fire protection
measures at all royal palaces under its control in the wake of last month's
conflagration at Windsor Castle.
Announcing the move in the Commons yesterday, Mr Peter Brooke, heritage
secretary, dismissed Labour claims that last week's report into the cause of
the Windsor fire was 'doctored'. Ms Ann Clwyd, shadow heritage secretary,
was 'casting doubt' on the Berkshire fire service by making such a claim, Mr
Brooke said.
It was not yet possible to put a precise cost on restoration work at
Windsor, he added, saying that estimates that repairs would cost Pounds 60m
were 'generated by the media'.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3467</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: Sceptics sense shift on Europe
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By IVO DAWNAY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE campaign for a UK referendum on the Maastricht bill received a boost
yesterday with a BBC Regional Broadcasting poll by Gallup showing three out
of four voters from a 7,000 sample favour a plebiscite, Ivo Dawnay writes.
Campaigners for a referendum on the Maastricht bill believe that they may be
close to finding a formula for an amendment that successfully skirts
procedural hurdles.
Several amendments are now being perused by Commons clerks including one by
Mr Bill Cash, a leading Tory Euro-sceptic, that would use an Order in
Council to circumvent the bar on incurring costs to the Treasury.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3468</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABTFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: Support for MP's medicine proposals
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RALPH ATKINS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A LABOUR MP's attempt to increase the information available on the safety of
medicines received a fillip yesterday when the government indicated some
support for his proposals.
Mr Giles Radice's Medicines Information Bill - opposed by the pharmaceutical
industry - would give patients and doctors rights to information given to
licensing authorities by drug companies.
The bill is intended to stop drugs being withdrawn or suspended without
patients' having access to the results of safety tests. It will be debated
by MPs on January 15.
In a deliberately conciliatory response, the Department of Health said: 'The
department understands the objectives of the bill but this is a complex area
of policy concerning a number of issues and the matter is under
consideration.'
Mr Radice, MP for Durham North, regards his bill as a test for Mr William
Waldegrave, public-service minister, who is reviewing secrecy rules across
Whitehall, including those affecting drugs, and who is understood to be
sympathetic to his proposals.
Support for Mr Radice's proposal has also come from Conservative, Labour and
Liberal Democrat MPs as well as from the Campaign for Freedom of
Information, the National Consumer Council and the Consumers' Association.
Bills introduced by backbench MPs are easily blocked and rarely become law
unless backed by the government, but Mr Radice may be able to reach a
compromise deal with the government.
One difficulty is the cost of compiling a fresh register on drug
information.
However, Mr Peter Lumley, director of public affairs at the Association of
the British Pharmaceutical Industry, said Mr Radice's bill could cause
'substantial damage . . . because the vast amount of information that the
pharmaceutical companies produce in order to support an application - the
intellectual property and the time and the money - is going to be
jeopardised.'
Mr Radice has tried to overcome such objections by limiting access to
information to people with no links with the pharmaceutical industry. A
similar rule is used by the Ministry of Agriculture for information about
pesticides. But the ABPI remains unhappy.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3469</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABSFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: Inquiry to probe royal fire
measures
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE GOVERNMENT is to conduct an inquiry into the adequacy of fire protection
measures at all royal palaces under its control in the wake of last month's
conflagration at Windsor Castle.
Announcing the move in the Commons yesterday, Mr Peter Brooke, heritage
secretary, dismissed Labour claims that last week's report into the cause of
the Windsor fire was 'doctored'. Ms Ann Clwyd, shadow heritage secretary,
was 'casting doubt' on the Berkshire fire service by making such a claim, Mr
Brooke said.
It was not yet possible to put a precise cost on restoration work at
Windsor, he added, saying that estimates that repairs would cost Pounds 60m
were 'generated by the media'.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3470</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: Lib Dems seek end to N-subsidy
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE removal of the Pounds 1.2bn-a-year subsidy to the nuclear industry and a
one-off deal to sell British Coal stockpiles at below market prices were
advocated yesterday by the Liberal Democrats in their response to the
government's review of the coal industry.
The party believes that the continuing losses of the nuclear industry should
be borne on the public-sector borrowing requirement, although the small
element of the non-fossil fuel levy that goes into renewable sources of
energy would be maintained.
The party believes that some of the 20m or so tonnes of coal stocks at pit
heads should be sold - to the electricity generators for preference - at
below market value, to give the coal industry a fresh start.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3471</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Building societies warned on market
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BUILDING SOCIETIES cannot rely on a housing market recovery and need to
restructure in order to remain profitable, Morgan Grenfell, the merchant
bank, says in a report issued today.
The 'great British love affair with owner-occupied housing' may be coming to
an end, the report says. When house prices recover, they may simply rise in
parallel with inflation. As a result, building society profits may not
recover to their 1989 levels until the end of the century.
'Larger societies are being boxed in by their dependence on the housing
market' and will need to look for 'radical structural solutions', the report
says.
Morgan Grenfell says it would make sense for the larger building societies
'simply to metamorphose into mutually owned banks'. Other alternatives are
to abandon their mutual status and convert into banks, merge with insurance
companies or be taken over by domestic or foreign banks.
The building societies have relied on making money out of their borrowers
but have not paid attention to their more numerous savers, according to Mr
John Franklin, of Morgan Grenfell's corporate finance division. 'They are
going to have to look towards providing a service to their savers. This is
an under-exploited side of their business.'
It would mean providing equity-based investments such as personal equity
plans and unit trusts, which might require a change in legislation.
The societies could also widen their lending practices by developing their
credit card and personal-loan operations. They have a foothold in the
insurance market through the sale of insurance-related products for
mortgages.
Morgan Grenfell predicts that if low rates of interest and inflation
continue, repayment mortgages will become cheaper than endowments and, given
the bad publicity endowment mortgages have received, that might kill them
off.
The larger societies have more in common with the banks than with their
smaller brethren, says the report, which finds it increasingly meaningless
to talk about building societies as a single homogeneous group.
The smaller building societies lack the resources to expand, and the report
finds it difficult to foresee a profitable future for them. During 1991,
there were seven completed mergers and takeovers, and Morgan Grenfell stands
by its prediction last year that the number of societies will fall to 50 by
the end of the decade. Building Societies after the Housing Bubble has
Burst. Morgan Grenfell, 23 Gt Winchester St, London, EC2P 2AX. Pounds 75.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3472</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Lloyd's brokers prepare terrorism cover
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD LAPPER and JIMMY BURNS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BROKERS at the Lloyd's of London insurance market are working with
industrial risk managers on a plan to provide insurance protection against
terrorist damage, which they hope to present to the government this week.
Insurers announced last month that new commercial insurance policies would
probably exclude cover for terrorism from January 1. But so far, the
government has not responded to pleas to extend the Northern Ireland
compensation scheme - which directly meets the cost of bomb and other
terrorism damage - to the mainland, leaving industry potentially unprotected
from the IRA's mainland bombing campaign.
The new proposals have been developed by the Association of Insurance and
Risk Managers in Industry and Commerce (Airmic), and the Lloyd's Insurance
Brokers Committee (LIBC). Insurers would be asked to continue to offer
insurance cover for terrorism, but offload their exposures into a
reinsurance pool, funded from reinsurance premiums and possibly jointly
managed by brokers, insurers and insurance buyers.
The government would be asked to reinsure all claims over an upper annual
limit - probably about Pounds 200m. Mr Alan Fleming of Airmic said
government and insurance industry participation was essential. 'What is so
worrying is that it is taking so long to get a scheme in place,' Mr Fleming
said.
Airmic and the LIBC say they have the backing of Mr John Greenway, MP for
Rydale, and chairman of the all-party committee for insurance and financial
services.
They also hope to persuade Lloyd's to back the plan.
Meanwhile, American International Group, the New York-based insurance group,
has asked a team of anti-terrorist and bomb disposal experts to carry out
risk assessments of buildings belonging to clients in the City before
extending cover under its sabotage and terrorism policy.
Mr Ian Harrison, AIG's senior underwriter for special risks in the UK, said
yesterday his company planned to make such surveys a precondition before
extending cover on a 'stand-alone' or specific-risk basis to prominent
locations that may be potential terrorist targets in the UK.
As an individual risk, terrorism insurance will be subject to its own terms
and conditions rather than being automatically included in standard property
insurance.
'The bottom line is that the terrorist threat has to be taken seriously and
(if) we can minimise our risk by insisting on such surveys, then we should
do it,' Mr Harrison said.
According to other anti-terrorist experts, the present wave of bombings is
presenting a serious tactical challenge to the security services, who have
had to adapt their operations accordingly. It is thought that there may be
at least three IRA active units at large on the British mainland. Some 600
Names at Lloyd's of London met yesterday to discuss taking legal action.
They are members of Merrett syndicate 418, angry about losses of at least
Pounds 132.4m from the 1985 underwriting year.
Names are being asked to raise up to Pounds 4.4m to finance the possible
action.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3473</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Big gas users told that bills may rise
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
LARGE industrial gas users may pay higher bills as more competition is
introduced into the gas market, Mr Ian Powe, chairman of the Gas Consumers
council, warned yesterday.
British Gas's agreement with the Office of Fair Trading to halve its share
of the industrial gas market in the next three years might see the company
substantially raising the price of its cheapest gas, Mr Powe said. That is
the gas sold to its largest customers on 'interruptible contracts' - meaning
British Gas can cut them off at short notice.
Competitors have shown no interest in entering the interruptible gas market
as it offers low profit margins. Mr Powe believes British Gas might increase
prices for such gas to maintain its profit levels as it loses market share.
Separately, Sir James McKinnon, the gas industry regulator, fired another
salvo in his dispute with British Gas over the rate of return it should earn
for its pipeline business.
Sir James said British Gas should be able to earn between 2.5 per cent and 5
per cent on transporting its own and other companies' gas through its
pipelines.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3474</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Nuclear Electric is hopeful on profits
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID LASCELLES, Resources Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
NUCLEAR ELECTRIC, the state-owned generator, is on course to make a profit
without help from the nuclear levy, Mr John Collier, its chairman, said
yesterday.
Reporting the latest six-monthly results, he said the company 'has been able
to point to clear evidence that we are making nuclear power in this country
a commercial success'.
The results come as the company is fighting suggestions that it should be
cut back to make more room in the energy market for coal. The row over pit
closures and the government review of energy policy have raised questions
about the level of the nuclear levy.
In the six months to September, the company made an operating profit of
Pounds 255m, an increase of 21 per cent. That included Pounds 632m from the
levy on electricity bills to help finance decommissioning costs.
Removal of the Pounds 1.2bn-a-year subsidy to the nuclear industry and the
sale of coal stockpiles at below market prices were advocated yesterday by
the Liberal Democrats in their response to the government's review.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3475</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Companies given tax deadline
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
COMPANIES will be expected to comply with the new pay-and-file regime for
simplified tax returns from October 1 next year, the Inland Revenue
confirmed yesterday.
The Treasury has introduced an order to implement the new system for
assessment and collection of corporation tax. Under pay-and-file, tax
payments should be filed within nine months and a day of the end of a
company's accounting period.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3476</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Hong Kong link will save 220 jobs
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
INMOS, the UK-based semi-conductor company, is forming a new company with
QPL International Holdings, a Hong Kong-based electronic components maker.
The move will enable Inmos to keep open its factory in Newport, south Wales,
and save 220 jobs.
The new company, Newport Wafer Fab, will be 70 per cent owned by QPL and 30
per cent by Inmos, which is a wholly owned subsidiary of SGS-Thomson, the
Franco-Italian semiconductor group.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3477</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Names asked to fund action
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
SOME 600 Names at Lloyd's of London met yesterday to discuss taking legal
action. They are members of Merrett syndicate 418, angry about losses of at
least Pounds 132.4m from the 1985 underwriting year.
Names are being asked to raise up to Pounds 4.4m to finance the possible
action.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3478</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Racecourse wins Pounds 3m grant
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE government will provide a Pounds 3m grant to help the financing of a
Pounds 15.4m scheme to redevelop Dunstall Park racecourse in Wolverhampton.
The scheme includes construction of a floodlit all-weather racetrack, a
grandstand, hotel and conference facilities and 300 homes.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3479</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Funding plea for inner London hospital shake-up
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN PIKE, Social Affairs Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SIR Bernard Tomlinson, author of a report recommending widespread changes to
London's hospital service, said yesterday he had told ministers there must
be 'major injections of money' to make his proposals work.
He defended his plan to reduce the number of hospital beds in the capital -
shifting resources to family doctor and community services - at a National
Association of Health Authorities and Trusts conference in London. Without
rationalisation, he said, hospitals would become unviable and his proposal
for planned closures would be replaced by unplanned closures of beds.
Sir Bernard's terms of reference did not involve producing detailed costings
of closure proposals and he would be disturbed if changes were approved 'on
the basis of back-of-the-envelope calculations'.
Mr Marmaduke Hussey, chairman of the BBC, who headed an inquiry by the
King's Fund health policy centre into London hospital provision, endorsed
Sir Bernard's call for adequate funding. 'There does have to be serious
money up front to fund the necessary investments in primary and community
care health services,' he told the conference.
Critics have two concerns about the financial implications of the proposals
to reduce hospital beds in the capital, on which ministers will make final
decisions next month. One is the absence of evaluations of individual
closure recommendations. The other is a fear that, with a sharp decline in
London land and property values, closures will not release sufficient funds
to finance proposed improvements in community services.
The difficulty of making closure proposals ahead of detailed evaluation has
been illustrated by the Tomlinson report's recommendation to move the
specialist Royal Brompton and Royal Marsden hospitals into the buildings of
Charing Cross hospital.
North West Thames regional health authority calculated that that would
Pounds 10.6m cheaper than closing the Charing Cross and leaving the other
hospitals in their existing premises. But a study by Ernst &amp; Young,
management consultants, says the net capital cost of closing the Royal
Brompton and Royal Marsden instead of Charing Cross would be between Pounds
47.4m and Pounds 62.5m. Ernst &amp; Young says about Pounds 52m-worth of work
would be needed at Charing Cross to enable the Royal Brompton and Royal
Marsden to move in.
'A full investment appraisal will need to be carried out to determine
whether such an investment is commercially sound and will deliver a
satisfactory rate of return on capital,' says the report, commissioned by
the Royal Brompton and Royal Marsden. Taking a 10-year payback at 6 per cent
Treasury discount rate, Ernst &amp; Young says, an investment of Pounds 52m
would require annual savings of more than Pounds 7m.
Another argument over the statistical basis of the Tomlinson proposals broke
out when Sir Bernard told managers and medical staff from St Bartholomew's -
one of those recommended for closure - 'you are very much worse off than you
think you are'. He said recent figures showed that by the end of the
financial year the hospital's position would be 'precarious in the extreme',
with a likely overspend approaching Pounds 10m.
Prof Michael Besser, St Bartholomew's chief executive, responded by
producing information from North East Thames regional health authority
which, he said, proved Bart's was more efficient than other leading
north-east London hospitals. There was, he said, a 'major inconsistency' in
the Tomlinson report saying hospitals' survival depended on efficiency while
recommending the closure of the one with the 'best record of efficiency' in
inner north-east London.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3480</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Nuclear Electric hopeful of levy-free profit
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID LASCELLES, Resources Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
NUCLEAR ELECTRIC, the state-owned nuclear power generator, is on course to
make a profit without help from the nuclear levy, Mr John Collier, its
chairman, claimed yesterday.
Reporting the state-owned nuclear generator's latest six-monthly results, he
said Nuclear Electric 'has been able to point to clear evidence that we are
making nuclear power in this country a commercial success.'
Yesterday's results come as Nuclear Electric is fighting suggestions that it
should be cut back to make more room in the energy market for coal. The
crisis over pit closures and the government's review of energy policy have
raised questions about the level of financial support that Nuclear Electric
receives.
But Mr Collier emphasised yesterday that nuclear power can compete in the
free market, and has environmental benefits when compared with fossil fuels.
In the six months to September, Nuclear Electric made an operating profit of
Pounds 255m, an increase of 21 per cent. That included income of Pounds 632m
from the controversial levy on electricity bills to help Nuclear Electric
finance the heavy decommissioning costs of its nuclear plant.
Dr Bob Hawley, the chief executive, stressed that the levy was not a
subsidy, but cover for liabilities NE had inherited from the Central
Electricity Generating Board. He said the company was well on its way
towards its target of making a profit before levy income by 1995.
In the six months, NE increased electricity output by 7 per cent, and its
revenue from electricity generation by 20 per cent to Pounds 618m. Improved
productivity had also reduced unit costs. Further cost reductions would be
implemented to cut staff from 12,500 to 9,000 by 1995.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3481</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / World Trade News: Trade-off with France keeps Gatt on course
 -EC ministers agree face-saving formula
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID GARDNER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BRUSSELS
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
FRANCE last night failed to prevent the Uruguay Round world trade reform
negotiations from proceeding in Geneva, but won a face-saving formula
whereby EC concessions on subsidised food exports would have to be balanced
by 'concrete results' in other trade areas.
Following a six-hour wrangle between EC foreign, trade and farm ministers, a
French demand that would have put paid to any further progress in the
six-year negotiations was beaten back - but without isolating France.
Ministers and diplomats from several member states hoped that, as a result,
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) negotiations would not
become an additional casus belli at this weekend's already fraught summit of
EC leaders in Edinburgh.
'What is vital is that France is not cornered,' a senior French official in
the European Commission observed.
The French were jubilant, although the main result of their effort is more
likely to be further financial concessions to EC farmers when agriculture
ministers meet again in Brussels next Monday. Mr Roland Dumas, French
foreign minister, said after last night's meeting that 'we refused to accept
a fait accompli'.
France opposes limits on the volume of subsidised food exports, agreed by
the EC and the US last month. It maintains this will demand sacrifices from
EC farmers which go further than this year's reform of the Common
Agricultural Policy (CAP). The price and production cuts under the new CAP
are the effective limit of the Commission's mandate to negotiate within
Gatt.
'The consequences of the proposed accord are unacceptable for the farming
economy of the Community,' French Agriculture Minister Jean-Pierre Soisson
said.
Last night France insisted no 'technical' follow-through on the EC-US
agreement could take place until it was clear what the other side of the
Gatt ledger held - such as openings in financial services and market access.
Mr Frans Andriessen, EC external affairs commissioner, told ministers there
would be no possibility of talks in these and a dozen other trade areas
earmarked for liberalisation unless the agriculture dossier was put aside.
The farm trade row has held up for two years any progress in areas like
industrial tariff reduction.
Mr Ray MacSharry, EC agriculture minister, passionately insisted yesterday
that what had been agreed on farm trade with the US fell within the remit of
Gatt reform.
At the summit in Portugal earlier this year France won support from Ireland,
Italy, Belgium, Spain and, to a lesser degree, Denmark in insisting that a
final Gatt settlement would have to be demonstrably compatible with the CAP
reform.
One upshot of yesterday's meeting is that next week's gathering of farm
ministers is likely to turn into a bazaar. Some senior Commission officials
forecast that extra agriculture spending can be justified technically in the
light of recent currency turbulence, and that this could help fund
concessions to France and others.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3482</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / World Trade News: Talks to tackle rice import ban
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHARLES LEADBEATER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE Japanese government is taking its first step to open talks with the US
and EC over the country's ban on rice imports, a potential stumbling block
to successful completion of the Uruguay Round under the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade, writes Charles Leadbeater in Tokyo.
Mr Masami Tanabu, Japanese agriculture minister, will leave Japan today for
talks in Washington with Mrs Carla Hills, US trade representative, and in
Brussels with Mr Ray MacSharry, EC agriculture commissioner.
He will reiterate his government's opposition to replacing the outright ban
on imported rice with a system of tariffs, and will ask for rice to be
exempt from Gatt provisions.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3483</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / World Trade News: Israel hails Tokyo's call on Arab boycott
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HUGH CARNEGY
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   JERUSALEM
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
ISRAEL has warmly welcomed Japan's call for an end to the Arab economic
boycott of the Jewish state. But a new trade dispute between the two
countries has arisen over demands that Japanese exporters enter
counter-purchase deals for Israeli goods.
Israeli officials described as very significant a statement late last week
from the Japanese Foreign Ministry urging Arab countries to suspend the
boycott following moves by Israel to freeze Jewish settlement in the
occupied territories.
Israel has long accused Japan of avoiding trade with it for fear of
jeopardising ties with the Arab world, especially oil supplies. It now hopes
a steady increase in Japan-Israel trade will grow more quickly.
However, no sooner have Japanese imports started to flow than Israel has
complained about a lack of counter-purchasing. Last month a senior official
from the Japanese Ministry of International Trade and Industry warned that
pressing the issue could halt the expansion of trade. But Mr Shimon Peres,
foreign minister, will take it up when he visits Tokyo next week.
A big deficit with Japan worries Israel, which, until recently, ran a
healthy trade surplus with it thanks to big exports of polished diamonds.
But a surge in Japanese vehicle imports and a slump in demand for diamonds
has meant that this year Israel will be some Dollars 200m in deficit out of
total bilateral trade near Dollars 2bn.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3484</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / World Trade News: Japan revises offer to open service
industries
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By FRANCES WILLIAMS
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   GENEVA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
JAPAN IS due today to present trading partners in the Uruguay Round of world
trade talks with a revised offer to open up more than 100 service industries
to greater foreign competition.
Japanese officials said the move was an attempt to speed the time-consuming
country-by-country negotiations on liberalising individual service sectors.
The substance, if not the legal drafting, of each country's initial
market-opening commitments on services must be completed by the end of this
year if the target set for concluding the six-year-old Round is to be met.
An agreed schedule of commitments is a condition for joining the proposed
General Agreement on Trade in Services, which will extend fair trade rules
to services for the first time.
Some 60 countries (the European Community counting as one), accounting for
more than 90 per cent of cross-border services trade, have made offers. But
Japan's latest is the first to take the form of a draft schedule of
commitments.
Under pressure from trading partners, Japan has improved its original offer
made early this year. In particular, it has dropped two of the six areas
initially proposed for exemption from Most-Favoured-Nation treatment.
Of the four that remain, the only one expected to come under challenge is
that relating to legal consultancy services provided by foreign lawyers.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3485</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCABAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / World Trade News: Andes nations regain a taste for free
trade - The revival of a moribund pact
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RAYMOND COLITT
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
AFTER more than half a century of protectionism, trade barriers continue to
tumble across the Andes. Even the Andean Pact, moribund for 23 years, is
enjoying a revival, despite a rupture of diplomatic relations between
Venezuela and Peru where President Alberto Fujimori suspended Congress in
April.
In October, tariffs between Ecuador, Colombia and Bolivia were abolished and
Venezuela is scheduled to join the free-trade zone in January.
Peru, despite suspending its membership of the five-nation pact until
December 1993, is meanwhile negotiating bilateral free-trade agreements,
including one recently signed with Ecuador.
The Group of Three, a trade group comprising Mexico, Venezuela and Colombia,
is also said to be ready to admit Ecuador, which is meanwhile talking to
Chile about free trade.
Years of political struggle and protectionism among member countries have
given way to unprecedented co-operation and trade liberalisation.
Economic necessities have sidelined many ideological struggles and the
geo-political competition of the cold war.
As Mr Mauricio Pinto, Ecuador's minister of industries and commerce,
explains: 'We decided to take a risk. Rather than seeing the dangers of
trading with a more developed economy such as Colombia, we began seeing the
opportunities. If Mexico was seeking free trade with an economic power like
the US, then it was because they saw opportunities of growth.'
Mr Pinto claims: 'No other trade agreement in the world has established as
open and unregulated a trade as the one between Ecuador and Colombia.'
Scepticism and fear of being swamped by Colombian imports is gradually
subsiding among some Ecuadorean manufacturers.
Companies in both countries are beginning to restructure their operations in
response to the trade liberalisation.
Critics of the free-trade area had feared Ecuador's industries would be hard
hit by Colombian imports.
But Mr Jose Penaherrera, the under-secretary of foreign commerce, says the
now obsolete maximum tariff of 20 per cent had not protected the industrial
sector. He adds that labour and business management alike support trade
liberalisation.
The impact of freer trade may be less than implied by the official
statistics. According to the official figures, Ecuadorean imports from
Colombia in 1991 were, at Dollars 94.5m (Pounds 62.1m), three times its
exports to its larger neighbour.
But Mr Luis Ornando Diaz, an economist at the Ministry of Commerce, Industry
and Integration, estimates that contraband is three to four times the size
of legal trade. Mr Penaherrera says: 'Informally there already existed a
free-trade zone with Colombia.'
Ecuador's relatively low labour costs give the country an advantage in some
of its export industries. Ecuador exports mainly traditional goods to
Colombia: canned sardines, fish meal, vegetable oils, synthetic yarns and
aluminium tubes, among others.
One Ecuadorean company that is responding to the challenges and
opportunities of the new free-trade area is Textiles San Pedro. Specialising
in high-quality carpets and industrial yarns, the company has modernised its
machinery and opened distribution centres in Colombia. Mr Alberto Sanchez,
general manager, says with these measures and access to the Colombian market
the company hopes to double its current annual production of 200,000
blankets by next year.
Ecuador has even started exporting cars - the sub-compact model built by
Suzuki in Ecuador, although in modest numbers at first.
Although the trade figures will increase markedly as previous contraband is
encompassed by the figures, actual intra-regional trade is not expected to
rise sharply.
There are also some non-tariff barriers that will take time to be removed.
According to Carlos Guzman of the Ecuadorean Export Federation, the
impediments include poor communication and transportation links between
member countries as well as corrupt customs officials.
Mr Pinto insists that the common external tariff set by the Andean Group -
in four bands ranging from 5 to 20 per cent - is not protectionist. The
tariff, averaging about 10 per cent, does not impede trade with non-member
countries, he says.
In addition, trade negotiations between the Andean Group and the G3, as well
as with Chile, provides opportunities for liberalising and increasing
inter-bloc trade.
Mr Pinto stresses that the Andean Pact has boosted Ecuador's international
negotiating position enormously. The size of Ecuador's economy on its own is
of little interest to countries such as Mexico or Chile, but the Andean
market as a whole is a far more attractive negotiating partner.
According to officials, the prospects of further integration among the
relatively compatible Andean economies are good. Future efforts of the
Andean group will focus on accommodating Peru and improving communications
and transportation to facilitate the exchange of goods and services.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3486</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAA9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / World Trade News: Japan to lift more trade curbs - Offer due
today on opening service industries to competition
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By FRANCES WILLIAMS
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   GENEVA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
JAPAN IS due today to present trading partners in the Uruguay Round of world
trade talks with a revised offer to open up more than 100 service industries
to greater foreign competition.
Japanese officials said the move was an attempt to speed the time-consuming
country-by-country negotiations on liberalising individual service sectors,
which have been slow to get going again since the Round resumed last month.
The substance, if not the legal drafting, of each country's initial
market-opening commitments on services must be completed by the end of this
year if the target set for concluding the six-year-old Round is to be met.
An agreed schedule of commitments is a condition for joining the proposed
General Agreement on Trade in Services, which will extend fair trade rules
to services for the first time.
Some 60 countries (the European Community counting as one), accounting for
more than 90 per cent of cross-border services trade, have made offers. But
Japan's latest is the first to take the form of a draft schedule of
commitments.
Under pressure from trading partners, Japan has improved its original offer
made early this year. In particular, it has dropped two of the six areas
initially proposed for exemption from Most-Favoured-Nation treatment.
Of the four that remain, the only one expected to come under challenge is
that relating to legal consultancy services provided by foreign lawyers,
where the US and the EC want Japan to drop reciprocity requirements.
Japan has not sought non-discriminatory Most-Favoured-Nation exemptions in
financial services, such as banking, insurance and securities business.
However, both the US and EC judged the original offer inadequate and last
October agreed a joint approach to squeeze better terms out of Japan and
other Asian nations.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3487</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAA8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / World Trade News: Talks on rice ban to open in Washington
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHARLES LEADBEATER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE Japanese government is taking its first step to open talks with the US
and EC over the country's ban on rice imports, a potential stumbling block
to successful completion of the Uruguay Round under the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade.
Mr Masami Tanabu, Japanese agriculture minister, will leave Japan today for
talks in Washington with Mrs Carla Hills, US trade representative, and in
Brussels with Mr Ray MacSharry, EC agriculture commissioner.
Mr Jean-Pierre Leng, EC ambassador in Tokyo, called on Tokyo yesterday to
lift its ban on rice imports and ease import restrictions on European farm
and leather products. Mr Frans Andriessen, the EC external affairs
commissioner, is to visit Tokyo next week for talks on trade issues.
Mr Tanabu will reiterate his government's opposition to replacing the
outright ban on imported rice with a system of tariffs, and will ask for
rice to be exempt from Gatt provisions. However, the trip is mainly designed
for domestic political consumption by farmers who provide vital electoral
support for the ruling Liberal Democratic party.
The government is intent on showing the farmers it is doing everything
possible to maintain the ban. However, it is believed a majority of the LDP
leadership recognises that eventually the government will have to compromise
on the rice issue.
The government is keen to delay a decision on the issue for as long as
possible. But US and EC negotiators are likely to put pressure on Japan by
telling Mr Tanabu that Tokyo's acceptance of tariffs would be a precondition
for full multilateral talks to open in Geneva later this month.
Mr Tanabu will also report to Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, the Japanese prime
minister, on the state of negotiations between the US and EC over
agriculture and other issues.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3488</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAA7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / World Trade News: Israel hails Tokyo call on boycott
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HUGH CARNEGY
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   JERUSALEM
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
ISRAEL has warmly welcomed Japan's call for an end to the Arab economic
boycott of the Jewish state. But a new trade dispute between the two
countries has arisen over demands that Japanese exporters enter
counter-purchase deals for Israeli goods.
Israeli officials described as very significant a statement late last week
from the Japanese Foreign Ministry urging Arab countries to suspend the
boycott following moves by Israel to freeze Jewish settlement in the
occupied territories. They said it was the first time Tokyo had taken such a
stance.
Israel has long accused Japan of avoiding trade with it for fear of
jeopardising ties with the Arab world, especially oil supplies. It now hopes
that a recent steady increase in Japan-Israel trade will grow more quickly,
with its high-tech industries able to benefit from trade and joint ventures
with Japanese counterparts.
However, no sooner have Japanese imports started to flow than Israel has
complained about a lack of counter-purchasing. Last month, a senior official
from the Japanese Ministry of International Trade and Industry warned that
pressing the issue could halt the expansion of trade. But Mr Shimon Peres,
foreign minister, will take it up when he visits Tokyo next week.
A big deficit with Japan worries Israel, which, until recently, ran a
healthy trade surplus with it thanks to big exports of polished diamonds.
But a surge in Japanese vehicle imports and a slump in demand for diamonds
has meant that this year Israel will be some Dollars 200m in deficit out of
total bilateral trade near Dollars 2bn.
Japanese carmakers, led by Subaru, Mitsubishi and Daihatsu, now have about
two-thirds of the Israeli market. Israel wants them to source some parts in
Israel or counter-purchase other goods for sale in Japan. It has begun to
exclude companies which do not comply from tenders for government vehicle
purchases. With Israeli-Japanese trade now exceeding in value Japan's trade
with countries like Denmark and Portugal, it believes it has some leverage.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3489</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAA6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Moslems furious at mosque destruction: Hindu temples
attacked in neighbouring Islamic countries in retaliation for assault on
Ayodhya shrine
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By FARHAN BOKHARI
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
INDIA'S Moslem neighbours reacted furiously yesterday to the burning of the
Ayodhya mosque in India on Sunday, as protests also came from Islamic
communities in Britain and elsewhere.
In advance of the action taken at dawn today by Indian police to drive out
Hindu militants from the site of the mosque, Moslem protesters attacked
Hindu temples and Indian shops and offices in Pakistan, Bangladesh and
Afghanistan. Moslem hardliners in Pakistan demanded a jihad, or holy war,
against India.
Police in the Pakistani city Karachi fought nearly 200 torch-wielding
demonstrators who tried to set fire to a small Hindu temple. More than 30
temples were attacked across the country.
Pakistan's government called for a one-day strike and peaceful rallies to be
held today 'as a mark of protest against the desecration of the mosque'. The
government handed a note of protest to the Indian high commissioner in
Islamabad.
After an emergency cabinet meeting, the government expressed its 'deep
anguish and grave concern' at the mosque's destruction. Mr Nawaz Sharif,
prime minister, said: 'The abhorrent act of extreme fanaticism deserves to
be strongly condemned by all civilised countries and especially those which
oppose religious intolerance and uphold human rights.'
The government appealed to the United Nations and the Organisation of
Islamic Countries to urge India to protect the rights of Moslems and their
places of worship. The OIC last night urged Moslems to show restraint.
The OIC statement, received in Cyprus, denounced the demolition as a
'heinous crime' and accused the state government of complicity in failing to
protect Moslems.
Security forces and police in Pakistan's main cities were last night
guarding Hindu temples and police surrounded the Indian High Commission in
Islamabad where students burned an effigy of Mr P V Narasimha Rao, Indian
prime minister.
In Lahore, protesters stormed an Air India office, dragging furniture into
the streets and setting it on fire. Indian airline offices were also a focus
of protest in Bangladesh, where thousands of Moslems broke through police
cordons in Dhaka and set fire to a building.
Paramilitary troops were called in as nearly 25,000 Moslems gathered outside
Dhaka's Baitul Mokarram mosque. About 5,000 young men with iron rods and
bomboo sticks tried to storm Dhaka National Stadium, but they were beaten
back by police. Begum Khaleda Zia, prime minister, appealed to Bangladeshis
to stay calm. 'Islam is a religion of peace. It teaches us to exercise
restraint,' she said.
Dhaka Mayor Mirza Abbas led a peace march by thousands of residents, calling
for restraint and vigilance against possible communal violence.
Leaders of the Islamic Constitution Movement in Bangladesh said the mosque's
destruction was 'an unbearable shock'. It said: 'This has been an
unpardonable challenge to Islamic faith in India and the Indian government
will be responsible for its consequences.'
In Afghanistan, Moslem rebels destroyed three Hindu temples and a Sikh holy
place. There were reports of six more temples being burned elsewhere in the
country.
Britain's Foreign Office warned UK travellers to India that 'outbreaks of
violence could occur anywhere across the country, particularly the northern
states'.
In Derby, England, a fire at a Hindu temple appeared to be related to the
Indian violence.
Hundreds of Pakistani and Indian Moslems closed their shops in the United
Arab Emirates.
 -----------------------------
   Main religions practised
 -----------------------------
Hindus               642m
Moslems              120m
Christians            18m
Sikhs                 15m
Buddhists              6m
Others                 6m
 -----------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3490</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAA5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Unita agrees to join government
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By AP
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   LUANDA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Angola's Unita rebel movement agreed yesterday to join a government of
national unity and respect a nationwide ceasefire, said its spokesman Mr
Jorge Valentim, AP reports from Luanda. The statement increased hope that
the country may be edging away from civil war. Unita would accept assigned
posts in the new government, he added.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3491</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAA4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / UN Mozambique peace force plan
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the United Nations secretary-general, proposed
yesterday the establishment of a UN peace-keeping operation, involving about
7,500 troops, police and civilians, to help monitor an agreement ending a
devastating civil war in Mozambique, Reuter reports from the UN in New York.
The UN has already launched peace-keeping missions this year in Yugoslavia,
Cambodia and Somalia, in addition to maintaining nine existing operations in
such places as Lebanon, Cyprus, El Salvador and on the Iraq-Kuwait border.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3492</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAA3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Israeli deaths mark intifada
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HUGH CARNEGY
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   JERUSALEM
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
PALESTINIAN gunmen yesterday marked the fifth anniversary of the start of
the intifada - the uprising in the occupied territories - with the deadliest
attack so far on Israeli soldiers in the West bank and Gaza Strip, writes
Hugh Carnegy in Jerusalem.
The army said three reservists were killed when three Palestinians in a car
raked their vehicle with gunfire as they were patrolling a road in Gaza busy
with locals heading to work in Israel. The attack was the bloodiest incident
in a surge of violence which has presaged the fifth anniversary of the
intifada, which according to most Palestinians started on December 9, 1987.
Responsibility was claimed by Hamas, the Islamic fundamentalist group which
was founded a few days after the uprising erupted and has become the second
most popular group in the territories after the Palestine Liberation
Organisation.
Army officials said it was the highest number of soldiers to have died in a
single attack in the occupied territories since the intifada began. The
authorities say Hamas, which is opposed to the Middle East peace talks,
which reopened in Washington yesterday, is trying to upset the negotiations.
However, PLO factions which support the peace talks have also stepped up the
use of guns in the intifada, which in its first three years was marked
mainly by mass demonstrations and stone and petrol bomb throwing. Army
figures show more than 340 shooting incidents this year, compared with 38 in
1988.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3493</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAA2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Stock market watchdog shows its teeth
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By EMIKO TERAZONO
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
JAPAN'S Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission, the new stock
market watchdog, yesterday launched its first raid to crack down on illegal
stock transactions.
At dawn, commission officials started a search of the office of Teishin
Fudo, a small property company, the home of its president, Mr Makoto Araya,
and Sumitomo Fudosan Finance, a financing affiliate of the Sumitomo group.
Teishin is alleged to have pushed up the stock price of Nihon Unisys, the 32
per cent-owned Japanese affiliate of the US computer group, by using some 30
different accounts at 20 brokerage houses during 1990 and 1991.
The commission, modelled on the US Securities and Exchange Commission, was
set up last July after a spate of stock market scandals shocked investors,
fueling the fall on the Tokyo stock market.
As television cameras rolled, commission officials raided Sumitomo Fudosan
Finance. 'We're the Securities Exchange Surveillance Commission]' shouted an
official storming into the central Tokyo office as the media recorded the
ceremonial raid.
The finance company extended an estimated Y55bn (Pounds 291m) to Teishin,
and took Nihon Unisys shares as collateral. Sumitomo Fudosan Finance said it
now regretted the 'stupid' loan, but said it had not known of Teishin's
alleged share cornering.
The commission is also investigating Mr Araya and Sumitomo Fudosan Finance
for allegedly violating the rule where holders of more than a 5 per cent
stake in a company are required to report this to the Ministry of Finance.
The Nikkei average fell 88.57 points to 17,207.12 yesterday in dull trading.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3494</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAA1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Japan's trade surplus grows but nature of the beast changes:
The way export billions are recycled is undergoing a stressful shift because
of bank weaknesses
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHARLES LEADBEATER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
JAPAN'S manufacturing industry is running up a huge current account surplus
 -one that is likely to continue, on current trends, for the foreseeable
future.
Yet the offsetting process - outward capital flows that allow the balance of
payments to balance - is reaching a turning point.
Last week the government announced the October current account surplus rose
by 60 per cent from the same month last year to Dollars 11bn. The Bank of
Japan believes the trade surplus will reach more than Dollars 120bn this
year.
The scale may be familiar but the nature of the beast has changed since its
last surge in the mid-1980s. Then export volumes rose strongly as Japanese
manufacturers launched an assault on foreign markets. The surplus now is
largely the result of higher prices for exports and lower prices for imports
rather than a huge sales offensive in export markets.
Export volumes are growing at about 2.7 per cent a year. Most of the
9-per-cent a year rise in export value is accounted for by an increase in
prices as a result of the strengthening of the yen against the US dollar and
the development of more up-market Japanese products which command higher
prices.
Import volumes have fallen as Japanese consumer spending has stagnated.
Japan's import bill has been further cut by the fall in oil prices.
In the mid-1980s the trade surplus was recycled as an outflow of long-term
capital from Japan: its institutional investors bought foreign stocks and
shares; its manufacturers set up plants abroad; its real estate developers
bought large swathes of property. At its height in 1989 this long-term
capital outflow reached Dollars 122bn.
But last year long-term capital flowed back into Japan as its investors
retrenched and foreign investors bought Japanese stocks which have plunged
in price. The outflow of long-term capital has resumed but it has reached
only Dollars 16bn.
The shortfall has been made up from two sources. Short-term capital outflows
have reached Dollars 63bn so far this year. But the most important factor
has been a series of transactions buried within the bank's accounts.
The Japanese banks are paying for their bad debts by boosting their profits
through paying low interest rates to depositors and charging high interest
rates to borrowers. As a result depositors abroad are switching their money
to non-Japanese banks.
In addition US and European banks are charging their Japanese counterparts a
risk premium for borrowings. Rather than pay higher rates of interest the
Japanese banks are repaying these borrowings from foreign banks.
As a consequence yen-denominated deposits made with Japanese banks outside
Japan fell by Dollars 85bn to Dollars 185bn in the year to July, while
deposits made in foreign currencies fell by Dollars 70bn to Dollars 495bn
over the same period. However the Japanese banks have barely reduced their
lending to foreigners.
By reducing their liabilities abroad - mainly deposits and borrowings from
banks - and maintaining their foreign lending, the banks have created a
short-term capital outflow large enough to recycle the trade surplus.
The problem is that this source is drying up. The Japanese banks have run
down their foreign borrowings to a point where they do not have much left to
play with.
That implies long-term capital will have to start flowing out of the country
again to recycle the surplus. Yet all the channels seem to be clogged up.
Foreign direct investment by Japanese manufacturing companies is about 40
per cent down from 1990 with little prospect of it picking up. Japan's real
estate developers are flat on their backs. All but two Japanese banks have
withdrawn from long-term lending to overseas infrastructure projects. The
scope for Japanese banks to recycle the surplus through 'off-balance' sheet
lending is limited, given the scrutiny they are under from international
banking regulators such as the Bank of International Settlements.
Japanese institutional investors could buy more foreign assets and foreign
investors could sell out of the Tokyo market. That would scarcely be good
news, however, since it might drive down the Tokyo stock market.
'The weakness of the banking system probably means it will take longer and
prove more difficult to arrange the capital flows to offset the surplus. It
will create a lot of stress in the system,' said a senior official at the
ministry of finance.
That stress could be alleviated in several ways. A sharp appreciation of the
yen might choke off the trade surplus and make it more attractive for
Japanese investors to put their money into foreign assets. Further cuts in
interest rates could stimulate bank lending.
An injection of public money into the banks to help them sort out their bad
debts might encourage them to halt the contraction of their international
activities. And the Japanese government is likely to come under
international pressure to stimulate the economy to revive imports.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3495</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAA0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Somali traders scent a bonanza when US troops arrive
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JULIAN OZANNE
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MOGADISHU
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
PRICES in Mogadishu's bustling street markets are rising and the Somali
shilling appreciating as local businessmen scent a bonanza from the US
troops poised to intervene in the war-ravaged country.
Big-spending American television networks have sent up to 150 journalists,
cameramen and technicians into the country, and everybody who owns or
controls something is cashing in.
Everything from car rental to housing, from the services of translators to
armed guards riding shotgun on vehicles, has rocketed in price. Businessmen
who have run Mafia-style operations throughout the two-year civil war expect
a big pay-off from US military contracts. The Pentagon has estimated that
the US operation will cost Dollars 300m (Pounds 197.3m) to Dollars 400m,
although that figure could rise rapidly if the Americans get bogged down in
a longer commitment than expected.
In a city where most buildings have been looted or destroyed, a rundown
four-bedroom house with no running water or air conditioning, which cost
Dollars 500 a month, is now up for rent at Dollars 3,000 to Dollars 4,000. A
day's car rental, with two armed guards to fight off bandits and looters,
has gone up from Dollars 50 a day to between Dollars 200 and Dollars 300.
Fees for landing aircraft have also increased. The only things going down in
price are guns - an AK47 Soviet-manufactured machine gun which cost SSh5m
last month can now be found for SSh1m.
Journalists and aid workers have been almost the sole source of foreign
currency coming into Somalia for the past two years apart from a few exports
of looted telephone cables, copper wire from electricity lines and
livestock.
The biggest import trade has been the leafy natural drug, qat - the
amphetamine-like narcotic stimulant grown in Kenya which loses its potency
within 24 hours of being picked. At least 40 private twin-engine bush
aircraft fly from Nairobi to Mogadishu every day at a cost of about Dollars
2,500 per flight.
Diesel, cigarettes and even food have been imported regularly, mainly by
businessmen through the southern port city of Kismayo.
Kismayo and the bulk of the commercial trade of the country is controlled by
Mr Osman Artoh, the principal financier of Gen Mohammed Farrar Aideed,
Somalia's main warlord. Aid ships trying to offload food at Kismayo have
been regularly looted. But Mr Artoh has continued to bring in ships with
cargoes of diesel and food without any problem. He has also been the main
supplier of so-called 'Mad-Max' trucks - four-wheel-drive vehicles with the
tops sawn off and heavy calibre machine guns mounted on the back.
The Somali shilling, which had maintained a value of SSh7,500 to the dollar,
has strengthened in the last day to Ssh5,500. With no banking system and no
national mint, Somalia has had a fixed supply of banknotes except in the
north of the city controlled by Ali Mahdi Mohammed, one of the rival
warlords. Four months ago Mr Mahdi managed to import Ssh150bn-worth of new
Somali banknotes printed in 1990 by De La Rue of the UK.
These circulate only in the 10-mile radius of territory he controls. If
somebody is caught with the new notes in the south of the city, they could
be shot on sight.
Racketeering and extortion have been part of Somalia's greatest problem in
the past two years, and with the US intervention Somalis are determined to
continue their thriving trade.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3496</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAAZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Korean election probe 'biased'
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOHN BURTON and ALEXANDER NICOLL
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   SEOUL
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
MR Kim Dae-jung, the leading opposition candidate in South Korea's
presidential elections, said yesterday the government was conducting a
biased investigation of alleged electoral malpractices in order to deny him
victory.
The government is investigating alleged secret funding of the campaign of Mr
Chung Ju-yung by the Hyundai industrial conglomerate which he founded.
Police have also raided a group of political activists closely associated
with Mr Kim's Democratic party on suspicion of illegal canvassing.
Mr Kim stands to benefit from a recent surge in the popularity of Mr Chung,
who is thought likely to win votes in the December 18 elections from Mr Kim
Young-sam, the ruling Democratic Liberal party candidate who is the
front-runner.
In an interview yesterday Mr Kim Dae-jung said: 'It is obvious that Chung
Ju-yung does not have a chance of being elected but he will take away votes
from Kim Young-sam. Therefore this (investigation) is an attempt to reduce
my chances of being elected.'
He accused the government of breaking its pledge to remain neutral in the
campaign and said the DLP was also guilty of vote-buying. 'How can the
government say that one party is conducting an illegal election campaign and
the other is not? This is clearly a biased attitude on the part of the
government, which should conduct a fair investigation.'
Mr Hyun Soong-jong, the caretaker prime minister, denied that the government
was partial in its investigation of Hyundai. 'The basic government position
is to punish every violator of the election law,' he said.
The Hyundai affair has aroused fears in Korea, where no opposition candidate
has ever won the presidency, that the government is using its powers to keep
the ruling Democratic Liberal party in office, thus undermining the
country's progress to democracy.
'I believe it has very negative effects on the democratic process,' Mr Kim
Dae-jung said.
Police said yesterday that Hyundai Heavy Industries, the group's
shipbuilding arm, had created a secret Won55bn (Pounds 46.3m) fund and that
they were investigating whether any of this money had been illegally
transferred to Mr Chung's United People's party. They were seeking to
question the company's president.
Mr Kim Dae-jung, though he attacked the government's probe, also accused Mr
Chung of undermining Korean politics by improperly using Hyundai employees
in his campaign. 'He has confused relations between Hyundai and his
political party by making politics and business one and the same.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3497</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAAYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Ayodhya's woes span five centuries
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
c 1528 - Emperor Barbar, who led the Mughal invasion, orders a mosque to be
built in the Hindu holy town of Ayodhya. Thousands of other mosques are
built in sacred Hindu sites during Moslem rule. Later the Ayodhya mosque
falls into disuse.
1949 - Hindu militants break in and install Hindu idols, claiming they
arrived by divine intervention. State officials lock the mosque but leave
the idols in place.
1961 - Hindu priests and Moslems file court cases, each claiming the site as
their own. The proceedings are frozen for 23 years.
1984 - An extreme Hindu group launches the Vishwa Hindu Parishad, a campaign
group for the 'liberation' of the god Ram's birthplace. The campaign is
derailed by a crackdown following Mrs Indira Gandhi's assassination.
1988 - The temple becomes a political issue as the Bharatiya Janata Party
adopts demands for reclaiming the mosque.
1990 - Mass rallies at Ayodhya organised by the BJP end in violence. BJP
increases parliamentary presence in general election from two seats to 28
and wins control in four states.
Oct 1991 - Militants damage mosque walls in a rally but are repelled by
police.
July 1992 - Another rally ends peacefully after the government promises
speedy resolution of the court actions.
Dec 6 1992 - Court fails to resolve dispute before another BJP-organised
rally. Militants storm the mosque.
Dec 7 1992 - At least 200, mostly Moslems, are killed. Police crack down on
nationwide riots.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3498</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAAXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Takeshita under pressure to quit
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHARLES LEADBEATER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
MR Noboru Takeshita, former Japanese prime minister, was yesterday facing
mounting public pressure to resign from parliament after his second
appearance to testify over allegations that an organised crime syndicate was
involved in his 1987 campaign for the premiership.
Mr Takeshita is deftly denying the charges that he knew a crime boss acted
as an intermediary to halt an embarrassing right-wing street campaign
against him. In two hours of testimony to the parliament's upper house he
reiterated that he would not resign because it would be seen as an admission
of guilt.
However, Mr Takeshita is under pressure because of inconsistencies between
his evidence and that of other politicians involved in the incident. He was
forced to back-track on earlier testimony and admit his office might have
arranged two meetings with Mr Hiroyasu Watanabe, former president of the
Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin courier company who is alleged to have enlisted the help
of gangsters to quell the right-wing campaign.
Meanwhile, Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, prime minister, is due shortly to announce a
cabinet reshuffle. It is thought to be a key test of how well Mr Miyazawa
can handle the party and parliament without the backing of Mr Shin Kanemaru,
the party king-maker who resigned from parliament in October after admitting
accepting an illegal donation from Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin.
It is thought likely that Mr Michio Watanabe, an advocate of opening Japan's
rice market, will remain as foreign minister. Mr Tsutomu Hata is expected to
launch a new LDP faction if, as expected, he is replaced as finance
minister.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3499</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAAWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Curfew imposed on Delhi
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By SHIRAZ SIDHVA
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW DELHI
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
PARAMILITARY forces patrolled the Moslem quarters of Delhi's old walled city
yesterday as residents were warned over a loudspeaker that an indefinite
curfew had been imposed.
Communal outbreaks of violence in other parts of India are often reflected
in Delhi. Some people, such as Mr Mohammed Ilyas, a butcher whose family has
lived for generations in the shadow of the imposing Jama Masjid mosque, had
already forbidden their children from going outside.
In spite of the curfew, three people died in Old Delhi in separate incidents
yesterday, and police opened fire on irate mobs in several areas. 'We have
seen much worse,' said Mr Javed Iqbal, who has sold snack foods in the old
city since the late 1940s. 'But when such a famous mosque has been
destroyed, what hope is there for the hundreds of small mosques that no
government or court protects?'
While most people stayed inside, demonstrations and protest marches were
held by opposition parties and civil liberties organisations.
The main office of the Hindu fundamentalist Bharatiya Janata Party, which
had been unable to control the wave of communalism it unleashed three years
ago, was heavily barricaded.
As one sad Moslem leader said in the parliament building yesterday: 'There
can be no winners from this - we have all lost out.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3500</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAAVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Shots in war for Clinton's ear
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL PROWSE
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   WASHINGTON
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE FIGHT for the soul of President-elect Bill Clinton has begun.
Yesterday the market-oriented Progressive Policy Institute, one of the
Washington think-tanks closest to him, published 'Mandate for Change', a
380-page tome billed, immodestly, as a 'new governing philosophy for a new
era in American politics'.
In trying to set a governing agenda for the Clinton administration, the
institute is following a trail blazed by conservative think-tanks, such as
the Heritage Foundation, which heavily influenced the policies of Republican
administrations in the 1980s.
'Mandate for Change' sets out detailed policy proposals on everything from
economics and health care to crime and foreign policy and tries to define a
new brand of 'progressive politics' that transcends the old philosophies of
both Democrats and Republicans. On many issues, however, it appears to lean
heavily toward the kind of policies advocated by conservatives in the 1980s.
It favours tough controls on government current expenditure (as opposed to
investment) and urges Mr Clinton to revitalise the economy by relying more
heavily on free markets. It advocates reforms, stressing choice and
competition in both healthcare and education, and proposes the phasing out
of conventional forms of welfare.
The institute is an offshoot of the Democratic Leadership Council (DLC), a
reformist group of moderate Democrats chaired by Mr Clinton from 1990 until
his bid for the presidency last year. It has already established strong ties
with the incoming administration.
Mr Al From, DLC president, and Mr Bruce Reed, one of his deputies, are among
Mr Clinton's top transition advisers. Mr Robert Shapiro, the institute's
chief economist, seems likely to get a top economic post, probably at the
Office of Management and Budget.
The cover of 'Mandate for Change', moreover, carries a warm endorsement from
Mr Clinton.
Mr From and Mr Will Marshall, the institute's president, argue that the
Clinton administration should base its policies on five core principles:
Opportunity: The old Democrat emphasis on redistribution must be dropped in
favour of free market policies that stimulate growth and opportunity.
Reciprocal responsibility: Right-wing social neglect and left-wing belief in
'entitlements' are both misguided. They should be replaced by contracts
which emphasise reciprocal responsibilities: the emblematic example is a
voluntary 'national service' scheme under which college students would get
subsidies if they agreed to serve the community, as, for example, police
officers or nurses.
Community: In social policy more emphasis should be placed on the 'third
sector' of voluntary organisations and on 'empowering' families and
individuals to solve their own problems.
Democracy: In the aftermath of the cold war, the promotion of democracy and
free markets should be the new unifying theme in US foreign policy. This
offers the best hope of stabilising an uncertain world and in settling
disputes nonviolently.
Entrepreneurial government: The old model of centralised government in which
monopolies offer standardised services no longer works. A revamping of the
public sector involving the wholesale introduction of choice, competition
and market incentives must form a central part of the Clinton programme.
'Mandate for Change' also sets out a detailed programme for rebuilding the
US economy dubbed 'enterprise economics'. This seeks to go beyond the 1980s
stalemate in which conservatives tended to call for more tax cuts and
liberals for increased government spending and regulation.
The institute argues that increased government spending is required in one
area only: the 'common economic resources that can enable all workers and
firms to be more productive'. It thus advocates increased federal support
for education and training, research and development, national
infrastructure and new business formation. The main innovation on training
is the proposed issue of career opportunity cards, a kind of voucher that
would give workers flexibility in purchasing education and training relevant
to their advancement.
In most respects the economic policies proposed are free market in tone. The
one equivocal note is in trade policy, where the institute advocates a 'new
commercial diplomacy' to expand trade opportunities aggressively that some
may interpret as covert protection.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3501</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAAUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Bentsen ready to confound the sceptics: Experienced
legislator is likely to fill top Treasury post
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JUREK MARTIN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   WASHINGTON
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
EVEN before Mr Bill Clinton won the US presidency some of his advisers made
no bones of their belief that the next Treasury Secretary should be capable
of reassuring even the most sceptical in the financial markets that the
administration would give priority to economic and fiscal affairs.
Although some backed Mr Paul Volcker, the former chairman of the Federal
Reserve, every shortlist included the name of Mr Lloyd Bentsen of Texas,
chairman of the Senate finance committee and as heavyweight a legislator as
any in Washington in the last generation. The announcement of his selection
now appears imminent.
To the wider public Mr Bentsen's reputation rests on one immortal sound
bite. In 1988 he figuratively undressed Mr Dan Quayle in their televised
vice-presidential candidate debate by interrupting his young opponent with
the words: 'I knew Jack Kennedy and, senator, you're no Jack Kennedy.'
In the nation's capital, however, Mr Bentsen, 71, has long been known as a
man to be reckoned with.
He arrived after beating an up-and-coming Republican, George Bush, in the
1970 Texas Senate race. He ran unsuccessfully for the Democratic
presidential nomination in 1976, emerged unscathed from his performance in
1988 as Mr Michael Dukakis's running mate and was still mentioned this
spring as a compromise candidate should Mr Clinton falter.
The Bentsen record in Congress is substantive, especially in the last six
years as finance committee chairman. He may not be the 'new kind of
Democrat' Mr Clinton promised to bring into power, but no legislator knows
more about the budget and taxation.
Like the president-elect, Mr Bentsen is a non-doctrinaire conservative on
fiscal matters. He has always favoured business-related tax breaks,
logically given his connections to the Texas oil and gas industry, but he
was an architect of the 1990 Budget Act which produced the tax increase
that, in the end, helped undo President Bush.
He also had a reputation as a closet protectionist. In 1988 he spoke of the
need for a new relationship with Japan which might take away some of its
competitive advantages.
If elected vice-president, he told the Financial Times that year: 'I would
not consider it beneath my office to push US products abroad.' But he has
been a careful supporter of the North American Free Trade Agreement, which
is popular in Texas, although sceptical of the fast-track authority under
which it was negotiated.
He has long fought for personal pensions, known as individual retirement
accounts (IRAs), on the grounds that they offer the most workable solution
to the country's savings shortfall. His proposal to extend IRAs to the 55
per cent of two-income families currently ineligible fell victim to Mr
Bush's veto of the urban aid bill in October.
Still unanswered is why Mr Bentsen should want to sacrifice being a grand
panjandrum on Capitol Hill, particularly if it means, as Governor Ann
Richards of Texas has warned, the loss of his Democratic Senate seat.
Perhaps he was persuaded by the arguments that only he could break the
gridlock between the executive and legislative branches. This must have been
Mr Clinton's pitch, as it was from another old Texas friend, Mr Robert
Strauss, now returned to Washington from the US Embassy in Moscow. They are
a persuasive pair.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3502</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAASFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / European Economic Area to go ahead, say EC ministers
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LIONEL BARBER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
EC foreign ministers brushed off Switzerland's rejection of closer ties with
the European Community, saying the European Economic Area would go ahead as
planned, writes Lionel Barber. Mr Tristan Garel-Jones, UK Foreign Office
minister, said: 'Membership of the Community is not compulsory.
The EEA encompasses the EC and countries of the European Free Trade
Association (Efta). Swiss rejection, though not unexpected, is likely to
delay the EEA's entry into force. The EC plans talks with Norway, which
holds the Efta presidency, to prepare a conference.
One snag is that the EEA involves a pledge by Efta countries to contribute
to an Ecu2bn (Pounds 1.6bn) fund for the poorer EC countries led by Spain,
Portugal, Greece and Ireland. Switzerland was due to contribute 28 per cent.
Spanish and Irish officials said they expected the fund to remain unchanged.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3503</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAARFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Burning the house Jacques built: UK plans to torch 71 pieces
of EC law at the altar of subsidiarity
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID GARDNER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE British government wants to throw 71 pieces of EC legislation on the
bonfire at the Edinburgh summit this week, to put national governments
firmly in control of Europe.
As details leaked out of the scale of UK plans to roll back Community power,
the European Commission was preparing a pre-emptive strike with its own more
modest list of 24 EC proposals to be burnt at the altar of 'subsidiarity'.
At the Birmingham summit in October, EC leaders pledged to bring the
Community 'closer to the people', and at Edinburgh they hope to agree on a
division of EC power in line with subsidiarity - the notion that decisions
should be taken at European level only when national or local action would
be ineffectual.
The UK has chosen consumer, social, and environment policy as its targets.
Of the items it wants scrapped, amended or withdrawn, 21 are EC measures to
protect consumers, 18 are in social policy - mainly proposals to strengthen
workers' rights - and 27 laws or proposals to raise 'green' standards
against pollution. What is more surprising, Britain is also advocating
loosening the EC's grip on competition policy.
British officials insist that the 'hit-list' is not from the current UK
presidency of the EC, but was drawn up by individual British ministries. It
has already been sent to the Commission president, Mr Jacques Delors.
Some Commission officials have reacted angrily, while others are confident
the UK list will be heavily pruned - not least because it cuts across the
aims of Britain's main allies on subsidiarity, Germany and Denmark, on
social and environment policy.
The inclusion in the UK hit-list of plans the Commission has not yet adopted
 -and in at least one case not even discussed - will further fuel the
suspicion of the smaller and poorer member states that it is trying to lead
a big-country power grab by diluting the Commission's sole right to propose
EC legislation. The smaller states see the Commission as guarantor of their
stake in the Community.
Of 37 EC laws already on national statute books, the UK wants to repeal 22
directives, including ones on the quality of shellfish and freshwater-fish
water and eight on food quality. It wants to amend 15 existing laws,
including ones on wildlife habitats, hazardous waste, and bathing, drinking
and ground water, as being too prescriptive and expensive.
'More discretion should be left to member states on achieving standards'
approved unanimously in the 1970s and 1980s, the document says on water.
Britain wants 18 Commission proposals - largely on social policy - withdrawn
altogether. These include plans for Europe-wide works councils, obliging
companies with more than 1,000 employees in more than one member state to
inform workers of job cuts, new working practices and technology.
Draft directives on part-time work, the employment of young people, and
working time would all be scrapped, as would a directive on the liability of
suppliers of trans-border services. There is 'no evidence . . . that
consumers are discouraged from buying services across frontiers by different
liability regimes,' the UK document argues.
A plan by the Commission to diminish packaging waste would be amended as
'too restrictive' in its environmental objectives.
Under the heading of proposals 'not yet adopted by the Commission which
should proceed no further', the UK says extending machinery safety
provisions to second-hand machines is 'disproportionate'; queries the
legality of extending equal treatment between men and women to social
security areas such as pensionable age; and argues that plans to make
environment impact assessment obligatory in policy as well as individual
projects is constitu- tionally unacceptable.
'How to take account of environmental (or any) considerations in
policy-making must be up to national governments,' the UK insists.
Plans the UK thinks Brussels should reconsider include requests by member
states to harmonise road safety and speed limits, price transparency and
disabled people's access to public transport, and a 'communication on social
exclusion' that the Commission has not even discussed at senior official
level.
Mr Delors' riposte, which the Commission will discuss tomorrow, is a careful
mix of bread and circus. Trivia, such as the harmonisation of shoe-labelling
and changeovers to summer-time, or the time-share directive the UK asked for
to protect investors in holiday homes, would be torched. But in 'green' and
social policy Brussels plans to offer up only the zoos directive and
subcontracting rules.
Meatier sacrifices include rules defining a Community ship-owner, and
changes in the plans for liability of suppliers of services and the mobility
of the disabled. The Commission is astutely proposing to withdraw two
advertising directives - the regulating of pejorative comparison with other
products and the banning of tobacco advertisements.
The advertising plans incensed newspaper owners worried about revenue loss,
and may have contributed to the avalanche of stories about 'Euro-lunacy',
which the Commission's modest pyre is intended to reduce.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3504</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAAQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Bonn parties find compromise to calm asylum row
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JUDY DEMPSEY
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BONN
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE German parliament is expected to pass controversial legislation aimed at
curbing the influx of foreigners and at the same time dilute the growing
influence of extreme-right groups which have exploited widespread concern
over the asylum issue to call for racist policies.
The draft proposals will go before the Bundestag when it reconvenes after
Christmas. They were thrashed out between the conservative government
coalition and the opposition Social Democratic Party (SPD) at the weekend
and still retain the individual right to asylum, as guaranteed in article 16
of the constitution. But draft amendments include the right to send back
'manifestly unfounded cases' to a third country. The third countries include
Poland, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Austria and Switzerland, all of which
have borders with Germany.
Border guards, for instance, will be able to decide, often on the spot,
whether to prevent individuals from entering the country, even if they
invoke article 16.
Mr Walter Koisser, head of the Bonn office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, yesterday said that if any person was sent back
to Poland, the conditions for appeal, housing, infrastructure, and for
guaranteeing the safety of the applicant, do not yet exist.
'Poland, the Czech Republic, and Slovakia are young democracies. They have
signed the Geneva Convention on Refugees, but they do not have the
legislation which can translate the convention into practice,' he said. 'I
really do not think that they are geared up towards dealing with a massive
number of cases who will be turned back at the German border.' Germany, for
instance, has already a backlog of 450,000 cases.
A spokesman for the Interior Ministry said yesterday that Germany would
provide financial assistance for those sent to a third country. Over the
past year, economic refugees, and genuine refugees, particularly gypsies
from Romania and Bulgaria, have been repatriated.
'We want to make Germany a less attractive place for economic refugees,' the
spokesman said. But he admitted that it was unclear how the proposals would
stem illegal immigration, which exceeds 100,000 people a year.
The proposals, which are also designed to speed the administrative
procedures, will still allow the courts in Germany to decide if an asylum
seeker is a legitimate applicant. If an asylum claim is rejected, the
applicant will be returned to a third country, where an appeal can be
lodged. However, SPD and UN officials want assurances that those countries
will not repatriate asylum-seekers.
With the case of those fleeing civil war, the governing conservative
Christian Democratic Union, the conservative Christian Social Union, its
sister party in Bavaria, the liberal Free Democrats, and the SPD went some
way towards giving these people - many from the former Yugoslavia - a
special status which will entitle them to the right of temporary residence
in Germany without applying for political asylum.
The SPD and the FDP said the amendments to the asylum law were only part of
a long process towards integrating the country's 6.2m foreigners.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3505</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAAPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / EC ministers fail to find budget answer
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID GARDNER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BRUSSELS
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
EC foreign ministers failed yesterday to break the impasse over the EC
budget, one of the vital issues needed to pave the way for a successful
summit in Edinburgh.
The UK played down growing expectations that its plan would raise the
Community's budget ceiling.
At the same time, Spain remained adamant it would not budge from its demand
that 'cohesion' finance be doubled for the four poorest member states.
'Better no agreement at Edinburgh than a bad one,' said a Spanish minister,
making clear Madrid was willing to play a long game. 'There are plenty of
other cities and lots of other dates.'
Foreign ministers, in Brussels for a two-day meeting ahead of the Edinburgh
summit on Friday, were also trying to clear the way for agreement at
Edinburgh on ratification of the Maastricht treaty by Denmark and the UK,
enlargement of the EC, and decentralised decision-making or 'subsidiarity.'
'We are still in three groups of four,' said a UK presidency official. Spain
has the firm backing of the other three 'cohesion' countries: Ireland,
Portugal and Greece. The UK's Treasury-dictated line has the support of
Germany, the Netherlands, and - with nuances - Italy. Wobbling in the middle
are France - on the look-out for support in its opposition to the Uruguay
Round farm deal - Denmark, Belgium and Luxembourg. Neither Germany nor
Italy, however, are unconditional allies of the UK. Bonn is hardening its
ideas on how to cut back the budget rebate Britain has received since 1985
(worth around Pounds 2bn a year), even though the UK says this is
non-negotiable. Italy, the Dutch, and others could join in this assault.
The UK 10 days ago presented a 'compromise' on the so-called Delors II
future financing plan.
This would mean an increase in the annual budget from Ecu66.8bn (Pounds
54.04bn) now to Ecu79.4bn (1992 money) in 1999. The original Delors II
package wanted a rise of nearly a third, to Ecu87.5bn - and by 1997.
However, Mr Delors last month offered to stretch a smaller increase over
seven years, getting to Ecu80.2bn by 1997 and Ecu86.2bn by 1999. The
Commission's revision would raise total fiscal transfers for regional and
cohesion spending from Ecu18.6bn now to Ecu27.3bn in 1997 and Ecu30.2bn in
1999. This is close to what Spain and its allies want, but at the expense of
increases in other areas.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3506</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAAOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Daimler-Benz appeals for tolerance
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   FRANKFURT
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
DAIMLER-BENZ, Germany's biggest industrial concern, has appealed publicly to
its workforce to show tolerance and solidarity in the face of rising racist
violence.
An open letter from Mr Edzard Reuter, group chairman, released before
publication in 30 German newspapers tomorrow, said 'criminal fanatics' who
did not shrink from murder challenged German self-respect.
'Irrationality and violence must not be allowed to take hold at a time when
the signs point to crisis and we are feeling the full weight of worldwide
recession,' it said. The fight against intolerance had to start with
improved communications in the workplace - the first point of contact
between Germans and foreigners.
Non-Germans make up more than a quarter of Daimler's 390,000 worldwide
workforce.
The group employs 40,000 foreigners inside Germany. Publication of the
letter, which will reinforce a campaign within the business community
against xenophobia, reflects concern both at the two-year wave of violence
and at indications that international revulsion could damage German business
interests.
Xenophobic violence has been growing since a mob fire-bombed a refugee
hostel in Hoyerswerda, Saxony, two years ago.
Lufthansa, the state-owned airline, ran press advertisements last weekend
stressing the international nature of the group. 'We are foreigners every
day,' the copy said.
Preussag, the steel and engineering group, last week declared that those who
wanted a future must be internationally minded, and not just at holiday
time.
All the corporate protests have stressed the contributions made to economic
well-being by foreign workers.
Common ground, Page 14
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3507</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAANFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / 'We Swiss may get up early, but we wake up late'
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By IAN RODGER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   ZURICH
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
'WE have just built an obstacle for ourselves. We now have to find a way to
get around it.'
This was how Mr Jean Rodolphe de Salis, Switzerland's most respected
historian, summed up yesterday his country's rejection of the European
Economic Area (EEA) - a vote which potentially leaves Switzerland isolated
in the midst of an integrated Europe.
The overall reaction to Sunday's referendum appeared a mix of angst and
confusion - tinged with a modicum of Swiss-style indifference. 'The world
couldn't care less about Switzerland's relations with Europe,' says Mr
Silvan Trachsler, head of equity research at Union Bank of Switzerland,
explaining why Swiss financial markets yesterday closed virtually unchanged.
Other financial analysts registered disappointment at the outcome. 'We Swiss
may get up early, but we wake up late,' one Zurich banker said yesterday.
But many German Swiss speakers - who voted by a large margin against the EEA
 -had clearly been worried that closer ties to Europe would bring
disadvantages through greater flows of immigrants or increased unemployment.
There was, however, near universal surprise that these fears were strong
enough to overwhelm economic self-interest. Normally fewer than half of
German Swiss voters turn out for plebiscites. This time, over 80 per cent
voted, and 61 per cent said No.
Even leaders of the anti-EEA forces seemed perplexed, emphasising that they
do not seek isolation. Instead, they claim that Switzerland must press ahead
with liberalising its structures and markets. 'We want to have good
relations with each of the European states and with the European Community,'
said Mr Christoph Blocher, leader of the anti-EEA campaign and chairman of
the Ems-Chemie chemical group.
As a small country with modest resources, Switzerland knows that it has only
limited control over relations with the rest of Europe.
As the EEA and the single market develop, Switzerland will, in a number of
important ways, be isolated.
There will, for instance, be no automatic freedom for people to move between
Switzerland and EEA countries.
More important economically, Swiss industrial products will not
automatically be accepted as meeting EEA standards. Delays on Swiss imports
imposed by EC authorities' examinations could be disruptive.
Mr Blocher says that the EC will not do anything to hurt the country which
is its second largest trading partner. But many Swiss companies are already
thinking of relocating production to EC countries.
For high technology companies, there is disappointment that Switzerland will
not be able to sit on the EC committees planning Community-wide research
projects.
Swissair, the national airline, will suffer through not being able to
participate in the gradual liberalisation of air traffic within the EEA. The
airline's hopes for minimising its disadvantages rest on negotiations for a
new bilateral agreement with the EC due to begin soon.
Swiss ministers say they will press ahead with plans to harmonise as many of
the country's laws and regulations as possible with those of the EC. But
that provides no guarantee that the EC will acknowledge them.
Meanwhile, many analysts fear that without pressure from EC regulations, the
momentum for dismantling Swiss cartels in many sectors could be lost, adding
to cxompetitiveness problems.
However, if the cost of remaining outside the EEA turns out to be high, the
Swiss will probably change course.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3508</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAAMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Major tour ends on note of gloom
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By IVO DAWNAY, Political Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MR JOHN MAJOR completed his pre-summit tour of European capitals yesterday
with stark reminders from Dublin and The Hague over the scale of the
difficulty he faces in achieving a wide-ranging accord in Edinburgh this
weekend.
The contrasting approaches of Ireland and the Netherlands on the key issue
of financing of the Community led officials in London to describe the mood
as far from 'optimistic'.
On his return, the prime minister claimed that he had made progress but
immediately was at pains to add that he could not recall a summit with so
many important issues on its agenda, all inter-linked. In an attempt to cast
an encouraging light, he added that often the results only came in the
denouement. 'We must wait and see,' he said.
However, his meetings yesterday only served to underline the strongly-held
disagreements that remain. Whereas Mr Ruud Lubbers, the Dutch premier, made
it clear that he is doggedly opposed to a substantial increase in Community
spending, Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister sided firmly with his
southern European allies in seeking a generous settlement.
It also emerged that Ireland is in dispute with the European Commission over
criteria by which the new cohesion fund would be distributed. Dublin claims
proposals leave it at a disadvantage to its Mediterranean partners. Downing
Street conceded that northern and southern member states were still 'a long
way apart' on financing questions, adding that lack of an agreement might
scupper hopes of pressing on with EC enlargement.
There was a little more hope of reaching an accord over the terms Denmark is
seeking to aid its ratification of the treaty. However, officials pointed
out that grave doubts remained among several member states over the legal
validity of the compromises now being sought by Copenhagen.
Although EC presidencies tend to be pessimistic prior to a summit to
accentuate subsequent successes, there appeared genuine anxiety. Mr Douglas
Hurd, the UK foreign secretary, said in Brussels last night: 'I'm past the
stage where I'm an optimist or a pessimist.'
Mr Major is due to meet Mr Jacques Delors, the Commission president,
tomorrow.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3509</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAALFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Brittan challenges EC to speed up anti-trust investigations
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW HILL
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BRUSSELS
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Sir Leon Brittan, EC competition commissioner, yesterday challenged EC
member states to provide the resources to speed up anti-trust
investigations, writes Andrew Hill in Brussels.
But he said that even without extra personnel, the Commission would
introduce new internal deadlines on inquiries into cartels and abuses of a
dominant position from April 1 next year.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3510</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAAKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Slovenia's voters reject Balkans diet of nationalism
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LAURA SILBER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   LJUBLJANA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
SLOVENIA has bucked the trend of nationalism in the Balkans as moderates
yesterday emerged as the biggest winners in the first elections since the
tiny republic won independence from Yugoslavia last year.
Mr Milan Kucan, the incumbent, won re-election as president with 64 per cent
of Sunday's ballot, according to officials results with more than half the
vote counted.
The centrist Liberal Democrats (LDS) led the vote for a new 130-seat
bicameral parliament, with 23 per cent. The Christian Democrats, their
closest rivals, received 14.9 per cent and the United Left, which includes
the former communists, trailed behind with 13.26 per cent. Mr Janez
Drnovsek, the current prime minister and head of the LDS, said negotiations
would soon be under way to form a coalition government.
Despite the strong turn-out in support of Slovenia's fledgling democracy,
many Slovenes were worried about the showing of Mr Zmago Jelincic, the
ultra-nationalist leader of the Slovene National Party, who came in fourth
with 10 per cent of the vote.
Mr Jelincic has called for the expulsion of Bosnian refugees and
guestworkers from the former Yugoslav republics in order to make jobs for
Slovenes.
But President Kucan, a former communist who is widely respected for opposing
Serb-dominated Yugoslavia, said the elections would represent a victory if
Slovenia looked towards the future and not the past. He called on citizens
to build economic prosperity.
Despite freezing temperatures and flooding, some 75 per cent of the 1.5m
registered voters turned out for the ballot.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3511</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAAJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / EC strives for Danish solution ahead of summit
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LIONEL BARBER and IVO DAWNAY
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BRUSSELS, LONDON
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
EUROPEAN Community foreign ministers are braced for a bruising clash today
as they mount a final effort to resolve the Danish question which has the
potential to wreck this week's summit in Edinburgh.
Officials in London also warned they were far from optimistic about
agreement being reached on future financing and on progress towards
enlargement of the Community.
A British presidency draft aimed at finessing Denmark's demands for
exemptions from the Maastricht treaty on European monetary and political
union has been attacked on all sides.
In Brussels, EC officials reacted with dismay to reports that Danish
opposition parties would force the minority centre-right government in
Copenhagen to present a long list of objections to the UK paper at today's
meeting of EC foreign ministers.
Mr Uffe Elleman-Jensen, Danish foreign minister, gave a foretaste of the
clash when he told his EC counterparts meeting in Brussels that the UK text
'does not go far enough'.
Mr Poul Nyrup Rasmussen, leader of the opposition Social Democratic party,
said after a meeting of the three parties that the British plan was
'generally not clear enough'.
He said Denmark wanted any agreement to state clearly that the country would
not take part in the treaty's general drive towards European union, but
declined to elaborate on other desired changes. 'The British plan must be
changed. If not, we cannot hold a new referendum,' Mr Rasmussen stressed.
Amid signs of British efforts to lower expectations of a breakthrough, Mr
Douglas Hurd, UK foreign secretary, said that it would be 'bad news' if
there was no Danish deal but the EC would press ahead with efforts to reach
an agreement next year.
Senior UK officials recognise, however, that the Danish question could
jeopardise efforts in Edinburgh to reach a budget deal and other agreements
on subsidiarity and enlargement, threatening a diplomatic debacle for Mr
John Major, who is hosting the summit.
In London, as the prime minister completed his tour of EC capitals with
visits to The Hague and Dublin, officials said member states remained 'a
long way apart' on a new community budget, while difficulties remained over
Denmark.
The UK draft on Denmark chose a middle path between Euro-federalism and
Danish minimalism on Maastricht, with ministers gambling that fear of
failure would galvanise the 12 member states to reach an agreement and end
the uncertainty over the Community's future.
Denmark is pressing for a legally binding agreement for a UK-style opt-out
on a single European currency, a putative European army, EC citizenship and
wider EC co-operation on justice and immigration.
A clear majority of British voters want a referendum before the government
ratifies the Maastricht treaty, according to a poll by Gallup for the BBC.
More than half of the 7,000 voters surveyed thought Britain's future lay
with Europe, but 75 per cent were in favour of a referendum. Only 28 per
cent thought Britain should pull out of the EC.
EC budget, Page 2
Trade-off with France keeps Gatt on course, Page 5
Government bonds, Page 24
Currencies, Page 27
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3512</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAAIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Airbus suffers Dollars 3.5bn setback: Northwest Airlines
cancels orders for 74 European-built aircraft
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PAUL BETTS and NIKKI TAIT
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   LONDON, NEW YORK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE EUROPEAN Airbus consortium, which includes British Aerospace, suffered a
significant setback yesterday when Northwest Airlines of the US cancelled
orders for 74 aircraft, worth a total of Dollars 3.5bn (Pounds 2.3bn), as
part of a refinancing package to stave off bankruptcy.
The cancellations are a particularly heavy blow for Airbus, because they
involve its latest airliner, the A340 long-range wide-bodied jet.
Northwest was the single biggest customer for the A340 with 24 firm orders,
all of which were cancelled yesterday. The airliner is due to enter service
for the first time next year with Lufthansa, Air France and, until
yesterday, Northwest.
Northwest also cancelled orders for 50 Airbus A320 narrow-body twin engine
airliners. It was one of the biggest customers for the A320, having
originally ordered 100 of the aircraft. Of these, it has already taken
delivery of 34 and will take delivery next year of 16 more.
BAe, a 20 per cent partner in the Airbus consortium, makes the wings for all
Airbus airliners at Chester. Overall, the UK company employs 7,000 people on
Airbus work.
BAe said last night it was disappointed at the Northwest decision. It said
it had been reviewing wing production as a result of deferrals and
cancellation of Airbus orders.
Airbus said from its headquarters in Toulouse that negotiations were
continuing with Northwest over the terms of the cancellations. Northwest is
expected to face heavy financial penalties.
The US carrier is also delaying, but not cancelling, orders for four Boeing
747-400 jumbo jets and 47 Boeing 757 twin-engine aircraft worth a total of
Dollars 2.7bn. It confirmed it would take delivery next year of two Boeing
747s.
Both Airbus and Boeing have faced a growing number of cancellations and
demands by airlines for delayed deliveries of new aircraft. The
manufacturers recently also had to renegotiate and reschedule large orders
placed by GPA Group, the troubled Irish aircraft leasing company. The latest
cancellations are bound to have an impact on the workload of the Airbus
partners which, in addition to BAe, are Deutsche Aerospace, Aerospatiale of
France and Casa of Spain.
The Northwest cancellations came as part of a big refinancing package at
Northwest. This incorporates a one-year secured loan of Dollars 250m,
provided by a consortium of lenders including the Dutch airline KLM, Bankers
Trust, ABN-Amro Bank, General Electric Credit Corporation and suppliers such
as Airbus and United Technologies.
There were fears that, had short-term funds not been forthcoming, Northwest
would have faced a cash crunch this winter, pushing the heavily-indebted
carrier into bankruptcy.
In addition to the short-term loan, Northwest's existing lenders have agreed
to reschedule Dollars 340m of principal repayment due next year. The
airline's unions have pledged wage and benefit concessions worth Dollars
300m a year for a three-year period, although talks are continuing.
The carrier secured financing commitments totalling Dollars 730m to cover
the 18 aircraft of which it will take delivery in 1993 - the 16 A320s and
two Boeing 747-400s.
KLM, which acquired a minority stake in Northwest when the US airline was
subject to a Dollars 3.65bn leveraged buy-out in 1989 and is contributing
Dollars 50m to the Dollars 250m loan, said last night it was looking forward
to 'fully realising the benefits of the proposed . . . integration
agreement' with the US carrier. This envisages a comprehensive meshing of
the airlines' operations.
Icahn gives up his control of TWA, Page 21
Design problems plague Qantas sell-off, Page 23
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3513</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAAHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / World News in Brief: Nameless nation
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The Czech part of Czechoslovakia still has no name even though it is due to
become a separate country in less than a month. Suggestions so far include
Czechoslovenia, Great Moravia, Czechoslavia and Bohemia.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3514</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAAGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / World News in Brief: Wildlife hit as oil leaks from tanker
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Salvage workers are fighting a losing battle against a tide of oil spilling
from the Greek tanker Aegean Sea, which ran aground at the entrance to La
Coruna harbour last week. Strong winds are spreading the 67,000 tonnes of
oil along Spain's north west coast, smothering seabirds and contaminating
fishing grounds.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3515</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAAFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / World News in Brief: Aid train reaches Mostar
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The first UN aid train reached the beleaguered Bosnian town of Mostar
carrying 250 tonnes of food. The delivery raised hopes that Sarajevo could
also be supplied by rail.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3516</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAAEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / World News in Brief: Policeman's killer jailed
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Nicholas Vernage, 27, was convicted at the Old Bailey, London, of murdering
a police sergeant and attempting to murder two constables. He was also found
guilty of murdering two other people and committing three burglaries.
Vernage was given five life sentences with a recommendation he serve at
least 25 years in prison.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3517</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAADFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Stock and Currency Markets
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
STOCK MARKET INDICES
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
FT-SE 100:                            2,754.5           (-4.9)
Yield                                    4.44
FT-SE Eurotrack 100                  1,056.75          (+3.97)
FT-A All-Share                       1,308.27          (-0.0%)
FT-A World Index                       139.49          (+0.8%)
Nikkei                              17,207.12         (-88.57)
New York:
Dow Jones Ind Ave                    3,307.33         (+18.65)
S&amp;P Composite                          435.31          (+3.25)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
US CLOSING RATES
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
Federal Funds:                         2 5/8%         (2 7/8%)
3-mo Treas Bills: Yld                  3.311%         (3.322%)
Long Bond                                 102      (101 19/32)
Yield                                  7.451%         (7.485%)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
LONDON MONEY
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
3-mo Interbank                         7 1/8%           (Same)
Liffe long gilt future:          Dec 99 27/32   (Dec 100 3/32)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
NORTH SEA OIL (Argus)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
Brent 15-day (Jan)              dollars 18.15          (18.25)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
Gold
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
New York Comex (Dec)            dollars 336.1          (335.7)
London                         dollars 335.15         (335.45)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
STERLING
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
New York:
Dollar                                1.59825         (1.5605)
London:
Dollar                                 1.5875         (1.5575)
DM                                       2.49         (2.4875)
FFr                                     8.485          (8.445)
SFr                                    2.2225         (2.2325)
Y                                       197.5          (194.5)
Pound Index                              81.2           (80.7)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
DOLLAR
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
New York:
DM                                     1.5565          (1.593)
FFr                                    5.3045          (5.407)
SFr                                    1.3935         (1.4285)
Y                                       123.8         (124.95)
London:
DM                                     1.5685          (1.597)
FFr                                     5.345         (5.4225)
SFr                                       1.4         (1.4335)
Y                                       124.4         (124.85)
Dollar Index                             65.0           (65.5)
Tokyo open:                         Y 123.965
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3518</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAACFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Treasury includes dissidents inpanel to advise on economy
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER MARSH, Economics Staff
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE UK Treasury last night named three economics arch-dissidents in its
panel of private sector forecasters which is to advise the government on the
economy.
In a development expected to lead to greater openness in UK economic
policymaking, the panel is to include Professor Wynne Godley of Cambridge
University, Professor Patrick Minford of Liverpool University and Professor
Tim Congdon, managing director of Lombard Street Research. The three are
among the Treasury's most severe critics of the past few years.
Also on the panel will be Mr Andrew Britton, director of the National
Institute of Economic and Social Research, Professor David Currie, head of
economic forecasting at the London Business School, Mr Gavyn Davies, chief
UK economist at Goldman Sachs, the US investment bank, and Mr Andrew
Sentance, economics director at the Confederation of British Industry.
Prof Godley, who for 20 years has warned of structural problems in the UK
economy resulting from the lack of a sufficiently competitive manufacturing
sector, said: 'I am very grateful to be asked on to the panel. It is a
generous act.'
Prof Godley, who restarted formal forecasting just last year after a break
of about eight years, was the only mainstream UK economist in the spring of
last year to predict accurately that national output would decline both in
1991 and 1992.
He wants the government to take immediate action to support manufacturing
through further cuts in interest rates from 7 per cent to 5 per cent. He
also wants a further devaluation of the pound by about 15 per cent, to add
to the depreciation of roughly the same amount which has already taken place
since Britain left the European exchange rate mechanism.
Prof Minford, a prominent monetarist economist, said: 'I am willing to give
it (the panel) a try and see what happens.' Prof Minford, who wants the
government to base future monetary policy on specific monetary targets, said
he had had misgivings about being asked on to the panel but was willing to
serve on it since he had been assured it would touch on policy matters.
He and Prof Congdon are members of the Liverpool Six group of monetarist
economists who since early last year have warned of the dangers of a deep
recession and called for Britain to leave the ERM.
The panel will meet three times a year and give Treasury officials a
wide-ranging briefing about economic developments. The discussions will be
be chaired by Mr Alan Budd, the Treasury's chief economic adviser.
A report drawn up by Treasury staff on the meetings will be published soon
afterwards, after having first been cleared by Mr Norman Lamont, the
chancellor. The first meeting is expected to be in January or February.
Profiles, Page 6
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3519</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAABFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / World News in Brief: Fire check on palaces
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The government has ordered an inquiry into fire protection at all royal
palaces under its financial control.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3520</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAAAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / World News in Brief: Briton wins appeal
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
British hospital manager David Brown, 32, who faced a flogging in Saudi
Arabia for allegedly swearing at his staff, won an appeal against his
50-lash sentence, the Foreign Office said.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3521</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLJACAG5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / International Company News: Degussa moves ahead 12% to
DM200m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   FRANKFURT
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
DEGUSSA, the German metals, chemicals and drugs group, increased pre-tax
profits by 12 per cent last year, in spite of losses in its important metals
division.
Cost-cutting and reduced investments helped improve earnings to DM200m
(Dollars 125.7m) after a 44 per cent profits slump in the previous year.
Turnover was down 4 per cent at DM12.8bn, mainly because of a 22 per cent
fall in precious metals sales.
Chemicals suffered from lower prices, but sales rose 1 per cent and profits
improved.
Meanwhile, turnover from pharmaceuticals, the smallest of the group's core
businesses, increased 32 per cent to DM1.75bn.
The proposed dividend is unchanged at DM7. The company said there was no
sign of an early recovery. Increasingly recessive tendences, detected in the
last quarter of the year under review, had continued in the early part of
the new financial year, especially inside Germany.
After allowing for the effects of acquisitions, Degussa reduced its
workforce by 2,000 people.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
International Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3522</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLJACAG4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Bucharest steps back from a market economy: Moves to
compromise over reform in Romania are unsettling budding entrepreneurs
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By VIRGINIA MARSH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ROMANIA'S third post-Communist government has distanced itself from the
'fast track' market reformers of central Europe. Instead, it has opted for a
compromise 'social market economy' which opposition parties have already
denounced as a step backwards.
Mr Nicolae Vacariou, the prime minister, heads a minority government formed
by the Democratic National Salvation Front (DNSF), which won most seats in
general elections two months ago. He argues that Romania needs a more
gradual approach which takes into account social costs.
A slower approach worked for the new prime minister's predecessor, Mr
Theodor Stolojan, who was drafted in after miner-led riots in Bucharest
toppled the radical reformist government of Mr Petre Roman in September
1991.
The Stolojan administration managed to implement monetary reforms without
destabilising the economy. The leu, Romania's currency, was partially
liberalised, leading to a 140 per cent devaluation, and subsidies on basic
foods and domestic energy were more than halved. But inflation has dropped
from 265 per cent last year to 133 per cent in the first 10 months of this
year.
By the end of October, exports had risen 26 per cent over the same period
last year, and there are signs that industrial production may have ceased
falling after declining 50 per cent since 1989. Output increased by 2.6 per
cent in October, the third monthly rise in a row.
Mass privatisation has been slow to start, but many new companies have
sprung up. By October there were more than 380,000 companies with private
capital, and the private sector accounted for 44 per cent of retail sales
and 27 per cent of services.
Mr Stolojan's consolidation of reform has helped improve the country's image
with foreign investors, who say they are beginning to look more seriously at
Romania.
'The country suffers from a credibility gap. The economy is not as different
from those in the central European countries as is supposed,' says Mr David
Nussbaum, a director of Charterhouse Bank, who recently brought a group of
senior western financiers to Romania. 'We are not unduly worried by the
political situation: the core legislation for a market economy already
exists.'
The country's budding entrepreneurial classes, however. have been shaken by
the DNSF's victory. 'This is a government of ex-Communist bureaucrats: they
do not understand the needs or importance of a private sector. Worse still,
they encourage the population to fear the transition and to be suspicious of
successful entrepreneurs,' says one businesswoman.
So far, the new administration has done little to dispel this view.
President Ion Iliescu, who was re-elected on the DNSF ticket, recently
reiterated that the state should strengthen the social security network and
protect the population against 'savage capitalism'.
Meanwhile, Mr Vacariou, who before 1989 worked at the Communists' central
economic planning institute, talks of implementing reform through
administrative measures.
He believes he can tighten control over state enterprises and still
encourage initiative. 'Spontaneous reform and privatisation would only lead
to anarchy,' he claims.
Mr Vacariou says he wants to end the 'financial blockage' caused by some
Dollars 2bn (Pounds 1.3bn) of inter-enterprise debt by closing unprofitable
state enterprises and compensating others. He plans to revive industry -
more than 90 per cent state-owned - through increased investment raised from
higher taxes. Profitable private businesses say that, with the base rate at
70 per cent and corporate tax up to 45 per cent, they are already starved of
capital.
In the short term, however,the greatest opposition to Mr Vacariou's plans is
likely to come from within the DNSF and its supporters in parliament. The
DNSF holds 34 per cent of seats, well short of a majority, and depends on
the 18 per cent of seats held by Communist and nationalist parties to
govern. Even the most cautious attempts at reform are likely to run into
opposition from the DNSF's satellite parties, the hardline nationalist
Greater Romania Party and the Communist Socialist Labour Party.
Their leaders, Mr Corneliu Vadim Tudor, one of deposed dictator Nicolae
Ceausescu's top propagandists, and Mr Adrian Paunescu, are among Romania's
most skilled politicians. They appear to exercise more influence over the
DNSF rank and file than Mr Vacariou, who like many in his cabinet is a
newcomer to politics.
Much depends on the two main opposition groups, the Democratic Convention, a
loose anti-Communist coalition, and the National Salvation Front led by Mr
Petre Roman, which together hold 44 per cent of seats in parliament.
Both groups favour a rapid transition to a market economy but, so far,
internal divisions have prevented them from providing a viable alternative.
They have agreed to try to form a constructive opposition over the difficult
winter months. Otherwise, they fear the economy will worsen, giving rise to
increased social tensions.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
International Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3523</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLJACAG3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Crimea order will upset Ukraine
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MOSCOW
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE Russian Congress of People's Deputies yesterday questioned the status of
Sevastopol, home port of the disputed Black Sea Fleet, Reuter reports from
Moscow.
The move is certain to raise hackles in Ukraine.
The Congress, under strong pressure from the conservative opposition,
ordered the smaller standing parliament to consider the status of the port.
On the Crimean peninsula, it has a mostly Russian population but was ceded
formally to Ukraine, within the Soviet Union, in 1954. Ukrainian
independence last December made the break real.
President Boris Yeltsin has accepted Ukrainian sovereignty over the Crimea
but Russian conservatives have urged that Sevastopol should have special
status rather than belonging solely to Ukraine.
They cited a 1948 decree giving the city an autonomous administrative
centre.
Relations between Russia and Ukraine, the two most powerful ex-Soviet
states, have been soured by a row over sharing the 380-ship Black Sea fleet
since the communist superpower collapsed.
In August Mr Yeltsin and Ukraine's President Leonid Kravchuk signed an
accord on a share-out, which considerably calmed emotions.
Russian nationalists have challenged Ukraine's right to Sevastopol and the
whole peninsula, saying Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had no legal
authority to hand them to Kiev in 1954.
Russia's standing parliament this year raised the Crimea issue, triggering
an increase in tensions between Russia and Ukraine.
In Kiev, the Ukrainian Foreign Ministry said the decision to turn the issue
over to the standing parliament could only hurt relations between the two
republics.
The ministry said the decision violated international principles on
territorial integrity and the inviolability of established borders.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
International Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3524</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLJACAG2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Russian Congress postpones vote on Gaidar
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LEYLA BOULTON
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MOSCOW
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE Russian Congress of People's Deputies yesterday postponed a vote on
whether to reject Mr Yegor Gaidar as prime minister, as the government
back-pedalled on a threat to resign if he was turned down.
The postponement, officially attributed to the importance of discussing
constitutional amendments, was also designed to give political leaders time
to find a deal in order to avoid an embarrassing vote against Mr Gaidar, who
is at present acting prime minister.
Mr Gaidar yesterday disavowed the resignation threat the government's press
service issued on Sunday, suggesting negotiation has replaced brinkmanship.
The negotiations are focusing on a deal which would lead to some ministers
being dropped and a way being found for Mr Gaidar to retain control of
economic policy without necessarily staying on as prime minister.
Mr Anatoly Chubais, the deputy prime minister responsible for privatisation,
said that key ministers were determined to resign unless Mr Gaidar continued
in the post of acting prime minister or was confirmed as prime minister by
the Congress.
He said Mr Gaidar's resignation would mean the end of large scale
privatisation and even his opponents realised that there was no real
alternative to Mr Gaidar.
President Boris Yeltsin is keen to keep Mr Gaidar on as the architect of the
economic reforms, but is thought reluctant to take on the job of prime
minister to let Mr Gaidar get on with reform unhindered. Another option is
for a neutral figure to take on the job of prime minister.
Although Mr Gaidar's closest reform associates have pledged to sink or swim
together some, such as Mr Andrei Nechayev, the economics minister, and Mr
Peter Aven, the foreign economic relations minister, may yet resign.
The main Civic Union opposition alliance leaders have demanded that
'incompetent' ministers should depart and Mr Gaidar should be given a
different cabinet post. Mr Chubais said changes in the government should be
made 'only on the basis of professional complaints about a minister's work,
not because Civic Union wants this or that post.'
One of the constitutional amendments adopted by parliament yesterday inserts
into Russia's old Soviet-era constitution for the first time the concept of
private property. Repeating the wording used in recent Soviet-era
legislation, the constitution now promises to protect various forms of
property, including private, collective and state property and that
belonging to public organisations.
Another amendment gives backing to controversial privatisation laws, saying
state property should be handled in accordance with these laws as well as
those passed by cities and Russia's constituent republics.
At the weekend, however, the parliament stopped short of endorsing the
unrestricted sale and purchase of land, allowing only the free trade of
small garden plots.
Bigger pieces of land remain subject to a resale moratorium of five to 10
years.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
International Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3525</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLJACAG1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Common health approach
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOHN WILLMAN, Public Policy Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
EUROPEAN countries are adopting similar market-based health care reforms to
contain costs and improve efficiency, according to a report published today
by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
The OECD says that its 24 member countries continue to face persistent
problems in the financing and delivery of their health services. These
include rapid increases in health spending and concerns over inefficiency
and poor performance.
Analysis of reforms introduced in seven European countries during the 1980s,
however, shows convergence in the solutions devised to deal with these
problems, despite considerable differ-ences between health care systems.
Public finance - through taxation or compulsory insurance - continues to
fund access to basic health care for most people in these countries, the
OECD says. But health care is increasingly provided under contract by
doctors and hospitals competing in managed markets.
In some countries, the government is devolving responsibility for purchasing
health care down to the local level, moving away from centralised
administration. However, this is matched by increasing efforts to cap the
overall health care budget, so that local purchasers in effect ration funds.
The reforms have been successful in reducing or even halting the rate of
growth of health expenditure as a share of GDP, the OECD says.
They have also succeeded in improving consumer choice and introducing
competition between doctors and hospitals. In the new health markets which
are created, money follows the patients and rewards efficient and innovative
doctors and hospitals.
The findings will be discussed at a two-day conference of OECD social policy
ministers in Paris which begins today.
The Reform of Health Care. OECD. Pounds 30.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
International Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3526</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLJACAG0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921208
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 DEC 92 / Macedonia likely to disregard veto: Greeks press Twelve to
withhold recognition in dispute over name
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KERIN HOPE
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   SKOPJE
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
MACEDONIA plans to press for membership of the United Nations later this
month if the European Community fails to reach agreement in Edinburgh on
recognising the ex-Yugoslav republic.
Mr Stevo Crvenkovski, the deputy president, said that Macedonia had received
'a lot of encouragement from other countries' to go ahead with its UN
application, which was submitted in September but put on hold while a
special EC envoy, Mr Robin O'Neill, tried to resolve Greek objections to
recognising Macedonia by that name. Hopes that Athens and Skopje could
compromise on the name issue crumbled last week when Mr Constantine
Mitsotakis, the Greek prime minister, rejected the EC envoy's report.
Both Athens and Skopje have been urged to accept a compound name in which
the word Macedonia is used as an adjective not a noun.
While the EC leaders may be unwilling to reverse their support at the Lisbon
summit in June for the Greek view that Macedonia should not be recognised
under that name, Greece fears that if Macedonia decides finally not to
compromise, individual member states may go ahead with recognition after the
summit.
'If the EC does not recognise us, it is realistic to go at once to the UN.
We've no reason to suppose that anyone at the Security Council would veto
our membership, since we meet the legal conditions,' Mr Crvenkovski said.
Macedonia is increasing ties with individual EC members. Germany, which has
opened a consulate in Skopje, is to provide aid for Bosnian refugees living
in Macedonia, and Italy plans to open a consulate early next year.
The economy is in increasing difficulty because Macedonia is excluded from
the international credit system. Exports have collapsed and the republic has
been unable to cover any of the Dollars 80m due this year in payments of
interest and principal on its Dollars 480m foreign debt.
In Brussels, a senior Nato official said that the US and some of its allies
were considering new steps to prevent a spill-over of the Yugoslav conflict
into the troubled province of Kosovo, agencies report.
The growing threat of a wider war in the Balkans would be discussed when
Nato defence ministers meet later this week and alliance foreign ministers
meet next week, the official added.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
International Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3527</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAD9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Companies in this issue
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
 ------------------------------------
UK
 ------------------------------------
Amstrad                   20
Barclays Bank             19
Burtonwood                20
Crossroads Oil            20
Crown Comms               20
Estates &amp; General         20
Forte                     19
Gardner Merchant          19
Gartmore Value            20
Hambros Inv Trust         20
Natl Transcomms           21
Sun Alliance              20
Tex Holdings              20
Tomorrows Leisure         20
Tops Estates              20
United Biscuits           19
Virgin                     8
Wiltshire Brewery         20
 ------------------------------------
OVERSEAS
 ------------------------------------
American Express        19,1
Club Med                  21
Dow Chemical              21
Generali                  21
Grupo Torras              21
IRI                       19
KIO                       21
Laurentian Bank           21
Pai                       19
RFM                       20
Royal Trustco             21
SME                       19
Sandoz                    21
Scientific Atlanta        21
 ------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3528</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAD8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Cross Border M&amp;A Deals
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
BIDDER/INVESTOR            TARGET                     SECTOR
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Camuzzi Gasometri          Distribuidora de Gas       Gas distribution
(Italy)                    Pampeana (Argentina)
Camuzzi Gasometri          Distribuidora de Gas       Gas distribution
(Italy)                    del Sur (Argentina)
Sideco Americana (Arg)/    Distribuidora de Gas del   Gas distribution
Italgas (Italy)            Centro (Arg)
Sideco Americana (Arg)/    Distribuidora de Gas       Gas distribution
Italgas (Italy)            Cuyana (Arg)
Tractebel (Belgium)/       Distribuidora de Gas del   Gas distribution
Iberdrola (Spain)/         Litoral (Arg)
Beirsdorf (Germany)        Nivea (UK)                 Toiletries
Columbian Chemicals (US)   Columbia Tiszai Carbon     Carbon black
/TVK (Hungary)             (JV)
WestLB/SudWestLB           Chartered WestLB (UK/      Banking
(Germany)                  Germany)
UAP (France)               Nordstern Allgemeine       Insurance
                           (German)
GECapital (US)/UMW         Joint venture              Financial services
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
BIDDER/INVESTOR            VALUE                COMMENT
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Camuzzi Gasometri          Pounds 152m          Consortium declared ..
(Italy)
Camuzzi Gasometri          Pounds 95m            ..top bidders
(Italy)
Sideco Americana (Arg)/    Pounds 89m           Consortium declared ..
Italgas (Italy)
Sideco Americana (Arg)/    Pounds 79m            ..top bidders
Italgas (Italy)
Tractebel (Belgium)/       Pounds 67m           Bid won with local
                                                partners
Iberdrola (Spain)/
Beirsdorf (Germany)        Pounds 46.5m         Smith &amp; Nephew disposal
Columbian Chemicals (US)   Pounds 35m           Manufacturing venture
/TVK (Hungary)
WestLB/SudWestLB           Pounds 26.3m         StanChart sells its half
(Germany)
UAP (France)               n/a                  Winterthur sells its
(German)                                        stake
GECapital (US)/UMW         n/a                  GE taking 49% stake
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3529</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAD7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Tories surprised by secrecy tally
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE PROCESS of British government is more secretive than the Conservative
party thought - nearly four times so, to be more precise.
That is one conclusion from the review of statutory restrictions on
information disclosure being undertaken in accordance with an election
pledge. The Tories promised to review the '80 or so' such restrictions.
The harder they look, the more curbs they find. About 280 have been
unearthed, and they are still counting.
The review is to be one of the subjects of a government report on
freedom-of-information issues to be published - probably in the form of a
white paper - early next year.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3530</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAD6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Germans agree to stiffen asylum law
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By Agencies
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BONN
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
GERMAN government and opposition leaders agreed yesterday on how to tighten
the country's liberal asylum law to curb the influx of foreigners, agencies
report from Bonn.
The parties thrashed out an accord in the wake of a rash of violent attacks
on foreigners and amid concern at the rise of radical right and neo-Nazi
groups exploiting the issue.
The agreement coincided with a demonstration by more than 300,000 Germans
with candles and lanterns in the streets of Munich protesting against racist
attacks on foreigners by right-wing gangs. Similar vigils took place in more
than 60 Bavarian towns.
Mr Wolfgang Schauble, parliamentary leader of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's
Christian Democratic Union (CDU), announced agreement on tightening the
asylum law at a joint news conference with opposition leaders.
He said the constitution would continue to guarantee the right of anyone to
apply for political asylum.
But asylum-seekers who crossed into Germany via another member nation of the
European Community or through a 'safe' third country such as Poland would be
immediately sent back to that country if it appeared they came for economic
rather than political reasons.
Asylum-seekers who arrived directly from countries where there was no
political persecution would also not qualify for refuge. It will be up to
the Bundestag to agree on a list of such countries.
The procedure for deciding on asylum cases would be drastically speeded up,
Mr Schauble said.
The governing three-party coalition and the opposition Social Democratic
Party (SPD) have had deep differences on the asylum issue. But SPD support
is needed if the constitution is to be amended to tighten the existing
guarantee of asylum.
The SPD made a big policy switch at a conference last month by deciding to
seek ways to tighten the law.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3531</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAD5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / World News in Brief: Body Shop's open house
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Cosmetics company Body Shop is throwing open the doors of its Littlehampton,
West Sussex, headquarters to guided tours from today. It is thought to be
the first time an international cosmetics company has opened its operations
to such scrutiny.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3532</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAD4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / World News in Brief: Somali deaths as US troops wait
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Twenty four Somalis died in clan fighting in the starving town of Baidoa
while a US-led task force waited offshore. It is due to head a crackdown on
lawlessness that has prevented effective distribution of aid to Somalia's
starving millions. Uphill task, Page 4
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3533</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAD3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Monday Interview: Managing director at the Yard - Paul
Condon, the incoming Metropolitan Police commissioner, speaks to Alan Pike
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN PIKE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
The new Metropolitan Police commissioner began his career as a constable on
the beat in London's east end, where Dixon of Dock Green, that most
nostalgic of television series, was set.
'I was never Dixon of Dock Green,' he confesses. 'We may not like to admit
it, but he was just part of the mythology of 1950s and 1960s Britain.'
Indeed, many realities of contemporary police life, both good and ill, were
excluded from Dixon's world. His notebooks were never subjected to
scientific analysis to see whether he had falsified evidence. Rioters on
neglected housing estates did not fire-bomb him simply because he was a
symbol of authority. Terrorism was not a daily feature of police work in his
London.
But what concerns Paul Condon who takes over the most high-profile post in
British policing in February, is the lingering impression that Dixon and his
amiable pals at Dock Green police station could solve every crime, catch all
the baddies and effortlessly keep the peace. The real police of Dixon's era
never managed to do all that, and they cannot today. In Condon London is
about to gain a police chief who will be very frank about that reality.
'The notion that a small number of police officers in the community can
prevent crime is nonsense. I am not trying to sound complacent. What I am
saying is that we must be absolutely clear about how we use our resources,
and share with the public what we can do and how they can help.'
Condon takes over at a particularly challenging time. The terrorist threat
is again rife throughout mainland Britain, as the switch last week of the
bombing campaign from London to Manchester showed. There is a recognised
need for the police service to repair its image after a series of
miscarriages of justice. Both the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice and
the Sheehy inquiry into police pay and structure are due to report next
year. These could lead to wide-ranging changes, from the way the police
interviews suspects to the service's career structure.
Commissioners find themselves promoted into the role of national spokesmen
for the police service on such issues, as well as having to run the
Metropolitan force. And Condon is not only going to run the Met; he is going
to change it. He has agreed with Kenneth Clarke, home secretary, that he
will serve a relatively long initial term. 'For an organisation of the Met's
size to get through the sort of change process I want it to go through will
take all of seven years.'
The remark will send a shudder around the corridors of the Met's New
Scotland Yard headquarters, where there are fears that Condon's top targets
for change will be among the force's high command. Recent Audit Commission
reports have suggested that the service is over-managed at senior levels,
and in his present post as chief constable of Kent Condon has shown himself
ready to tackle the problem.
At 45, he is the youngest of recent commissioners and, provided he has a
supportive home secretary, has a good chance of pushing through substantial
reform. Condon is one of the police service's new breed of fast-track,
graduate chiefs. He joined the Met when he was 20, was selected for
accelerated promotion and won a scholarship to St Peter's College, Oxford.
where he took bachelor's and master's degrees in jurisprudence.
Condon is very much Clarke's personal choice for the commissioner's job.
Although the home secretary is preparing his ground cautiously, he suspects
there is substantial inefficiency waiting to be rooted out of Britain's
police service, and sees in Condon evidence of a likely ally in the cause.
Two aspects of Condon's previous career - the first as a teenager before he
joined the police and currently at Kent - illustrate how he is likely to
behave as an agent of change.
He left school at 16 and, until he was 20, worked for a small industrial
publisher. The young recruit spent his last year there managing the company,
responsible for between 40 and 50 employees. This sparked an awareness of
management issues that has become a central feature of his style as a chief
constable.
Screens in Kent police headquarters display information, updated every 10
minutes, on the force's state of activity and readiness. Condon talks of
performance indicators, output measurements and devolved budgets.
Occasionally - in language that would have seemed entirely foreign in Dock
Green police station - he refers to Kent police as the business and himself
as its chief executive rather than chief constable.
'When I go to the Met I shall have an organisation of 44,000 people and a
budget of Pounds 1.5bn. The disciplines involved in running a police force
are not dissimilar to those of the private sector,' Condon says.
He has engineered a three-stage managerial revolution during his three years
at Kent. Stage one was to identify what he describes as the force's core
business. Opinion surveys of the customers - the public - showed people
wanted a fast emergency response; visible 'bobbies-on-the-beat' policing and
compassionate treatment for victims of crime and other misfortunes.
Stage two was to organise the force to deliver these core objectives, while
stage three consists of rigorous monitoring to ensure that standards are
being met. A team of headquarters staff spends all day telephoning victims
of crime and other police customers, asking if they were satisfied with the
service they received.
Condon's stage two is the cause of apprehension among some of his future
colleagues at Scotland Yard. Kent's reformed delivery system is based on the
devolution of all possible decision-making functions to local police
stations.
People who run Kent stations, he says proudly, have more freedom than some
chief constables. This was achieved, however, by eliminating an entire tier
of divisional middle-management and through the early retirement of senior
officers at chief superintendent level. 'To take out a whole divisional
command structure of very loyal colleagues who have given all their careers
to policing, and to change the ground rules around them, is a painful
process. Fortunately, the people involved saw why we were trying to change
and were supportive.'
Kent and the Met are not interchangeable forces, however. The latter has
semi-national responsibilities, including the fight against terrorism and
protection of the royal family and VIPs, that require central co-ordination.
But there is no doubt Condon will repeat his experiment in the devolution of
responsibility for basic policing in London, and equally no doubt that the
Met's command structure of high-ranking officers is in line for thinning
out.
Colleagues say Condon, an opera lover and sports enthusiast who is married
with three children, is a relatively private man. He recognises that the
high media profile and public image of the commissioner's post will intrude
on his family life. and acknowledges that there may be worse to come.
'I really mean this - I would not have felt a failure if I had ended my
career without being Metropolitan Police commissioner. Having been given the
enormous challenge of taking it on, I will do the job to the very best of my
ability. In doing that, I know it will make me vulnerable to personal
criticism. Any commissioner who tries to change things is vulnerable to
dirty tricks campaigns, rumour and innuendo.'
In spite of the bad publicity the police service has received in recent
years, Condon is convinced that it has become a far better trained, better
equipped, higher quality organisation since he joined it 25 years ago in the
real Dock Green.
'One of the great tragedies is that as all these improvements have taken
place the image of the service has dropped.' This has arisen, he says, from
more critical and questioning attitudes to public services in general; from
the police having tried to do too much, failing miserably in some areas; and
from miscarriages of justice such as those leading to the release of the
Guildford Four and the Birmingham Six.
'I feel a tremendous obligation to try to build the image up again,' he
says. 'We cannot stop crime, but if you are in trouble we can help you very
quickly. You will see police officers on reassuring patrol. We will take
care of you if you are a victim of crime. The new moral high ground for the
police service is around these issues.'
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
PERSONAL FILE
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1947     Born in Dorset.
1967     Joins Metropolitan Police.
1972-75  St Peter's College, Oxford. Bachelor's and Master's degrees in
         jurisprudence.
1984     Assistant chief constable, Kent.
1987     Deputy assistant commissioner, Metropolitan Police.
1989     Chief constable of Kent.
1992     Appointed Metropolitan Police commissioner.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 32
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3534</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAD2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Michael Prowse on America: Just do it, Mr Clinton
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL PROWSE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
The weeks before inauguration are a magical time for presidents-in-waiting.
Like a student preparing for college, Mr Bill Clinton has been revelling in
the opportunities lying ahead. On the economy, however, the time for tough
decisions has arrived.
On Wednesday he is expected to name his economic team. Next week droves of
economists, businessmen and policy-junkies will converge on Little Rock for
a televised 'economic summit'. Shortly thereafter, Mr Clinton is expected to
outline his strategy for economic renewal before starting lengthy
negotiations with congressional leaders. The laudable aim is to have
legislation ready for enactment soon after he assumes power in the new year.
Top congressional Democrats now seem likely to gain prominent economic posts
in the Clinton administration. Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the Texan head of the
Senate finance committee, is all but certain to become treasury secretary.
Mr Leon Panatta, chairman of the House budget committee, is a strong
contender for budget director. Such appointments would be a shrewd way of
ensuring a smooth passage for delicate economic and social legislation:
congressional leaders are far more likely to co-operate with respected
former colleagues than with outsiders brought in from Wall Street or
business.
But in the long run policies matter more than personalities. On economics,
the big question is whether Mr Clinton can keep his eye on medium-term
structural problems. A succession of respected bodies, including the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and - in Washington -
the Brookings Institution, have urged Mr Clinton to take tough action to
raise the national savings rate, which fell to a disastrous 2.5 per cent of
national income under the Republicans, compared with about 8 per cent in
previous decades and an average of 10 per cent in other industrial
countries.
Domestic savings and investment rates can diverge a lot in the short run.
The link between investment and growth is equally obscure over short
periods. But in the long run, a country that does not save or invest much
cannot grow much. There is no escaping this fundamental logic. Nor can it be
denied that a decade of huge budget deficits - negative saving by the public
sector - has done more than anything else to erode US savings. Economic
historians will judge Mr Clinton less on his pet projects, such as new
student loan schemes, than on his success in restoring budgetary sanity in
Washington.
Fortunately, the path toward budget retrenchment is being smoothed by signs
that the economic recovery is taking firmer hold. On Friday, the Labour
Department reported the fifth consecutive monthly decline in the
unemployment rate - to 7.2 per cent, enviably low by European standards.
Employment, factory overtime and the length of the average work-week all
rose significantly, pointing to a solid increase in industrial production
last month.
Friday's employment report followed a run of sparkling numbers. Consumer
confidence, factory orders, retail sales, leading indicators, the Purchasing
Managers' Index, money supply growth and bank lending are all rising, in
some cases substantially. Revised figures for the third quarter showed the
economy expanding at an annual rate of 3.9 per cent, by far the best result
since the Reagan years.
On close inspection, most of these numbers are overstating the economy's
strength. Most of the fall in unemployment since June, for example, reflects
a shrinking workforce; job gains, so far, are tiny. Consumer confidence
usually rebounds after elections and is still far below levels normal for a
vigorous recovery. The rise in factory orders was concentrated in volatile
sectors such as defence and transport. Consumption has been temporarily
lifted by a decline in the personal savings rate from already low levels.
Export figures do not yet reflect declining demand in Japan and Europe.
Yet the fact remains that the US is enjoying its seventh straight quarter of
growth, in stark contrast to the experience of most other countries. The
economy is expanding at an underlying rate of about 2 per cent and seems
more likely to gather momentum than to relapse into another semi-recession.
Much of Mr Clinton's campaign rhetoric is thus out-of-date. The case for a
short-term fiscal stimulus to 'grow' the economy was always weak; anything
more than a symbolic package would now be irresponsible.
Mr Clinton's original plan was to match spending increases (on education and
infrastructure) with tax increases and spending cuts, thus allowing the
deficit to decline a little as economic growth picked up. With the economy
strengthening of its own accord, this now looks insufficiently ambitious.
Coming into office as a business cycle upswing gets under way, Mr Clinton
should seize a golden opportunity to raise the national savings rate sharply
by progressively cutting the deficit to zero. As the OECD and others have
pointed out, this does not require an exceptional effort, merely fiscal
measures commonplace in other countries, such as realistic controls on
healthcare costs, a scaling back of 'middle class' welfare benefits and
modest increases in energy and consumption taxes.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 32
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3535</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAD1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Ian Davidson on Europe: Last chance for Maastricht
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By IAN DAVIDSON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
In the run-up to this week's European summit at Edinburgh, we are faced with
one absolute certainty, and one high probability. The certainty is that
everything hangs on the Danish problem. The probability is that, by Saturday
night, the Maastricht Treaty of European Union will be dead or dying.
Everything hangs on the Danish problem because, unless it is solved, nothing
else can be. Ratification of the Maastricht treaty is the necessary
condition for the Community to move ahead on all other fronts. Unless there
is an agreement enabling the Danes to reverse their No vote of last June,
there cannot be an agreement on a new multi-annual budget package, there
cannot be an agreement on subsidiarity and transparency, and there cannot be
an agreement on the admission of new members to the Community.
This morning, nobody has the faintest idea whether there will be an
agreement in Edinburgh on the Danish problem, but the omens look poor. The
British government has put forward an ingenious draft, which would give
Denmark various forms of opt-out from the Maastricht treaty, but British
officials do not sound very confident that it will be the basis of a deal.
'If there is an agreement,' said one UK diplomat last week, 'we shall not
get it until Edinburgh, and probably not until late on Saturday evening.'
That means in plain English that the British expect a long struggle which is
likely to drag the summit several hours into overtime.
From a formal point of view, it is a cunning text, because it meets the
Danish request for a document which would be 'legally binding', without
making any formal changes to the treaty. The trouble is in the substance,
however: it may not go as far as the Danes would like, but it goes much too
far for some of the other member states. Indeed, it has already been
denounced by five Christian Democrat governments for voiding the treaty of
much of its substance.
The heart of their objection, is the new and much strengthened Danish
opt-out from economic and monetary union. In the Maastricht treaty, the
Danes already have a protocol which would allow them to decide, at the
appropriate moment, that they did not wish to enter the final stage of Emu,
with full monetary union and a single currency. Under the British draft
proposal, Denmark would take that negative decision right now, without
waiting for 1999 or whenever.
Community lawyers have apparently ruled that this twist is consistent with
Maastricht as it stands. The treaty allows Denmark to notify its partners
that it will not go into stage three of Emu; but since it does not specify
when such a notification should be made, there is no reason why the Danes
should not make it today.
This may satisfy the lawyers; any ordinary person can see immediately that
it is just legal sophistry. It is one thing to concede that, at some future
date, taking one thing with another, in the circumstances of the time, and
politics being what they are, the Danish government and parliament of the
day may not be able to accept a single currency. It is quite different for
the Danish government to reach that decision even before the treaty has been
ratified. This isn't an opt-out, this is a carve-up; in spirit it is a
rewriting of the treaty.
Here we are getting close to the heart of the problem: does Denmark
subscribe to the general objectives of the Maastricht treaty or not? The
central characteristic of the treaty is that it is a compendium of
programmes for future action: Emu, foreign policy and defence, immigration
and justice, and so on. If Denmark can denounce one of the primary
objectives of the treaty even before it comes into force, Maastricht will
look like a meaningless scrap of paper.
Actually, if the truth be told, most of the other member states do not care
too much about Denmark. As a senior diplomat from the Benelux said last
week: 'The problem is not Denmark; the problem is Britain.' If Denmark can
set such a damaging precedent, Britain may stampede through the gap; and
Britain makes a real difference to the political viability of the Community.
Cynics say the Maastricht treaty has in any case been discredited by events.
But they do not have any alternative solutions. Monetary union is a logical
response to a single market with free capital movements and an exchange rate
mechanism. It is obviously very ambitious; but do the cynics believe that
the problem will simply go away; or do they imagine that France, Germany and
the Benelux will instead vote to disband the European Monetary System? If
the Euro-sceptics defeat the Maastricht treaty (and they may), they will not
prevent an inner core of committed countries from seeking alternative routes
to a more integrated Europe.
Throughout its presidency, the British government has done its best to turn
the Community in the direction of an inter-governmental free-trade area. The
attempt has failed - so far. But the Danish protocol looks like the last
throw for the same stakes.
If the British draft for the Danish problem is accepted by the other 10
member states, we shall know that they have virtually consigned the
Maastricht treaty to the waste paper basket. If it is not accepted by the
10, the odds will rise sharply against Danish ratification. In either event,
the situation will start to become clearer, and those who want to go ahead,
will go ahead.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 32
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3536</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAD0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Foreign Exchange and Money Markets: Optimism for DM
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
TOUGH talking out of the Bundesbank is expected to offer some support to the
D-Mark this week.
After a depressing end to last week for the German currency, the Bundesbank
may set new parameters for the D-Mark at its central council meeting on
Thursday. Some analysts believe that the German central bank could widen its
targets for M3 monetary growth next year from this year's 3.5-5.5 per cent
range to a band of 3-5 per cent.
Most analysts are agreed that the Bundesbank will not announce an interest
rate cut. The German central bank is likely to stand firm, despite last
week's signs of an accelerating German economic downturn and evidence of an
easing of inflationary pressures on the wages front in Germany.
The dollar, meanwhile, is expected to maintain a robust tone following last
Friday's better-than-expected employment data from the US.
'The figures are consistent with a steady recovery in the US and should keep
the dollar well underpinned this month,' said Mr Gerard Lyons, chief
economist at DKB International in London.
Other analysts warned against expecting that last Friday's 1.65 cent gain
against the D-Mark presaged a particularly strong performance for the dollar
ahead of Christmas.
'I'm not sure this is the start of a big improvement,' said Mr David Cocker,
treasury adviser at Chemical Bank. After Christmas, he said, investors were
more likely to allocate their cash for 1993 and the US currency might then
profit further.
Sterling is not expected to perform quite as strongly as last week. Many
analysts were beginning to feel that the currency's heady rise last week -
almost 8 pfennings against the D-Mark in five days - had been somewhat
overdone.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 29
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3537</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Risk and Reward: Ignorance and other failures of the
regulators
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD WATERS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BACK in January, when Mr Gerald Corrigan, head of the Federal Reserve,
warned of the unseen risks lurking in the derivatives markets, it seemed a
bomb had been put under the banking industry.
With external scrutiny focused on the markets, surely it would be only a
matter of time before all the weapons in the international regulatory
armoury were wheeled out. Fiercer capital adequacy standards, strict
oversight of market operations and assorted other intrusions would surely
follow.
Nearly a year on, things look rather different. True, a batch of reports is
still awaited, including those from the US General Accounting Office and
G30, the banking industry's international think-tank. These may toe the
Corrigan line. So far, though, it is the regulators themselves who have come
out worse from the scrutiny of these new financial markets.
It is now commonplace to witness bank regulators all but admitting to
ignorance of how derivatives markets work. They cloak their ignorance with
pious remarks about the need to understand the markets better, and for
improved communication, but the message is not lost on anyone.
When did the banking industry last get so far ahead of its regulators? The
damage to bank balance sheets caused by the results of leveraged finance in
the US, or the bank-financed bubble in property prices in several major
economies, could hardly be blamed on a lack of understanding. Negligence
maybe, but not ignorance.
There are plenty of other failures which help to explain regulators'
nervousness about derivatives.
One is the division of responsibility, which has left the impression that no
one is in a position to assess the full risks accruing in the financial
system.
The US is the best example. The Federal Reserve, the Securities and Exchange
Commission and the Commodities Futures Trading Commission all have an
interest in the subject. The division between the CFTC and the SEC is
reaffirmed in the Re-authorisation Bill which is due to be confirmed before
the present administration stands down.
The SEC meanwhile, feels at a loss because the firms it regulates are busy
setting up unregulated subsidiaries for derivatives business. In fairness,
the politicians are as much to blame for this state of affairs as the
regulators.
The fragmentation is echoed elsewhere. The European Community, for instance,
has a raft of directives which have a bearing on the market. Mr Alex
Merriman, an EC official, says there are plans to amalgamate some of these
rules into simpler, unified directives - but no plans as yet to examine the
gaps between the directives or to bring forward new regulations specifically
aimed at the new markets.
The regulators are also woefully short of data on what is happening in many
over-the-counter markets. How can you predict the knock-on effect of a
crisis in one financial market when you do not know the scale of trading or
its relationship with other markets?
No wonder regulators have been making a song and dance about the derivatives
industry this year. It may well be that some senior bankers do not
understand the new risks they are exposed to - but the supervisors are no
better off.
It was, therefore, unusual to hear a director of the Bank of England
expressing an unfashionable view last week. Mr Pen Kent - admittedly not
responsible for banking supervision himself - expressed only mild caution
about the new risks banks are running. 'We should not be complacent, but nor
should we necessarily become alarmist either,' he told a conference in
London. There would be 'huge risks in the cash markets which we would all
face if we had no hedging mechanism to spread them and share them,' he said.
Not that he does not share some of the concerns of other observers. Some
banks are writing 30-year options, he says: how can they price such
instruments to reflect the true risks they are running?
But the regulators have a long way to go before they can take the
derivatives specialists to task.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3538</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / International Bonds: Bank tries to boost prospects for UK
securitisation
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TRACY CORRIGAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SECURITISATION, touted as the latest growth market in Europe for the past
few years, has so far failed to live up to high expectations.
The largest market in Europe, the UK mortgage-backed market, totals around
Pounds 9bn, or 3 per cent of total mortgage loans outstanding. It is dwarfed
by the massive Dollars 1,000bn US mortgage-backed sector, which accounts for
40 per cent of all residential mortgage debt, according to Bank of England
figures.
The prospects for securitisation in the UK have recently had two boosts.
Last week, the Bank of England rescinded its plans to increase the risk
weighting of mortgage-backed securities from 50 per cent to 100 per cent,
effective January 1, 1993.
The threat of a 100 per cent risk weighting had driven many banks, a
mainstay of the market's investor base, away from the market.
In November, the Accounting Standards Board, the UK accounting regulators,
gave in to pressure to change proposed rules that could have stopped banks
and companies from securitising assets.
The ASB proposed last year that all securitised assets - where a bank or
other entity passes assets to a special purpose vehicle, which then issues
bonds against them - should remain on the originator's balance sheet, thus
removing a significant attraction of such arrangements.
While still requiring companies to record assets, the new system allows them
to express a net asset figure reflecting only the residual risk left with
the company from a securitisation.
These two changes are not, however, enough to kick-start the market. In the
US, large size and homogeneity of asset pools facilitates securitisation.
Pools of receivables in Europe are generally much smaller and more diverse.
Securitisation is designed to allow banks and companies to remove assets
from their balance sheets and repackage them as bonds which are then sold to
investors.
The theory is that the current squeeze on bank capital and the lack of bank
financing available for companies will encourage both to take this route.
But the process of securitisation is often prohibitively expensive, or is
only viable if a company or bank has large amounts of assets to securitise.
The latest trend for securitisation involves assembling different
receivables in a single pool.
'A number of companies do not fit the pattern for a single origination
programme: Pounds 50m is a lot of funding to raise in the current market,
but not enough to justify its own programme,' said Mr Bruce Gaitskell, an
executive director in charge of securitisation at UBS Phillips &amp; Drew.
The solution: your bank sets up a vehicle which funds your trade receivables
by issuing asset-backed commercial paper. This technique can be used to fund
other assets, such as leases.
As well as a Barclays special-purpose company - called Sceptre
(Securitisation conduit for the enhancement and purchase of trade
receivables across Europe) - other banks involved include Deutsche Bank,
Westdeutsche Landesbank and Warburg, and UBS Phillips and Drew.
The US asset-backed commercial paper market has expanded rapidly, on the
back of a huge and mature commercial paper market.
For the moment, issuance of commercial paper backed by European receivables
may well be concentrated in the larger market. Several European CP markets
are still highly regulated, restricting issuance, and the European investor
base for these products is not yet well developed.
Meanwhile, bank regulators in Europe will be watching developments. In the
US, the Federal Reserve has come down on the banks which were providing the
liquidity guarantees for these programmes.
They were concerned these liquidity guarantees created substantial credit
risk for the banks and asked banks to set more capital aside against them.
Since then, many programmes have been restructured so that, for example,
specialist insurance replaces liquidity guarantees.
As for the rest of the market, there are signs of life. UBS is believed to
be preparing a Pounds 180m five-year issue of floating rate notes backed by
Leyland-Daf leases and dealer finance plans. The issue, called Truck
Funding, will have an average life of 3 3/4 years.
But the mortgage-backed market, despite the Bank of England move, is still
on hold.
The Centralised lenders such as The Mortgage Corporation and National Home
Loans, which were once the mainstay of the market, are no longer churning
out deals - or mortgages, for that matter.
However, the building societies are looking more closely at securitisation.
Although they are originating few mortgages, the decline of retail funds, as
investors shift funds into higher-yielding investments, is creating
potential funding difficulties.
A number of societies are close to the 40 per cent ceiling of public debt
funding permitted under the Building Societies Act. Some have already set up
auxiliary mortgage companies, a process required of building societies if
they wish to tap the market.
Although only a handful of building societies are likely to issue next year,
once the process has begun, others are expected to follow suit.
Several UK clearing banks, including Barclays and Midland, are already well
advanced in their preparatory work for mortgage securitisation, and may
bring deals next year. Barclays is also considering securitisation of
consumer loans and credit card receivables.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3539</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / European Government Bonds: Bundesbank unlikely to cut rates
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID WALLER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ALL EYES will be on Thursday's meeting of the Bundesbank's central council,
the last for the current year and therefore the sole remaining opportunity
this year for Germany's central bankers to deliver the long-awaited cut in
interest rates.
There was plenty of evidence last week to stimulate hopes that rates would
be cut.
A raft of statistics showed it is more likely than not that Germany's
stagnation will deteriorate into a recession, for example, an adjusted 0.5
per cent fall in third-quarter gross domestic product from the previous
quarter, and a 2 per cent contraction in industrial output in October
against the previous month, and a plunge in manufacturing orders.
The worse the state of the economy, the better the outlook for inflation and
ultimately interest rates.
Taken together with signs of wage restraint - last week steel-workers in the
north-western region of Germany settled for an effective 3.3 per cent a year
between 1992 and 1994 and the insurance industry for 4.3 per cent - it is
not surprising the bund market staged a rally later in the week, with prices
rising across the yield curve on Thursday and Friday.
However, these positive market developments have to be balanced against a
number of factors which make it unlikely that the cut will come this week.
Inflation is still running at 3.7 per cent - annualised M3 growth for
October was at more than 10 per cent, compared with the 3.5-5.5 per cent
target range - and the Bundesbank has made it clear in recent weeks that the
battle against inflation is its chief priority.
Furthermore, the greater the political pressure to abandon this orthodoxy -
in the name of the European Monetary System, for example - the more stubborn
the central bank is likely to be in defence of its position. At present, the
political pressure is enormous, with the French franc under fire and the
European Community summit in Edinburgh looming.
For this reason the Bundesbank, embarrassed at the way its last interest cut
in September was presented as a victory for the politicians, is unlikely to
deliver even a token cut on Thursday.
The consequences for the EMS are of secondary importance to the preservation
of the central bank's credibility in the battle against domestic inflation.
More likely is a gradual easing from the first quarter of next year - after
the public sector wage round has started in the first half of January.
The deteriorating outlook for the real economy may then start to affect
prices. Inflation is being driven upwards by increases in rents and services
and is likely to be pushed above 4 per cent from the beginning of next year
because of rise in the rate of value added tax to 15 per cent from January
1.
The problem for investors in the bund market is that a gradual sinking of
interest rates in the first months of next year has already been discounted.
The yield curve has flattened out. Mr Thomas Mayer, chief economist at
Goldman Sachs in Frankfurt, says that the best investment opportunities are
at the shorter end of the curve - that is, bunds with maturities of two
years where yields are at 7.37 per cent against 7.10 per cent for 4-5 year
bunds and 7.33 per cent for 10-year bunds.
Mr Mayer believes long bunds may test the 7.00 per cent mark in the first
quarter of next year if interest rates do come down.
In the meantime, he is advising clients who wish to invest in D-Marks to put
their cash on deposit for six months, where they can obtain 8.5 per cent
interest.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3540</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / US Money and Credit: Market rallies on signs of recovery
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN FRIEDMAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
CONVENTIONAL bond market psychology was stood on its head on Friday, when
the benchmark 30-year Treasury issue staged a powerful rally on the back of
a series of encouraging macro-economic statistics that appeared to signal a
strengthening of the US recovery.
Normally, investors in the bond market take flight when the economy looks
better, on the grounds that good news means the Federal Reserve is less
likely to make further cuts in interest rates.
But last Friday's jobs data - showing the US unemployment rate for November
down from 7.4 per cent to 7.2 per cent - caused a   25/32 rise in the price
of the 30-year Treasury bond, with bond investors apparently as enthusiastic
as their counterparts in the equity market.
The yield on 30-year paper declined from 7.55 per cent to 7.48 per cent on
Friday.
The bond market's unusual reaction to the jobs data, which followed other
encouraging signs, can be explained in part as a function of investor
expectations about the likely fiscal measures planned by the incoming
administration.
The logic of bond investors was that if the economy's recovery is shown to
be more buoyant than was thought to be the case, then President Clinton
might reduce the size of his job-creation and other spending measures aimed
at stimulating the economy.
A more modest package of fiscal stimuli would appeal to investors concerned
that too much new spending would worsen the deficit and have a broadly
inflationary impact.
That in turn could require the government to issue more Treasury paper to
pay for the stimuli, creating a greater supply in the market and depressing
bond prices generally.
Some US economists were remarkably bullish on Friday. 'The economy is up and
running; we're out of the rut,' said Mr Allen Sinai, an economist at Boston
Co Economic Advisers.
Yet sceptics abound. Salomon Brothers, for example, noted that the new jobs
data confirmed the US economy was 'ending its long flirtation with
recession,' though the investment bank reckoned that the signs of recovery
were still insufficient to convince fiscal policy makers to abandon plans
for fresh stimuli.
Salomon summed up its cautious view by saying that while 'the US job engine
has shifted from reverse to forward, it remains in first gear', while
analysts at Donaldson, Lufkin and Jenrette termed the fledgling economic
improvement 'far from robust.'
Mr Phillip Braverman, chief economist at DKB Securities in New York, was
even more bearish. 'The strength of recent economic reports is largely
explained away by special factors. The economy remains stagnant, requiring
fiscal stimulus and Fed easing.'
This week's economic data will include the release of November producer
price numbers on Thursday, with a 0.1 per cent rise forecast by many, and
consumer price figures for last month on Friday, with a consensus forecast
of a 0.2 per cent increase.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3541</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / UK Gilts: Conflicting signals cloud outlook
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER MARSH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
INVESTORS are in a confused mood as a result of conflicting signals about
the outlook for bonds.
Gilts closed on Friday on a high note, shrugging off the downturn in prices
at the start of the week and the slightly disappointing outcome to the
auction last Wednesday of Pounds 2.5bn of securities from the Bank of
England.
However, the stronger pound helped spark buying pressure for gilts and bonds
finished on Friday largely unchanged on the previous week.
Over the past two weeks short-dated gilts have seen a moderate rise in
yields and fall in prices, as expectations about further cuts in base rates
have eased. That has fitted in with generally more bullish sentiment about a
weak recovery in the UK next year, as reflected by a strong tone recently on
the London stock market.
It is generally reckoned that the government is unlikely to want to sanction
further cuts in base rates, now 7 per cent, before early next year.
The auction last Wednesday of 8 per cent bonds due in 2003 received bids
only about 1.3 times above the value of gilts on sale, a figure for the
'cover ratio' considered to be fairly low. Overseas investors mainly stayed
away from the auction, leaving most of the stock to be picked up by domestic
institutions.
Although the Bank of England was probably reasonably happy with the day's
events, the auction did not augur particularly well for the run of auctions
expected over the next year as the Bank tries to sell a large volume of
securities to pay for Britain's burgeoning public sector borrowing
requirement.
Mr John Shepperd, an economist at S. G. Warburg Securities, said overseas
support for the auction was 'fairly close to negligible'.
He said this was not a good sign, bearing in mind the Bank would have to try
to sell large volumes of securities to non-UK institutions in the 1993-94
financial year when the Treasury expects the PSBR to be around Pounds 44bn,
after a projected Pounds 37bn in 1992-93.
'Britain will almost certainly need large purchases of gilts by foreigners
over the next two years; it would be wrong to think that domestic
institutions will be in a position to buy all the gilts that will be on
offer,' said Mr Shepperd.
Demand for gilts during the week, however, was boosted by the strong gains
made by the pound against a D-Mark weakened by growing indications about a
German economic slowdown.
On Friday, sterling finished in London more than 1 pfennig stronger on the
day against the D-Mark at DM2.4875. That represented a gain of slightly more
than 7 pfennigs on the week and was its highest closing level since
mid-October.
Some of the strength in the UK currency was due to indications that a
fragile recovery may be about to start, a development which might have been
expected to reduce demand for gilts on the grounds that inflationary
pressures could be expected to increase.
But according to Mr Ian Blance, an economist at Nikko Securities in London,
gilt investors are, if anything, hoping that a recovery will start
relatively soon.
That is on the grounds that an upturn, even a modest one, will reduce the
strains on the PSBR resulting from large increases in unemployment pay and a
reduced tax take. As a result, an economic recovery could remove some of the
strains on the gilt market arising from expectations of large volumes of
price-depressing gilts issues.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3542</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / International Company News: Grupo Torras move is bitterly
criticised - KIO's departure from Spain may have further repercussions
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER BRUCE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE DECISION last Friday by the Kuwait Investment Office to place its
Spanish holding company, Grupo Torras, into receivership has provoked fierce
criticism of the KIO in Spain and threatens to open an unprecedented
political inquiry in Kuwait.
Influential Spanish newspapers said this weekend Torras receivership was a
betrayal of promises made by the new KIO management to the Spanish
government.
In Kuwait, critics of the ruling al-Sabah family, closely identified with
the former management of the KIO and Torras, called for the assets of people
involved with Torras to be frozen.
An opposition newspaper in the emirate called the affair 'the theft of the
century'.
The KIO's departure from Spain was colourful. Mr Mahmoud al-Nouri, who has
run Torras since June, trooped into a press conference with a string of
legal advisers in tow. One read out the results of an investigation into the
past management of the KIO's six-year investment spree in Spain. These were
a Dollars 2bn loss on share trades, a Dollars 700m loss on share support
schemes and a Dollars 600m loss on short-term financing.
Another, hired to prepare charges against the former Torras management, said
he was still not sure who would be charged, what the charges would be and
when they would be brought.
Mr al-Nouri said Torras was in a much worse state than originally believed,
that the KIO had lost Dollars 4bn in Spain (adding Dollars 700m to the
lawyer's estimates), and that it had no choice but to call in the receivers.
In fact, the KIO has known for months what state Torras was in. But after
nearly six months of alleging misappropriation by former managers,
particularly Mr Javier de la Rosa, the financier who ran the KIO's
investments in Spain until last June, the KIO was facing a sticky problem.
At some stage the KIO would have to take some responsibility for the Torras
businesses not already driven into receivership or cut off from funding
since June. By getting out now, it could still explain the receivership away
as a consequence of past betrayals.
But the Spanish press, which has taken the new Torras management seriously
until now, did not see it that way.
Expansion, a business daily, called on Madrid to protest to the Kuwaiti
government.
'The sorry witch hunt and the allegations of the new management . . . have
ceased to interest the public and cannot be used to justify the clumsiness
and lack of management of the new leadership (of Torras),' it said.
Among daily newspapers, El Mundo called the receivership a 'state fraud' and
said the move threatened 100,000 Spanish jobs, directly and indirectly.
El Pais blamed Mr de la Rosa for the Torras collapse, but said the KIO and
Kuwait had 'betrayed' Spain for failing to fulfil a promise made two months
ago to invest a fresh Dollars 1bn in the Torras group.
Although the receivership affects only Torras and not its surviving
industrial affiliates, these companies are now vulnerable - particularly
Spain's biggest paper-maker, Torraspapel. In September the KIO promised to
inject Dollars 400m into the company but has so far transferred only Dollars
180m.
Torraspapel will have to find the rest itself, but many unhappy banks are
already owed money by now-deserted Torras affiliates. 'The public campaign
against de la Rosa has hurt all the companies, even the good ones,'
commented one independent corporate analyst in Madrid. 'There is no goodwill
left.'
What Friday's departure does leave behind are questions. Last December one
KIO auditor, KPMG Peat Marwick, valued Torras' assets at Dollars 2.9bn,
saying they had cost Dollars 4.4bn. For the KIO to say it has lost all
Dollars 4.4bn is to imply, improbably, that Dollars 2.9bn has vanished in
the past year alone, the last half of it under new management. And Peat
Marwick warned then that a 'forced sale (of assets) in the current European
recessionary climate could result in a significant loss of the investment
made by the KIO to date.'
The Kuwaitis appear to have decided to take the loss anyway, as the price,
at least, of a quick retribution against de la Rosa and former KIO managers
whom they believe have enriched themselves at Kuwait's expense.
It is important for the reputations of the KIO and its advisers that they
make a legal case in Spain that sticks. But even an unsuccessful prosecution
is likely to open a political Pandora's box inside Kuwait.
Former Spanish and KIO managers could implicate members of the al-Sabah
family in the Torras debacle. Already forced to devolve more political
power, the Emir now faces constant pressure for greater transparency in the
management of Kuwait's finances.
'The secrecy which has surrounded (the Spanish) investments was a big
mistake. The people must know,' Mr Jassem al-Saadoun, an adviser to the new
Kuwaiti parliament, said at the weekend.
'The time has come to punish those who abused public money and to freeze
their money while the judicial authorities have investigated this tragedy,'
said Mr Abdul-Jalil al-Gharabali, a former consultant to the Kuwaiti central
bank.
The political prize in Kuwait is control of its oil revenues. So far this
has been the reserve of some of the al-Sabahs, but Kuwait is changing fast.
Mixing the KIO's Spanish adventure into Kuwait's freer post-war politics
could cause further problems.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3543</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADTFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / International Company News: US-UK joint venture in new TV
technology
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RAYMOND SNODDY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
NATIONAL Trans-communications of the UK has signed a joint venture agreement
with Scientific Atlanta of the US to develop digital compression television
equipment, writes Raymond Snoddy. Digital compression offers the ability to
squeeze several television channels into the space currently occupied by
one.
NTL, the privatised former transmission and research arm of the Independent
Broadcasting Authority and Scientific Atlanta, have agreed to share
technical knowledge and will jointly market products for the terrestrial,
cable and satellite television industries.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3544</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADSFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / International Company News: Cornelissen quits Royal Trustco
directorship
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT GIBBENS
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MONTREAL
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
MR MICHAEL Cornelissen, who headed Royal Trustco for 10 years during its
international expansion, has resigned as a director and will not now become
vice-chairman.
Royal Trustco is Canada's second-biggest trust company and a key member of
the Edper group controlled by the Toronto Bronfman family. It reported a
third-quarter loss of CDollars 243m (USDollars 190m) after write-downs on
North American and UK property investments, and has sold its US affiliate
Pacific First Financial.
Its domestic trust business remains profitable.
Mr Cornelissen stepped down as chief executive in September. Mr James
Miller, 61, a chartered accountant, took over last week as chief executive,
a month earlier than expected.
Mr Hartland MacDougall, chairman, said: 'Mr Cornelissen thought it best for
personal reasons to sever all ties.'
Laurentian Bank, controlled by the Laurentian financial services group,
reported profits for the year ended August 31 of CDollars 38.7m, up 13 per
cent from the previous year.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3545</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / International Company News: Management shake-up for Dow
Chemical
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN FRIEDMAN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
DOW CHEMICAL, the second biggest US chemicals group, has unveiled a
reorganisation aimed at creating a more flexible management structure to
improve international competitiveness.
The company, which suffered a 35 per cent decline in third-quarter net
income to Dollars 145m, called the reorganisation a streamlining.
At the heart of the changes is a new division of management responsibilities
for Mr Frank Popoff, the chairman, and Mr William Stavropoulous, who becomes
president and chief operating officer next April.
Mr Popoff will be responsible for all Dow divisions as well as the Marion
Merell Dow pharmaceuticals subsidiary. Mr Stavropoulous will be responsible
for three core global businesses.
A six-person executive committee, including Mr Popoff and Mr Stavropoulous,
will take responsibility for long-term business strategies and finance.
Dow will discontinue its corporate product department and replace it with
global core business groups focused on plastics, chemicals and performance
products.
These will be headed by new group vice-presidents who will report to Mr
Stavropoulous.
Dow's management of Canada, Mexico and the US will be consolidated into a
North American area, to be based at corporate headquarters in Midland,
Michigan.
'Our present organisation has served us well over the past three decades,'
Mr Popoff explained yesterday.
'The new organisation will serve Dow's needs by maintaining flexibility to
adapt to change and enhancing global competitiveness,' he added.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3546</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / International Company News: Leading executive at Generali
resigns
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HAIG SIMONIAN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MILAN
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
MR Fabio Fegitz, one of Generali's three managing directors, has resigned
from the Italian insurance company. The surprise departure, for 'personal
reasons', immediately triggered speculation about differences of opinion
among top management at Italy's biggest insurer.
Mr Fegitz had previously headed the company's London operations for 27
years.
But some observers maintained his resignation owed more to the difficulties
of re-establishing himself at a highly bureaucratic head office in Trieste
than a clash over strategy.
The company forecast an unchanged loss in its non-life underwriting
activities this year, based on figures for the first nine months, while
earnings from life insurance were set to rise. In 1991, Generali lost
L112.8bn (Dollars 80.5m) in non-life underwriting and made L493.4bn on the
life side.
It gave no absolute figures for its nine-months results in either life or
non-life business.
However, it said the claims ratio on its Italian non-life business had
started to improve after years of steady decline. The company attributed the
change to better market conditions and more careful selection of risks.
The company, which last year made net earnings of L563.9bn, made no 1992
profits forecast. But it said this year's earnings would be swollen by
exchange rate factors, whereas new Italian tax measures would have a
negative effect.
Group premiums in the first nine months rose by 26.2 per cent to L11,330bn
from L8,981bn at the end of September last year. Adjusted for exchange
rates, overall premiums climbed by 13.2 per cent, with a 15.6 per cent rise
in life insurance and a 11 per cent increase on the non-life side.
Although investment income jumped by 29 per cent in the first nine months,
Generali warned that profits from trading would be 'satisfactory' but below
last year's level.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3547</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / International Company News: Airline recovery helps Club Med
back into black
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALICE RAWSTHORN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   PARIS
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
CLUB Mediterranee, one of the largest French leisure groups, returned to
profit last year following a recovery in its airline business.
The group, which has been expanding its cruise ship interests but is still
best known for its holiday villages, made net profits of FFr160m (Dollars
29.62m) in the year to October 31, against a loss of FFr17m in the previous
year.
However, Club Med did not perform as well as it had hoped, falling below the
FFr240m of net profits initially expected.
The shortfall was largely due to the poor performance of its US subsidiary,
which suffered an unexpectedly sharp fall in profits during the first nine
months of 1992.
The drop reflected higher costs and the US dollar's weakness against the
French franc.
Club Med yesterday attributed its return to profits in 1991-92 to reasonably
stable activity during the financial year.
It also managed to prevent the recurrence of the exceptional losses on its
airline activities that hit the previous year's results.
During that year Club Med, in common with other holiday companies, was badly
affected by the impact of the Gulf war on international travel.
The group said its winter trading had so far been relatively stable compared
with that of last year and there had been an improvement in the performance
of its US and Asian businesses.
Club Med is in the throes of a renovation and expansion programme and this
summer launched a FFr1bn bond issue to finance its plans.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3548</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Estates &amp; General completes bank talks
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Estates &amp; General, property investor and developer, has completed
formalities surrounding discussions with its bankers regarding continuing
support to the company and enhancement in its working capital facilities.
As part of the arrangements the directors and related parties were making an
unsecured loan to the company of Pounds 250,000. Also, Pounds 389,000 of
additional loan notes due as deferred and final consideration for the
acquisition of Norman Reeves had have fallen due and were are being issued
to NR shareholders.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3549</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Doubts on going concern message - Auditors'
reports of 'little value' says a recent study
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW JACK
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
AUDITORS' reports in annual accounts are of little value in showing whether
a company's survival is threatened, an academic study has found.
There is little correlation between the incidence of the 'going concern'
doubts and Auditors' reports of 'little value' says a recentstudy corporate
collapse, according to a paper by Mr David Citron and Professor Richard
Taffler of the City University Business School in London.
Under existing guidelines, auditors are supposed to qualify the accounts of
any companies over which they believe there are materials factors which
could threaten its survival.
But Mr Citron said yester day: 'The going concern qualification is not
giving a very substantial message.
The study, based on an analysis of the accounts of the 107 UK quoted
industrial and distribution companies which failed during 1977-86, showed
that only 26 per cent had a going concern qualification.
These were the companies which were very clearly financially weak and about
to fail. Auditors often claim they are restrained from giving a
qualification for fear that the company might collapse as a result.
But the study shows that 71 per cent of companies given the going
concernqualification survived, and the failure rate was no higher among
these companies than those in which theaccounts were not qualified.
The report does suggest that auditors may not qualify the accounts for fear
of losing their contract with the client. Companies which were given a going
concern qualification and survived were more likely to switch their audit
firm.
Overall, small audit firms behaved no differently than the largest nine
firms.
The findings are particularly relevant because the Auditing Practices Board
earlier this year launched a discussion document calling for substantial
changes in the 'going concern' qualification.
Under the proposals, auditors would be required to assess more actively the
directors' view of the company as a going concern over the coming 12 months.
They should use their judgment to identify 'material matters' such as
inadequate borrowing facilities, litigation or significant debts falling due
which might jeopardise its position.
The value of the audit report in the presence of going concern
uncertainties: an empirical analysis. City University Business School,
Frobisher Crescent, Barbican Centre, London EC2Y 8HB.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3550</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / UK Company News: LBC owner hits new hitch over French sale
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID BUCHAN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   PARIS
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
CROWN Communications, the financially-troubled owner of LBC, the
London-based radio station, has hit another hitch in its bid to sell some of
its stake in RFM, its French commercial station.
The CSA, the French broadcasting authority, said it had still not received
sufficient clarity on the bid by Mr Alain Ayache, owner of Le Meilleur
magazine, and of Mr Jean-Paul Baudecroux of the NRJ group for Crown's
controlling stake.
It said it wanted further information on the proposed capital and nature of
the bid before making a ruling.
NRJ, after having an earlier bid turned down by the broadcasting authority,
has since been joined in its endeavour by Mr Ayache.
But this has apparently not relieved the CSA's concern about undue
concentration.
Crown has been seeking to raise money from the sale of its RFM stake, but
recently entered negotiations with Dame Shirley Porter, the controversial
Conservative politician, who is said to be interested in taking a stake in
LBC.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3551</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Tomorrows Leisure Pounds 110,000 in loss
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Tomorrows Leisure, the USM-quoted hotels and leisure group, ran up a loss of
Pounds 110,000 pre-tax for the half year ended September 30.
That compared with previous profits of Pounds 422,000 and was scored after
taking account of a swing from interest receivable of Pounds 142,000 to
charges of Pounds 395,000.
Turnover improved by 22 per cent to Pounds 4.48m. Losses per share of 0.9p
compared with earnings of 2.7p.
The interim dividend is again being passed.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3552</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Wiltshire Brewery reduces losses
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Wiltshire Brewery's capital restructuring has been approved at an
extraordinary meeting, placing UB Group, India's largest brewer, in
management control.
Mr Vijay Mallya, chairman of UB, becomes chairman of Wiltshire and Mr O'Neal
Nalavadi, chief operating executive. His group and his family will take
about 16 per cent of the enlarged group.
Wiltshire reported a reduced pre-tax loss for the six months to May 31 down
from Pounds 324,851 to Pounds 283,607 on sales doubled to Pounds 1.33m.
Wiltshire's tenanted estate grew from 26 to 40 during the period and has
expanded further to 78 as a result of the restructuring.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3553</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Gartmore Value revenue rises
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Net asset value per share fell over the six months to October 31 from 27.4p
to 16.8p at Gartmore Value Investments. However, the figure per zero
dividend preference share improved from 72.1p to 76.7p.
Net revenue for the half year to the end of October was Pounds 779,000
(Pounds 754,000) giving earnings per share of 1.57p (1.52p). As already
announced, an increased second interim of 0.9525p (0.925p) is being paid.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3554</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Hambros Investment net asset value lower
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Hambros Investment Trust, a subsidiary of Hambros, had a net asset value of
46.44p at September 30 against 46.54p a year earlier and 46.78p at the March
31 year end.
There was a net loss of Pounds 175,000 for the half year compared with
profits of Pounds 71,000, which translated into losses per share of 0.34p
(earnings 0.08p).
The deficit resulted from the sale of and revaluation of investments.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3555</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Burtonwood in Pounds 5m expansion
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Burtonwood Brewery has agreed to buy 34 public houses from Tetley Walker for
a cash consideration of Pounds 5m.
Cheshire-based Burtonwood was confident that the contribution from about
9,000 extra barrels would improve the utilisation of brewery capacity and
thus increase its profitability.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3556</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Crossroads Oil Pounds 107,000 in loss
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
For the six months ending September 30 the USM-quoted Crossroads Oil Group
incurred an unchanged operating loss of Pounds 80,112.
The after-tax loss emerged at Pounds 106,903. That compared with profits of
Pounds 267,368 which included exceptional revenue of Pounds 377,142. Losses
per share worked through at 0.25p (earnings 0.75p).
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3557</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Tops Estates slips to Pounds 0.92m
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Pre-tax profits of Tops Estates, the property investment group, declined by
32 per cent, from Pounds 1.34m to Pounds 918,000, in the six months to
end-September.
The outcome was struck on rental income after outgoings down from Pounds
5.07m to Pounds 4.98m.
Earnings came out at 1.33p (1.92p) and the interim dividend is increased by
5 per cent to 0.5775p (0.55p).
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3558</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Losses continue at Tex
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
DESPITE cost reduction measures, Tex Holdings, the maker and supplier of
consumables to the plastic, steel and energy industries, announced pre-tax
losses of Pounds 146,000 for the half year to September 30.
There were profits of Pounds 57,000 last time although for the year to March
losses of Pounds 396,000 were reported.
Turnover declined from Pounds 8.2m to Pounds 7.9m.
Mr Richard Burrows, the chairman, said that sales and margins remained under
pressure.
The directors have continued to reduce the group's cost base, he said, while
at the same time taking initiatives to boost sales by increasing market
share.
Losses per share emerged at 1.6p (0.4p earnings).
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3559</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Sun Alliance clears way to open Beijing
office
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD LAPPER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SUN ALLIANCE has obtained approval from the Chinese authorities to establish
a representative office in Beijing.
This paves the way for it to eventually conduct direct business in one of
the world's potentially biggest insurance markets.
The move follows the agreement earlier this year of a co-operation agreement
with the People's Insurance Company of China and was in line with Sun
Alliance's strategy of building a presence in the Far East.
The company has recently established links with Lucky Insurance Company in
Korea and with Taisho in Japan. In September it consolidated its position in
Australia by merging its local operations with those of Royal Insurance and
taking a 60 per cent stake in the new company.
The office would be used to conduct research into the Chinese market, but
would help Sun Alliance underwrite reinsurance for PICC.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3560</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Alan Sugar remains pessimistic over deal
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD GOURLAY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MR ALAN Sugar yesterday remained pessimistic about gaining the support of
shareholders who appear strongly opposed to his proposal to take Amstrad
private.
With the approach of tomorrow's deadline for proxy votes, ahead of the
extraordinary meeting on Thursday, Mr Sugar repeated the suggestion that
shareholders should act.
Some of the 20,000 shareholders who had not voted but who expected a cheque
in the post for their shares 'might be in for a surprise,' he said.
'The interesting thing is what happens to the share price tomorrow,' Mr
Sugar said last night.
Results of proxies received by Thursday evening suggesting Mr Sugar was
losing his battle to take Amstrad private came on Friday after the market
closed.
Amstrad shares closed unchanged on Friday at 28p, 2p below the price Mr
Sugar is offering to buy the 65 per cent of Amstrad shares he does not
already own.
Amstrad on Saturday ended its telephone campaign to persuade shareholders to
send in proxy cards.
The campaign which was financed by Amstrad and policed by Amstrad's
advisers, Kleinwort Benson, involved individual calls to thousands of
Amstrad shareholders.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3561</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / A corporate titan forged from plastic: American Express's
chief executive
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN FRIEDMAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
The impending resignation of Mr Jim Robinson as chief executive of American
Express may come to be seen as yet another symbol of the almost fin de
siecle atmosphere of post-1980s Wall Street.
Few US corporate titans - and even fewer US companies - so symbolised the
heady times of the last decade as did Mr Robinson and American Express.
A mythology grew up around the socially ambitious Mr Robinson and his wife,
a prominent public relations partner of one of President George Bush's
former re-election campaign advisers.
Both Mr Robinson and the company prospered mightily during most of the
1980s, as consumer spending rose steadily and the American Express card
earned hefty fees as a prestige product.
Mr Robinson in turn portrayed himself as a grand strategist who added to the
group's traditional card and travellers cheque products an array of sister
businesses that included stockbroking and investment banking (Shearson
Lehman Hutton), private and commercial banking (Mr Edmond Safra's Trade
Development Bank) and, for a time, even the cable television business
(Warner Amex Cable).
His deal-making included a failed attempt to acquire Walt Disney. American
Express's diversification brought more problems than benefits and the
group's fortunes remain more than ever tied to its core businesses.
The cable television venture was sold in 1985, just before it became
profitable. Shearson Lehman suffered large losses a couple of years ago and
Mr Robinson forced out Mr Peter Cohen, the firm's chairman. And Mr Safra and
American Express went through a costly divorce, culminating in a humbling
1989 apology by Mr Robinson when it emerged that American Express employees
had engaged in a smear campaign against Mr Safra.
More recently American Express has suffered conflicts with rebellious
retailers and heavy losses in its Optima credit card business.
Earlier this year Mr Robinson acknowledged the need to bolster capital and
reduce staff. Some 6,500 employees have been made redundant in the 1991-92
period, with related restructuring charges totalling Dollars 607m (Pounds
390m). The last third-quarter results from the company showed a Dollars 205m
loss.
Perhaps the biggest problem Mr Robinson faced was that the American Express
card used to be a high-priced product aimed at an affluent market. Now the
card has lost much of its lustre and is facing stiff competition from banks
and non-banks.
Mr John Keefe, an analyst and veteran Robinson-watcher, yesterday summed up
the problem: 'American Express succeeded and grew as a premium priced
product, but by the end of the 1980s premium pricing was no longer what the
market wanted. The market wanted value, not prestige. Yet American Express
clung to its premium pricing and customers no longer wanted it.'
A handful of books highly critical of Mr Robinson's management appeared
earlier this year and the man once known as the 'Teflon' chairman found
himself under fire on Wall Street.
One American Express executive said recently that the company lost touch
with the market. 'We became arrogant, insensitive and profoundly stuck in
our ways, with a huge, inflexible bureaucracy that was very hard to move.'
Yesterday, in an interview with the FT, Mr Robinson conceded that this
description of American Express was accurate. 'I think it's an appropriate
characterisation,' he said.
He stressed that he had said as much in an unusually contrite letter to
shareholders last March. In that letter he wrote: 'For years we were able to
remain above the fray of credit card competition. But bank card issuers have
turned their sights on our primary markets - the affluent households and
travel and entertainment spenders.'
Yesterday Mr Robinson denied strongly that he was being pushed out of his
job and insisted he had never wished to serve more than 15 years as chief
executive. He said he was keen to continue working on the group's recovery
plans. He said he wished his 15-year tenure to be remembered as: 'Total
quality management.'
Unfortunately for Mr Robinson, that is not how most on Wall Street perceive
his record. Although he is credited by some as a man of vision, most
analysts feel that in retrospect Mr Robinson presided over an ad hoc series
of opportunistic acquisitions that ultimately produced an unwieldy
conglomerate. Its costs and capacity proved excessive once the boom years of
the 1980s were replaced by the austerity of the 1990s.
As for management, Mr Robinson broke with several top executives, including
Mr Sandy Weill, who left as president in 1985 to take over as chairman of
Primerica, the financial services group, and Mr Lou Gerstner, the talented
president who left in 1989 to become chairman of RJR Nabisco.
It was only in July 1991, after criticism from Wall Street that the
president's post had been vacant for two years, that Mr Robinson named Mr
Harvey Golub, his heir apparent, to the job.
The truth is that Mr Robinson has become increasingly embattled at American
Express in recent months. There is only one other top US financial executive
whose tenure has been the subject of as much speculation - Mr John Reed, the
chairman of Citicorp who appears now to be correcting that bank's problems
by bolstering capital and cutting overheads.
American Express has clearly been trying to change its culture, but few
expect a speedy improvement in profitability.
For the first nine months of 1992 net income was Dollars 380m, down from
Dollars 551m in the same period of last year. Optima is not expected to
return to the black before next year and competition in the card market has
become tougher than ever.
'This is really another bill to be paid for the 1980s,' said Mr Keefe,
commenting on Mr Robinson's plans to resign next year as chief executive.
In a letter to American Express employees, Mr Robinson said yesterday he
planned to spend more of his remaining time working on 'the next phase' at
Shearson Lehman with Mr Howard Clark, the former American Express chief
financial officer who was sent to Shearson as chairman in 1990.
Many think that American Express may eventually seek to divest itself of
Shearson Lehman, although Mr Robinson said in his letter that the goal was
to bring the subsidiary to the point where it could improve its credit
rating with a strong capital base.
His letter to staff had the tone of a man looking backward, as he thanked
the workforce 'for the tremendous effort so many of you have made during the
past year'. Part of his personal objective, Mr Robinson wrote yesterday, 'is
to ensure a smooth passing of the leadership baton as we move ahead'.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3562</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAC9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Economics Notebook: Spotlight on Italy's privileged tax
refugees
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT GRAHAM
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   ROME
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Holders of Italian short-term treasury paper are disarmingly nicknamed the
'Bot-people'.
These are the individuals and institutions who have traditionally taken
refuge from Italy's hostile world of inflation, threats from the taxman and
volatile stock market by relying on the security of treasury bills (BOTs).
The Bot-people have been assiduously courted by successive post-war
governments and have been given enormous privileges.
Bearers of Bots are anonymous and pay income tax on interest at a minimal
12.5 per cent. Interest rates offered are extremely attractive, currently
some 7 per cent in real terms.
In a country with a large parallel economy and punitive tax rates on
declared income, state guaranteed paper has been - and still is - an
unbeatable investment for those with only lira expenses.
Indeed Italy is the last country in the EC where the state courts the
investor in such a generous manner.
This, though, is not surprising. Italy has long run a budget deficit, which
has steadily been increasing as the debt stock has grown.
Total accumulated debt has risen from 58 per cent of GDP in 1980 (the
maximum set by the now much criticised 1991 Maastricht Treaty) to the
current 104 per cent.
The 1993 budget deficit consists entirely of debt service payments.
State paper has to be attractive to finance the deficit and because of the
exchange risk to outsiders it is chiefly attractive to Italians.
As a result although Italy accounts for almost a third of all EC debt, only
6.5 per cent of this is held by foreigners. The rest is in the hands of
Italians and Italian institutions.
The enormous needs of the treasury, coupled with the advantages of state
paper, have led Italy consistently to possess one of the highest savings
ratios in Europe.
Financing the debt has also created a peculiarly distorted savings profile.
According to Bank of Italy figures, the average family savings portfolio is
12.7 per cent in short-term state paper (basically Bots) and 18.8 per cent
in medium and long-term state paper. This compares with a combined total
under the two headings of 2.7 per cent in France and 1.7 per cent in the UK.
This distortion in the direction of savings has mattered little until now.
But with the Amato committed to a major programme of privatisation over the
next three to four years, the distortion has been brought into focus.
The government is planning to raise almost L40,000bn (Pounds 18bn) during
this period through divestiture and partial sell-off of banks and industrial
companies.
Foreign capital of necessity is expected to play a considerable part, but
most will have to come from domestic sources at a time of recession and
projected sluggish growth.
In tandem with financing (and hopefully reducing) the debt, the government
has to encourage investors, especially the Bot-people, to switch their
attention to the bourse.
For the world's fifth industrial power, the bourse is a Cinderella compared
with Italy's main partners.
The turnover volume in relation to GDP is less than half that of France and
a quarter that of the UK, according to the latest government assessments in
privatisation documents.
Last year average daily turnover was L124bn and in the period
January-September of this year it fell to an average of L106bn.
Since 1985 only on nine occasions has daily turnover risen above L500bn, and
of these eight occurred in the boom year of 1986 with one record of L800bn.
That record year saw new issues and company capital increases of L14,500bn.
But this year so far the figure new issues and capital increases is a little
above L2,300bn, and almost entirely has been accounted for by two issues -
one from the STET, the state-controlled telephone holding, and San Paolo di
Torino, the bank.
Treasury experts estimate without changes in the bourse's operations and
fresh investment incentives its capacity to raise funds has a ceiling of
around 5 per cent of total capitalisation, or less than L10,000bn a year.
Yet if the privatisation programme proceeds, the total value of new issues
and capital increases next year alone will be close to L20,000bn  - double
the present capacity.
In part the bourse bears blame for failing to modernise and for its lack of
transparency that has created a strong odour of insider dealing.
However, the government has never provided incentives to encourage share
ownership largely through fear of damaging the demand for state paper. To
make risk investment in the stock market more attractive, the government is
studying a number of measures.
First of these is to provide a package of fiscal incentives for share
ownership.
Second is the development of pension funds (less than 9 per cent of pensions
are paid into pension funds).
A third idea is to permit the exchange of state paper for shares in newly
privatised companies.
A more controversial move, which the government has constantly denied
contemplating, is that of raising the tax paid on Bots which account for
nearly a third of state paper.
At a time when the government is seeking to raise fiscal revenues and create
a more rational tax structure, the continued privileges of the Bot-people
are an increasing anomaly.
Nevertheless, the howls of protest which have greeted suggestions in recent
months that the government might tax Bots higher - or freeze interest
payments - underline how sensitive the issue is.
Such a move might only be palatable if compensatory tax breaks were offered
on share ownership. But this would mean Italians accepting the concept of
greater risk with their savings, and it still leaves the treasury with the
need to fund a huge deficit.
The resolution of this dilemma holds the key to Italy developing a fully
fledged capital market.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3563</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAC8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Barclays to offer new form of finance
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TRACY CORRIGAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BARCLAYS Bank will this week become the first European bank to provide
companies with a new form of short-term financing which will allow them to
build up their order books without borrowing directly from banks.
Barclays has set up a special-purpose company which buys from companies the
right to money owed on export sales (known as trade receivables) then sells
short-dated debt (commercial paper) backed by the receivables in the
international market.
The structure provides an alternative to overdrafts, bank facilities or
credit lines and may help ease the credit squeeze suffered by mid-sized
companies.
'As we come out of recession, companies will need money quickly and the
banks will not be able to provide it,' said Mr James France, director of
Barclays de Zoete Wedd's asset securitisation group. The Barclays vehicle is
poised to issue Dollars 80m-Dollars 90m-worth (Pounds 51m-Pounds 58m) of US
commercial paper, backed by Dollars 100m of trade receivables. But
subsequent offerings under the Dollars 1bn multi-currency programme will be
made in the Euro-commercial paper market, where regulations allow.
In the US, the asset-backed commercial paper market, mostly involving trade
receivables, has grown swiftly to around Dollars 50bn. This type of
repackaging of assets, known as securitisation, has already been widely
applied to mortgages, car and personal loans, which are sold to investors as
asset-backed bonds.
Several US banks, including Citibank, have also become active in Europe,
mainly securitising US companies' European receivables. The business is
typically dominated by clearing banks, which already lend to the companies
involved, and so are well positioned to offer alternative financing.
Most of the companies involved in the Barclays' structure so far are from
Sweden, Italy and Spain. The crisis in the Swedish banking industry has
forced Swedish companies to seek alternative sources of funds.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3564</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAC7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Forte to sell its catering unit and expand in Europe
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER, Leisure Industries Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
FORTE is this week expected to move closer to its aim of becoming a more
internationally-based hotel and restaurant group with the sale of its
Gardner Merchant catering division, the acquisition of a chain of French
motorway restaurants and the conclusion of an agreement to run 18 hotels in
Italy.
The sale of Gardner Merchant to a consortium led by CinVen, the UK's second
largest venture capital investor, for Pounds 400m could be announced today
or tomorrow. The Gardner Merchant management will have a small stake in the
business.
An attempt by the Gardner Merchant management to acquire the business,
backed by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts (KKR), the New York-based leveraged
buy-out specialists, failed earlier this year, as did a takeover proposal by
the Compass catering group.
CinVen approached Forte shortly after the breakdown of negotiations with
Compass last July. CinVen, which has stakes in several Forte hotels, will
not be buying the group's airline catering interests.
Forte is also expected to announce that it is to pay Pounds 65m to Pounds
70m for more than 40 motorway restaurants in France. The restaurants were
acquired by Accor, the French hotels to luncheon vouchers group, when it
bought Wagons-Lits, the Belgian travel company, last year.
The European Commission instructed Accor to sell the restaurants last April
because they would have given the group too dominant a position.
The Wagons-Lits restaurants operate under the names of Relais, le Petit Cafe
and Truckstore Cafe.
Forte is also likely to announce in the next few days that it has concluded
an agreement to manage 18 hotels in Italy as part of a joint venture with
Agip, the state-owned petrol company. The hotels are mostly at motorway
junctions.
Forte is expected to start building early next year the first of a network
of 100 hotels and motorway restaurants in Spain in a deal with Repsol, the
Spanish state-owned energy group.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3565</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAC6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / UB protests to SME overItalian crisp sell-off
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HAIG SIMONIAN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MILAN
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
ITALY'S fledgling privat-isation programme has been hit by an unexpected
spat over a state-owned potato crisp maker.
United Biscuits, the UK-based multinational, has written to SME, the
government-owned foods group controlled by the IRI state holding company,
expressing disappointment over the sale of Pai, a potato crisp and savoury
snacks maker, to an Italian rival. Pai was sold for L30.2bn (Pounds 13.8m)
late last month to Unichips, the Italian family-owned concern.
Mr John Warren, UB's group finance director, said the transaction was
'lacking transparency'. UB said Wasserstein Perrella, the US investment bank
handling the deal, gave bidders 'just a weekend' to come up with indicative
offers. No detailed information about the company was provided.
On Friday night, SME said negotiations on the sale 'took place according to
a procedure guaranteeing all potential buyers the same level of information,
and, therefore, the possibility to make offers on a totally equal basis'.
'We noted how the bid had come about and said we might have been able to
make a better indicative offer in other circumstances,' said Mr Warren. It
has not received a reply.
The dispute over the Pai sale could be embarrassing to the Italian
government. Mr Giuliano Amato, prime minister, has pinned his hopes on
disposals as a source of income.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3566</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAC5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Countdown to 1993: Difficult marriage of customs - The chaos
likely when EC barriers come down
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW JACK and RALPH ATKINS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BRITISH businesses face the prospect of administrative chaos in complying
with customs and VAT regulations after the single European market comes into
force on January 1.
Many companies say they are worried by questions about detailed procedures,
which customs officials across the EC have yet to resolve.
'The whole thing is a total imposition,' says Mr Ken Solomons, the
accountant for Wilson &amp; Kyle, a small supplier of fuel injection equipment
in Brentford, south west London.
Wilson &amp; Kyle is one of 30,000 British companies with trade of at least
Pounds 135,000 a year with other EC states. As a result, it must file a new
statistical form called Intrastat within 10 working days from the end of
each month - on pain of criminal penalties. That could be a risk if its only
bookkeeper falls ill or goes on holiday.
Yet the company has not yet received from Customs the directory of commodity
codes required to complete the form. It says it has found ignorance,
conflicting information and inaccurate advice on preparations for the single
European market among trade associations and consulting groups. Many of its
suppliers had no idea what changes were required.
Executives at Unisys, a large US-owned computer company, appear somewhat
better prepared. Mr Bob Marshall, director of operations for distribution in
Europe and Africa, has been publicly reassuring his staff about the changes
required.
However, in private, he is less sanguine. 'We are quietly comfortable that
we will be ahead of the game,' he says. 'But if only we knew what the rules
were.'
He is particularly worried because Customs authorities in some other EC
states - notably Spain, Italy and Portugal - still have not issued details
of the procedures companies must follow.
Unisys must comply with widely differing requirements. In the UK the
Intrastat returns may be supplied electronically, but the Danes are
insisting on cumbersome paper documents.
Mr Marshall is also concerned about how to cope with 'triangulation' - the
process by which a trader in one EC country supplies to a customer in a
second through a branch plant or sub-contractor in a third.
He believes officials are only just realising the administrative
difficulties this involves and the potential for fraud that it could
generate. He has not yet received answers on how to deal with this.
From January 1, traders will no longer be required to present documents at
EC border crossings. In the UK, larger traders will instead have to complete
two new forms, and two extra boxes on their existing VAT returns.
Mr Athol Cowley, controller of the tariff and statistical office at Customs
in Southend, who is co-ordinating Intrastat, says: 'We are relatively happy
with the way things are going. My feeling is that we will achieve a pretty
high state of readiness.'
Yet by the end of last month, planned visits by UK local customs officials
had still not been made to 5,000 of the top 30,000 EC traders in Britain.
Recent internal figures show that some 6,000 traders declaring EC trade on
their VAT returns had done so incorrectly.
Mr Solomons of Wilson &amp; Kyle is unconvinced. 'It'll be a terrible shambles
in January everywhere,' he says. 'There's no question about that.'
Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, yesterday denied that
British industrialists were unaware of potential European markets, saying on
BBC radio that inquiries to his department were running at 1,000 a week,
writes Ralph Atkins.
But he confirmed that the UK is reviewing how EC directives have been
implemented.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3567</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAC4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Hindu militants push India towards crisis: Curfew imposed
after mosque is demolished
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By SHIRAZ SIDHVA and STEFAN WAGSTYL
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW DELHI, AYODHYA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
INDIA faced a political and constitutional crisis last night after Hindu
militants stormed and demolished an ancient mosque in Ayodhya, prompting
widespread fears of communal violence across the country.
Mr PV Narasimha Rao, the prime minister, appealed for calm, even as
regulatory police orders were imposed and the army alerted in many Indian
states. Addressing the nation on television, Mr Rao said his government
would go to any length to promote secularism and appealed to every citizen
to co-operate with it.
Tension escalated in several communally-sensitive states as news spread that
the disputed mosque had been demolished by hordes of Hindu militants, who
had converged on Ayodhya over the past week to protest against the
government's failure to resolve the issue.
Some 200 para-military police were inside the barricades at the time they
were stormed. But within minutes they had retreated to a nearby building and
played no further part, as a section of the 200,000 Hindus stormed the
barricades and clambered on top of the mosque's three dilapidated domes. The
religious chants of holy men were drowned in a violent melee as Hindu
fanatics ignored their leaders and demolished the mosque's weak structure
with tridents, daggers and even bare hands.
Within three hours, all three domes had been reduced to rubble, which was
carried away as souvenirs by a jubilant crowd that had accomplished what the
courts and successive governments at the centre had been trying to prevent.
The few hundred paramilitary police standing guard within the mosque did
little to hide their sympathy for the militants.
The 16th century Babri mosque, which was built on a temple site claimed by
Hindus to be the birthplace of the god, Ram, has come to symbolise India as
a secular state, guaranteed by the Constitution. The right-wing Hindu
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has, over the past three years, become the
largest opposition party by politicising a dispute that dates back to
independence.
Government direct rule was imposed in Uttar Pradesh, India's largest and
most politically crucial state, where Ayodhya is located. Mr Kalyan Singh,
the chief minister, who won power in an election 18 months ago on a promise
to build a Hindu temple on the site where the mosque now stands, resigned
late last evening. Hours later, his government, supported by the Bharatiya
Janata Party, was dismissed by Mr Rao for its inability to abide by the
Supreme court order to protect the disputed structure.
A special hearing of India's highest court was convened to assess the 'grave
constitutional crisis' caused by a constitutionally elected government not
being able to uphold the court's orders.
'This is the first time that an assurance by the state government that it
will protect the structure and carry out the court orders has been
violated,' the bench said. 'Innocent lives have been put to danger all over
the country.'
The Hindu militants, dressed in saffron robes and chanting religious
slogans, defied court orders and disobeyed the same Hindu political leaders
who had used the temple issue to muster support for a Hindu nation.
The BJP and some leaders of its more militant allies, the Vishwa Hindu
Parishad and the Rashtriya Swayam Sewak Sangh, termed the Ayodhya incident
'unfortunate', but said it was 'an indication of the depth of popular
feeling about the construction of a Hindu temple' where the mosque now
stands.
The leaders reiterated their commitment to construct the temple as thousands
continued to mill around the disputed site.
The army was alerted in six Indian states, and an indefinite curfew imposed
in Uttar Pradesh.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3568</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAC3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / The Lex Column: UK stores
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Shoppers may not yet be dashing into the stores, but investors have
certainly been rushing into some of their shares. Although the sector as a
whole has moved comparatively little since Black Wednesday, there has been a
striking divergence within the group. The defensive quality core of Marks
and Spencer, Boots and GUS - which accounts for more than half the sector's
weighting - has just outpaced the market. But the really eye-catching
performances have come from some of the smaller, more volatile fry.
Excluding the big three, the rest of the stores sector has outperformed the
market by almost 40 per cent.
It is difficult to believe that this giddy ascent has not been overdone.
Although it is still early Christmas days, there appears to be little
anecdotal evidence of any great surge in consumer sales other than those
induced by Nintendo fiends. Robert Fleming points out that the stores sector
has underperformed the market in December and January in 17 of the last 22
years - although it adds the important proviso that the five exceptions have
been at times of falling interest rates.
Yet even if consumers do indulge in an unusual burst of enthusiasm over
Christmas, it may benefit other sectors more than stores. The firmer the
evidence of recovery becomes the more likely investors are to chase
highly-geared capital goods stocks where volumes and profits should rebound
more sharply than in shops.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3569</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAC2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / The Lex Column: Enterprise Oil
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
One of the almost unalloyed winners from sterling's devaluation on Black
Wednesday was the UK independent oil sector. With so many sterling costs and
oil priced in dollars, the benefits drop straight to the bottom line. That
has been reflected in the performance of the shares; the sector has risen by
some 15 per cent. But Enterprise Oil is up by over 50 per cent despite the
weakening dollar oil price. Such rises are apt to make shareholders
light-headed. When measured against its net assets, Enterprise Oil begins to
look expensive.
Besides, there are a few disadvantages to lower sterling. Many independents
like Enterprise are now exploring outside the UK and are having to pay in
dollars for exploration equipment. Some, perhaps most notably Lasmo, also
have a high proportion of their debt in dollars, so that interest charges
and redemption costs will rise. And most of the independents' assets are in
the North Sea, so the companies such as Enterprise incur a high marginal UK
tax charge on the additional revenues.
These problems may only be a temporary drag on Enterprise Oil's progress. As
the company's reserves come on stream, output will double in the next two
years. The company already has a strong balance sheet, and cash will start
to flow into Enterprise as output rises. Its management has proved capable
and has found oil at enviably low cost. The black spot is a decline in new
fields coming on stream after 1996. It will be interesting to see if the
chief executive, Mr Graham Hearne, can find the oil to maintain his winning
streak.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3570</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAC1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / The Lex Column: UK insurance
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The market should be encouraged to see insurance companies getting to grips
with their moth-eaten balance sheets. But it would not do to get carried
away. Last week's convertible bond from Royal will add only a modest 2
percentage points to the company's solvency margin assuming full conversion.
Recent preference share issues from Commercial Union and General Accident
plugged larger holes, but fixed rate prefs are a poor substitute for real
equity. The suspicion remains that some of the latter will be required
before the upswing in the underwriting cycle is over.
With luck, better conditions in insurance markets will coincide with a
rising equity market. Capital gains on investments would compensate for the
tendency of solvency margins to fall as premium income grows. Having sold
equities this year, though, insurers' balance sheets are generally less
geared to a rising market than in the 1980s. Since the economic outlook is
so uncertain, it would take a brave insurer to predicate expansion plans on
a bull market for equities. With their own shares trading at a premium to
net assets - and having out-performed the market by a streak this year - the
more expansionist insurance companies may eventually be tempted to try a
rights issue.
The message from the recent rash of convertibles and prefs, though, is that
the industry still lacks the confidence to take the plunge. Judging by the
sharp downward correction in the sector last week it is right to take a
cautious line. But if the US insurance market turns next year there will be
strong arguments for a bold approach.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3571</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAC0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / The Lex Column: Private reservations
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Since the government is intent on mopping up the lion's share of
institutional cash flow in the gilts market, the onus of supporting equities
next year may fall on small investors. Conditions are promising: on a
prospective yield over 4.5 per cent, the equity market now gives bank and
building society accounts a run for their money. A stampede out of deposit
accounts has supported US equities at levels which look optimistic set
against sluggish growth in corporate earnings. So far, though, UK small
investors appear far from convinced of the allure of equities.
True, unit trusts have seen healthy net sales since sterling came out of the
exchange rate mechanism. But the best of the inflows from the public and
independent financial advisers are into bond and money market funds. Last
month's congestion at the retail end of the gilts market equally suggests
bonds rather than equities have been the immediate beneficiaries of lower
interest rates. That is hardly surprising. Judging by last week's results
from M&amp;G, purveyors of equity funds have had a particularly tough year. It
could take a few more months of rising shares and low interest rates before
small investors demonstrate any real enthusiasm.
If retail investors keep gilt yields down in the meantime they will
indirectly benefit the equity market. But that is no substitute for hard
cash. The best time for equity professionals to tap their retail sources is
before the government starts funding in earnest from next April. From then
on, higher bond yields may look all the more tempting. And the government
will be fighting for every penny it can get.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3572</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Gaidar at centre of Congress power struggle
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LEYLA BOULTON
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MOSCOW
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
MR Boris Yeltsin's parliamentary opponents, smarting at their failure at the
weekend to deprive the Russian president of his power to form governments,
are likely to return to the offensive today by refusing to endorse Mr Yegor
Gaidar as prime minister.
Members of the Congress of People's Deputies hope to put a stop to economic
policies they have described as 'contrary to the interests of Russian
citizens' by voting to remove Mr Gaidar, the acting premier whose name has
become synonymous with market reform in Russia.
The government last night issued a statement warning Congress that it would
resign en masse unless Mr Gaidar was approved as premier, the only post
which would allow him to 'effectively conduct reforms'.
Congress's failure - by four votes - to endorse a move giving parliament the
right to appoint the cabinet spared the country a constitutional crisis. The
president did hint that he would have dissolved the full parliament had it
taken any other decision.
Even if Mr Gaidar's endorsement is defeated, President Yeltsin can still
keep him on as acting prime minister for another three months, while he
comes up with another candidate.
Such a vote against Mr Gaidar, coupled with a resolution by Congress calling
his performance 'unsatisfactory', would be awkward for the government in the
short term, but it would not be a fatal blow.
President Yeltsin's negotiations with the centrist Civic Union group may yet
result in a compromise which would alter the composition of the cabinet
while finding some way for Mr Gaidar to retain control over economic reforms
 -which have already moved a long way to accommodate many opposition
demands.
Mr Alexander Shokhin, a deputy prime minister, said the result of today's
vote would depend on 'the mood of the deputies' following the failure of
their attempt to curtail President Yeltsin's powers on Saturday.
In secret ballots held on Saturday, the Congress also failed to secure other
constitutional amendments giving it the right to veto the creation and
disbanding of various ministries.
But Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, the parliament's chairman who has orchestrated
opposition to Mr Gaidar, warned President Yeltsin that his victory at the
weekend was only temporary.
Mr Vladimir Shumeiko, the first deputy prime minister, said the government's
main challenge now was to achieve tangible successes in time for the next
Congress scheduled for April.
Background, Page 3
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3573</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Observer: Horse sense
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Certain readers have been aggrieved by Observer's report that the City of
London police horse named after past police committee chairman Geoffrey Gass
is being called, not by his surname as is customary, but Geoffrey.
'I can understand a reluctance to name the poor animal Gass,' writes Alison
Bailey of Hamburg, 'but why not just use the ex-chairman's initials?
'Gee-Gee has a certain ring to it . . .'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3574</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Observer: Holding on
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
News that a replacement is being sought for James D Robinson III - chairman,
chief executive and chief quality officer of American Express  - raises the
question of whether he would have been allowed to cling on for so long if he
had not combined the role of chairman and CEO.
American Express's spectacular growth in the 1960s and 1970s owes much to
Robinson's predecessor, Howard Clark, who dominated the company for 17 years
as both chairman and chief executive. However, one of the perks - and
dangers - of a powerful chairman is that he gets to choose his replacement.
Hence Robinson's appointment in 1977, followed fairly soon by the departure
of his main rival for the top job, Roger Morley. Since then Robinson has
held sway in Amex's well-connected boardroom, as witness his seemingly
influential role in the search for his successor.
Until very recently, combining the role of chairman and chief executive has
been the norm in most US boardrooms. According to headhunter Korn/Ferry
International only 20 per cent of major US companies split the job of
chairman and chief executive, and no more than 5 per cent of large
businesses appoint an independent director rather than a retiring insider as
chairman.
Nevertheless the recent reshuffle at General Motors, where retired Procter &amp;
Gamble chairman John Smale has taken on the GM chairmanship, suggests that
fashions are changing.
If a blue chip like American Express were to follow suit by importing an
independent as chairman - instead of just passing the job on to faithful
Harvey Golub - it might even be worth calling a trend.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3575</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Observer: Speech therapy
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
South African society has always had a first-world and a third-world sector,
and never the twain did meet. But now the first-worlders are to get access
to the healing powers of the third world via Telkom, the state telephone
monopoly.
For R6 a minute (Pounds 1.20), anyone with a phone can consult a sangoma or
traditional Zulu spiritual healer, to cure ailments of the mind or body. The
sangoma will in turn consult the caller's ancestral spirits to find out the
cause of the ailment and the cure. (That is done through mystical channels,
without recourse to Telkom, it seems.) Given that 80 per cent of South
Africans regularly consult traditional healers, the service could well prove
popular.
If callers do not like what the sangoma has to say, however, they can try
Telkom's alternative services: SexTalk, LoveTalk or the Princess Diana
tapes.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3576</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Observer: Initially free
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
BT, Britain's biggest company, seems to be taking penny-pinching to a
ridiculous extent. It contacted a colleague's husband the other day to ask
whether he wanted all four of his initials to appear before his surname in
the phone directory for his about-to-be-purchased house. He could have three
for free, but the fourth would cost him Pounds 3 a quarter extra.
Obviously a new money-making rule; he has all four in the 1992 directory
without having incurred the extra charge.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3577</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Observer: . . . the menace
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Lord Healey's banishment to the Upper House has not blunted his ability to
sum up his Tory opponents.
The 75-year-old peer - who as plain Denis won a place in the Oxford
Dictionary of Quotations by likening the impact of Lord Howe's debating
skills to 'being savaged by a dead sheep' - produced a few more sallies
yesterday on breakfast TV.
For starters, Healey thought Premier John Major resembled Eddie the Eagle:
so far from being up to the job that there were rumours he was in line to
run the game show, 'Sorry, I Haven't a Clue'. To follow, he had the
embattled chancellor of the exchequer, Norman Lamont, behaving 'like a
disgruntled chihuahua'.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3578</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACTFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Observer: Meaningful dialogue
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Whatever the contention over who is to be the 1992 European of the Year,
there is no doubt about the EC's Word of the Year. 'Subsidiarity' wins by a
landslide.
A search of the FT database reveals that Britain's broadsheet newspapers
have so far employed the dread term 1,437 times since last December. That is
quite an achievement, considering - as the article above shows - there is as
yet no officially agreed definition.
Filling the semantic gap will be one of the tasks for European Community
eminences at the coming weekend's dialogue in Edinburgh. Any temptation to
feel sorry for them should be resisted, however, because the EC leadership
brought the task on itself with its communique on economic and monetary
union following the June 1989 Madrid summit.
Before 1989 there had only ever been three references to the term - which
means, broadly, taking decisions at the appropriate level. But although the
Madrid conferrants had the decency to put the word in tentative inverted
commas, after them came the deluge of obscurity.
So it is right for their successors to have the job of clearing up the
confusion. If all else fails, they might at least ban the term entirely from
the Edinburgh summit's official emanations.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3579</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACSFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Letter: Duly noted
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Ms LORNA SINCLAIR
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, We note Mr Nuttall's letter of December 2. We do not comment in public
on any individual case, respecting confidentiality, but would like it to be
known we are following up this matter direct with Mr Nuttall.
On a general point, we operate within a tightly defined legal framework and
are accountable to parliament for the way in which our business is carried
out. Our aim is always to deal sensitively with all cases.
Lorna Sinclair,
head of information,
HM Customs and Excise,
New King's Beam House,
22 Upper Ground,
London SE1 9PJ
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3580</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Letter: Supervisor training crucial
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr HOWARD A J JORDAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, I agree wholeheartedly with your correspondent Peter Marsh ('Japanese
find UK lacks supervision', November 26) on the subject of supervisor
training.
For a number of years now I have been beating the drum in Scotland to
encourage companies to appreciate the benefits of training their first-line
supervisors. And only recently, in the last 18 months or so, have companies
really started to address the problem.
It is unfortunate that it has taken a comparison with another country -
Japan - to show just how important it is for a firm to develop its people.
Not only for the firm to benefit, but also to give the workforce the
necessary skills to compete in the world market.
As your article points out, a supervisor is not only someone who is familiar
with technology and machines, but is also skilled in human relations and
creating team spirit.
The role of the supervisor in industry is changing rapidly with the
introduction of more flexible manufacturing systems and the development of
'flatter' organisational structures. This increases the importance of the
improved selection of supervisor and the provision of training with greater
breadth and depth.
Government must recognise the need for a higher standard of supervisor
training, and training and enterprise councils and local enterprise
companies should encourage the provision of such training.
Howard A J Jordan,
chief executive,
Scottish Engineering,
105 West George Street,
Glasgow G2 1QL
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3581</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Twelve men in search of a common meaning: At Edinburgh, EC
leaders face the daunting task of clarifying the concept of subsidiarity
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW ADONIS and ANDREW TYRIE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
The European Community's leaders will try once again at this week's
Edinburgh summit to make sense of subsidiarity, the idea enshrined in the
Maastricht treaty that Brussels should not interfere in matters best left to
member states.
A year ago, subsidiarity seemed an elixir for all the Community's ills. Back
in 1989, when Mr Jacques Delors, the European Commission president, was
seeking to exorcise Lady (then Mrs) Thatcher's nightmare vision of a
'European super-state', he invoked it as the means to reconcile 'what for
many appears to be irreconcilable: the emergence of a united Europe and
loyalty to one's homeland; the need for a European power capable of tackling
the problems of our age and the absolute necessity to preserve our roots'.
The history of the term should have made us suspicious from the start. For
subsidiarity is a chameleon, changing its colour to suit the beholder. To
the Vatican in the 1930s, it meant keeping Mussolini's fascist tentacles out
of Italian education. For postwar Germany, the term helped provide a
justification for a federal division of powers between Bonn and the lander.
Subsidiarity is really no more than shorthand for two platitudes as old as
politics itself: that political authority should be exercised at the level
most appropriate to the function in question; and that government of any
kind should supplement, not replace, action by individuals and families.
Turning those maxims into a constitutional principle regulating the
Community's authority was always bound to cause trouble.
It came at Maastricht. The formula agreed in Article 3b conflates a
hotchpotch of vague and conflicting meanings. One sentence permits Brussels
to do whatever is 'necessary' to achieve any of the treaty's widely-drawn
objectives (eg: 'to promote economic and social progress'); another states
that, in areas of shared competence, Community action will be tolerable only
if a specific policy goal cannot be 'sufficiently achieved' by member
states. In the latter case, Brussels may act if it believes it can do better
'by reason of the scale or effects of the proposed action'.
Since the treaty does not demarcate areas of 'exclusive' and 'shared'
powers, the scope of subsidiarity is left as unclear as its definition. Even
if it were clear, there is no agreement on whether it is applicable at all
in areas of exclusive competence, such as agriculture, where the treaties
oblige the Community to act. The British government asserts that it is; the
Commission that it is not.
As Lord Mackenzie-Stuart, former president of the European Court, writes in
a foreword to our study of the issue published today*: 'The paragraph on
subsidiarity is a disgraceful piece of sloppy draftsmanship, so bad that one
is forced to assume it must be deliberate.'
Deliberate or not, the ambiguity has enabled every Community politician to
claim it for his own. Mr Major hails subsidiarity as a triumph for
decentralisation, even a licence to repatriate existing Community
activities. The poorer states invoke it to support an extension of Community
policies, often travelling under catchphrases such as 'cohesion', which will
enable them to obtain budgetary transfers - transfers they are clamouring to
increase.
As for the Commission, its latest document on the subject asserts that 'the
subsidiarity principle regulates the exercise of powers rather than the
conferment of powers'. This is a pointless distinction for those large
fields of potential Community competence agreed at Maastricht, within which
subsidiarity was intended to act as an effective check. Or rather, its only
point is that it gives an initial presumption that the Community may act,
fortified by the document's insistence on subsidiarity going hand-in-hand
with the principle of 'proportionality' - more Euro-jargon, meaning: 'don't
use a sledge-hammer to crack a nut'. By that interpretation, subsidiarity is
largely about the management of Community action.
Since Article 3b will be justiciable, all this promises to turn the European
Court of Justice into a cockpit of controversy, forced to reach political
decisions on political criteria. Are standardised speed limits,
environmental impact assessments and a waste land fill directive 'necessary'
to fulfil the Community's obligations? Can protection for animals in zoos,
or harmonisation of company law, be 'sufficiently achieved' by member
states, or do the 'scale or effects' justify intervention from Brussels? The
judges may soon have to decide.
Despite this farrago, Article 3b - and subsidiarity - are here to stay.
Renegotiation would be too dire a prospect for the EC's leaders to
contemplate. So what is to be done?
For subsidiarity to have any chance of providing an effective basis on which
to arbitrate between conflicting views of the Community interest, the
minimum task at Edinburgh is to improve Article 3b in three ways: by
defining it less ambiguously, by clarifying its scope (what it should apply
to), and by giving it teeth with a 'subsidiarity veto'.
Definition. The words 'scale or effects' need to be defined more closely.
Commission initiatives should be limited to proposals on policies which, if
left to member states, would have appreciable cross-border consequences, or
to policies which can be shown to achieve significant overall economies of
scale. To focus attention on this subsidiarity test, and provide a basis for
adjudication by the Court should it be sought, the Commission should be
required to justify its proposals in those terms, and the Council of
Ministers should append a subsidiarity statement to all legislation it
enacts.
Scope. Subsidiarity, however defined, should apply to existing Community
policies, and to action proposed within areas currently held to be the
exclusive competence of the Community. Subsidiarity veto. Where any two
member states believe a proposed measure is incompatible with subsidiarity
as defined above, they should be able to exercise a suspensory veto - that
is, a power to refer for further consideration on grounds of subsidiarity
any proposal for a period of up to two years.
'Strange fate for a word to have a use before a meaning,' remarked Mr
Francois-Xavier Ortoli, a former Commission president, recently. If
subsidiarity does not acquire an agreed meaning soon, it will be of little
use, and much danger, in the times of adversity already engulfing the EC.
* Subsidiarity: No Panacea, European Policy Forum, 20 Queen Anne's Gate,
London SW1H 9AA. Pounds 5.
Andrew Tyrie, a former adviser to John Major, now an economist at the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, writes in a personal
capacity
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3582</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Letter: Chapter 11: a good means to get things right
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr RICHARD J SINGER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, The article, 'Stepping back from the brink' by Mr Thomas Wyatt
(Management, December 1) was of great interest.
CVAs (Company Voluntary Agreements) appear remarkably similar to Chapter 11
of the US Bankruptcy Code, save some of the legal safeguards. The benefits
of Chapter 11 often outweigh the risks, even in the litigious US. The
company remains in operation. Employees still have a job. Contingent
liabilities, which are often very sizeable, can be retired in an orderly
manner. Furthermore, and rarely considered, customers are not left high and
dry.
Most important, management which best knows the business and how the company
got into trouble, is empowered legally with the responsibility to get things
right. The result is often a company which reinvents itself. A company which
is forced to focus on every available resource in order to extract maximum
value.
Chapter 11 thus has not only the obvious economic rationale. It is also a
potent fine-tuner of human capital. Assuming that those most damaged by the
past will learn from mistakes, the Debtor in Possession (as called in the
US) of necessity becomes a more flexible, a better 'educated' and a more
creative manager.
A step back from the brink can be a galvanising event on the way to greater
capabilities for the survivor.
Richard J Singer,
president,
Singer Products Export Co,
107 Northern Boulevard,
Suite 400, Great Neck NY 11021
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3583</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Letter: Esoteric, burdensome index
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr MARTYN ARBIB
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, The sole purpose for which my fund managers turn up to work is to
achieve above-average investment performance - whether it be gauged from
beating an index or making superior returns to our competitors'. Our UK
department has achieved significant success in this objective over the
years.
The additions to the FT-A All-Share Index list in your paper on December 4
include such esoteric names as TR Pacific Investment Trust, EFM Dragon
Trust, Foreign and Colonial Germany Investment Trust, Martin Currie Pacific
Trust, German Smaller Companies Investment Trust, Abtrust New Dawn, etc. Our
clients investing specifically for UK investment in our UK funds would not
appreciate it if our UK fund managers invested in a selection of these
investment trusts. The inclusion of these 100 per cent overseas investment
trusts in the FT-A All Share Index places an additional and unnecessary
burden on our UK fund managers in years when the UK market underperforms
other world markets, particularly if I reviewed their salaries on how they
have performed against the FT-A All Share Index.
Martyn Arbib,
chairman,
Perpetual,
48 Hart Street,
Henley-on-Thames,
Oxfordshire RG2 2AZ
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3584</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Letter: Tax point
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr N DACK
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, Now that Her Majesty the Queen is to become a taxpayer, should we
expect to see the 'By appointment' crest on our 1993-94 tax return?
N Dack,
29 Portersfield Road,
Norwich NR2 3JT
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3585</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Letter: Location inspires long-standing indecision in the EC
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From RUDIGER VON WECHMAR, MEP
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, Observer noted in 'Talking heads' (December 3) that Euro ministers
could not agree on the location of a future European Drugs Agency. The
question of seats for European institutions, and the hassles between member
states that go with it, is now 41 years old.
Even today, the EC Commission, the Council and the European Parliament have
no permanent seat. The EC Council, composed of ministers from national
governments, has to decide unanimously on matters of seats or locations.
Unanimity could not be reached in the past because France insists that,
first, Strasbourg must become, officially and finally, the seat of the
European Parliament.
Several other decisions are pending, such as the location of the European
Environmental Agency and the future central bank.
In 1951, the foreign ministers of the six-nation Coal and Steel Community
tried, and failed, to decide where the future capital of Europe should be
located. I was then a United Press correspondent covering that meeting in
Paris. It was 3.30 in the morning after endless hours of discussion when
Konrad Adenauer emerged from the conference room, shaking his head,
murmuring 'poor Europe'. Each member state had made several proposals, he
said, 'but when Luxembourg suggested (as its umpteenth proposal) to have
Europe's capital in Mondorf-les-Bains, I left. I do not even know where it
is and how it is spelt.'
That was 41 years ago.
Rudiger von Wechmar,
D-8000 Munich,
Amalienstrasse 45,
Germany
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3586</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Race to unchain the dragon: Economic reform is the priority
for the winner of next week's elections in South Korea
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOHN BURTON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
When South Korea's military rulers backed down in the face of mass protests
and granted free elections in 1987, the country faced two big questions.
Could it achieve the transition to democracy? And could it do so while
maintaining the economic success which had made it one of the most dynamic
of east Asia's dragon economies?
Next week's presidential elections are proof of progress on the political
front. Mr Roh Tae-woo, the outgoing president who is constitutionally barred
from standing again, will be the first leader to preside over a peaceful
transfer of power since the republic was founded in 1948. For the first time
in almost 40 years all of the principal candidates are from outside the
military elite.
The race between the three leading candidates is turning into a cliffhanger.
There is a ban on publishing opinion polls, but private polling by the
political parties suggests that Mr Kim Dae-jung of the main opposition
Democratic party is closing the gap on the frontrunner, Mr Kim Young-sam of
the ruling Democratic Liberal party (DLP). The third candidate, Mr Chung
Ju-yung, founder of Hyundai which is South Korea's largest conglomerate, is
winning votes at the expense of Mr Kim Young-sam. He could tip the election
in favour of Mr Kim Dae-jung.
In terms of policy, there is little to separate the candidates. All would be
regarded as centre-right by western standards, although Mr Kim Dae-jung - a
veteran opposition leader who was imprisoned under the military government -
is regarded as closer to the labour movement than his rivals. Mr Kim
Young-sam was also a leading opposition figure during the 26 years of
military rule which ended in 1987. He joined the ruling party in 1990. Mr
Chung Ju-yung, meanwhile, unlike his opponents is a political novice. He is
the first industrialist to campaign for the Blue House, the presidential
office in Seoul.
But whoever becomes the next president, he will face a big economic
challenge. Korea's competitiveness and growth have fallen sharply since
1987. Reversing this trend will require economic reforms as extensive as the
democratic changes Korea has undertaken.
The reforms are necessary to guide Korea from a dirigiste economy controlled
by five-year plans to a competitive and deregulated free-market system. They
are also needed to achieve the country's transition from a maker of
labour-intensive, low-quality products, to a high-tech industrial power.
The introduction of democracy has encouraged economic change by loosening
some government controls, such as suppression of the trade unions, which had
kept wages low and supported the country's rapid push to industrialise since
the 1960s. Reforms have become increasingly necessary, because the expansion
of Korea's economy has made it much more difficult to manage by bureaucratic
fiat.
'We need to build a new economic structure appropriate to democracy. Our
economy is still geared to the authoritarian past,' says Mr Park Jae-yoon,
economic adviser to Mr Kim Young-sam.
The fact that the economy is the main election issue indicates the healthy
state of Korean democracy. The survival of political reforms is no longer an
issue as it was in the 1987 presidential election.
The fundamental support for democratic development is in place. The rise of
an affluent, educated middle class is an important factor, and Koreans have
grown accustomed to exercising their democratic powers: at least 80 per cent
are expected to vote in the election.
The possibility of a military coup is remote. 'Direct military intervention
is now virtually impossible,' says a western diplomat. 'The army has become
more democratic and the mood of the populace would make it difficult for the
military to govern again.'
Nonetheless, Korean democracy has some rough edges. Political corruption is
widespread. Personalities, rather than ideology, dominate politics, which
means that parties are subject to factional infighting.
'Korea's current system of democracy is far from perfect. But the country
will remain stable politically. The system is still evolving, but the major
issues have been settled,' says Ms Christine Hill, a political analyst for
the Seoul office of stockbroker W I Carr.
The progress of democracy means that Korea's new president can devote more
attention to the economic rather than political reform. The economy has
fluctuated sharply in the past five years: growth in real gross national
product fell from 13.1 per cent in 1987 to 6.8 per cent in 1989, rebounded
to 9.3 per cent in 1990, before slowing again. In the third quarter of this
year, GNP rose by just 3.1 per cent, the smallest quarterly increase since
1981, when Korea was reeling from the slowdown in the international economy
prompted by the Opec oil price shock.
There are several factors behind the erratic performance. One is the growth
of the previously suppressed trade union movement and the strong negotiating
power that workers have in an economy where the unemployment rate of just
2.4 per cent has created labour shortages. Between 1988 and 1991 wages
increased by an average annual rate of 20 per cent, eliminating Korea's
advantage as a source of cheap labour. The rise in labour costs was not
matched by productivity gains.
The result was a sharp fall in competitiveness. Export growth fell from 28
per cent in 1988 to 3 per cent in 1989. The current account, which hit a
peak surplus of Dollars 14bn in 1988, fell into a deficit of Dollars 8.7bn
last year.
Faced with this downturn, the government panicked. It launched the biggest
infrastructure programme in the nation's history, including the construction
of 2m housing units, in an attempt to compensate for falling exports with
stronger domestic demand. But this caused the economy to overheat by
creating inflationary shortages of labour and construction materials.
Inflation climbed from 5.7 per cent in 1989 to 9.7 per cent in 1991,
prompting another rethink in policy. The result was a decision to cool the
overheated economy earlier this year by squeezing the money supply and by
postponing public expenditure projects. This caused the current slowdown in
growth.
The government and most private economists believe that the economy is now
showing signs of sustainable improvement. Growth in average wages is
expected to slow to about 10 per cent this year and unit labour costs to
fall next year as productivity improves. As a result, the Bank of Korea, the
country's central bank, predicts that inflation will slow to 6 per cent this
year.
On the trade front, too, there are grounds for optimism. Import growth has
slowed to a single-digit rate, while exports are this year expected to rise
by almost 10 per cent. Part of this improvement reflects a depreciation of
the Korean currency, the won, and a shift by exporters away from the markets
of the US, Japan and Europe to faster growing markets in south-east Asia and
China. The current account deficit is expected to narrow to Dollars 4.5bn
this year and the government forecasts a surplus by 1994.
Although most economists in Seoul expect that it may take another year for
Korea to return to steady growth, the new president will then have a more
secure base to tackle the main structural challenges confronting the
economy. These include:
Strengthening industry's technological capability. Korea's export success -
which has made it the world's 11th largest trading nation - has been based
on the mass production of low-technology, high-volume goods. But the
increase in the costs of production, particularly labour costs, is forcing
Korean companies to produce higher quality, more sophisticated products.
To achieve this, industry needs to spend much more on developing technology.
Total annual corporate research spending in Korea amounts to Dollars 4.5bn,
about the equivalent of research investments made by General Motors or IBM,
according to the Korea Development Institute, the government policy centre.
Only a handful of companies, such as Samsung Electronics, one of the world's
largest manufacturers of memory chips, and Hyundai Motors, the country's
largest car manufacturer, have large research budgets at present.
The government wants to raise research spending from 1.7 per cent of GNP to
5 per cent within the next decade. To achieve this target it is offering tax
incentives to encourage corporate research. It is also giving funds to joint
government-business projects, such as plans to develop advanced memory chips
and high definition television systems.
Financial liberalisation. Government control of the banking system, in
particular its setting of borrowing rates, has resulted in an inefficient
distribution of capital. Interest rates are 5-7 percentage points higher
than international borrowing rates, depriving companies of the capital
necessary for investment in research and machinery and placing a heavy
burden on their balance sheets. This puts Korean industry at a competitive
disadvantage with regional rivals where the cost of finance is much less.
The government has drawn up a plan for deregulating the country's capital
markets, but implementation of the most important reforms has been delayed
until 1997. This is largely the result of pressure from the economic
bureaucracy, which jealously guards its control of credit, and from the
commercial banks which are vulnerable to the competition which would result
from financial liberalisation.
There is agreement among the presidential candidates that government
intervention - in particular of the financial system - is hindering economic
development and that reform is necessary. 'The government likes to keep its
fingers in the economy, but it is running out of fingers as the economy
becomes more advanced. It can no longer manage the economy as it once did,'
says Mr Yoo Jong-keun, economic adviser to Mr Kim Dae-jung.
Whether any of the presidential candidates will have the commitment to
tackle the bureaucracy remains to be seen. 'Every candidate says he wants to
deregulate. But politicians have similar mind-sets to bureaucrats, they want
to keep power,' argues Mr Lee Hahn-koo, president of the Daewoo Research
Institute.
Keeping power may mean exercising a lighter grip on it. The next president
will be judged by his ability to rekindle the economy. He may well conclude
that loosening the government's control of the allocation of financial
resources is the best way to achieve this. Deregulation would not only
improve the country's industrial performance, but also transform Korea into
a more democratic state by diluting bureaucratic power.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3587</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Leading Article: A shot across the EC's bows
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
TOWARDS THE end of Europe's annus horribilis, Switzerland has sent its own
small shaft into the battered edifice of European integration. Yesterday's
Swiss rejection of the European Economic Area and, by implication, the
European Community was neither unexpected, nor a disaster. The longer term
effects on Switzerland are likely, however, to be negative.
Beyond its frontiers, the No will delay the establishment of the free-trade
area between the EC and the European Free Trade Association, which was due
to have started in January. The vote delivers another jolt to EC leaders as
they confront the larger conundrum: the future of the Maastricht treaty
after its rejection by another small country, Denmark.
Switzerland's history of neutrality and its direct democracy make it a
special case. But the vote is a further example of the volatility of
electorates. As in Denmark, the Yes campaign was supported by the country's
political and business establishment. Yet the people trusted their instincts
more than their leaders.
The Swiss government believed the domestic recession, coupled with political
changes across Europe, would make voters less resistant to diluting
independence. Instead, disarray within and outside their borders may have
made the electorate more sceptical about abandoning their formula for wealth
and stability. The electorate was not ready to support the Berne policy of
making the EEA a waiting room for EC membership. The Efta-EC link would have
drawn Switzerland - with the exemption of agriculture - fully into Europe's
single market. It would have dismantled some cartels, without allowing the
country a part in formulating the EC laws to which it would be subject.
Further ahead, Community membership would have integrated the Swiss into the
Community's political and monetary union.
It would be regrettable if the electorate's vote against integration added
to misgivings elsewhere in Efta about joining the European mainstream. Yet
the EEA can exist without Switzerland. If, through the single market,
economic integration continues, more Swiss companies may transfer
manufacturing capacity abroad. In view of the sharp split yesterday between
French- and German-speaking Switzerland, the larger question centres on the
future of the country's own political system. When Europe was split into two
blocs, Switzerland gave the appearance of a model of democracy. Now that the
cold war has ended, the erstwhile paradigm may itself be weakened by
linguistic division. Switzerland is strong enough to weather the short-term
economic consequences of the vote.
Restoring Swiss consensus may be more difficult. As Switzerland ponders this
loss of consensus, the rest of Europe must face up to the problems caused by
the EC's failure so far to reconcile nationalist aspirations with the
political structures needed for effective co-operation.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3588</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Perilous moment
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
AUTHORITARIANISM is once again haunting Latin America. The second military
coup attempt this year in Venezuela and Peruvian President Alberto
Fujimori's dissolution of Congress in April underline the fragility of the
region's democracies.
In a sense both countries are special cases. In Peru, the threat to the
state from the left-wing fanatics of Sendero Luminoso and political
stalemate helped to explain, if not to excuse, Mr Fujimori's move.
Venezuela, one of the richest countries in Latin America, is still suffering
a hangover from the 1970s oil boom and has yet to adapt its economy to a
scarcity of resources.
Yet what both are suffering is a crisis of the state, and in this they are
not alone. Neither provides the levels of public safety, health, education
and other services required by the population, and they are no longer rich
enough to buy off troublesome pressure groups. Unfortunately, most Latin
American governments are in a similar position.
The temptation, when the going gets rough, is to blame liberalising and
budget-cutting reforms. But it is the original system, not the effort to
change it, that is responsible. Only by making their economies more
responsive to market forces and by showing greater fiscal responsibility
will Latin American governments achieve sustainable economic growth and
combat corruption, special-interest politics and misallocation of resources.
Change may be easier for strong governments than for weak ones, yet there
are things that all could do to reduce the political risks. They could
better communicate the benefits of their policies - pointing out, for
example, that it is the poor who have most to gain from reduced inflation.
Equally, they should do more to provide targeted help where policies are
hurting the poor. They should also have smaller, more professional armed
forces, which means initially paying off surplus men.
On balance, most Latin American countries are still on the right track, and
deserve continuing international support. Even in Venezuela and Peru there
are chinks of light. The Venezuelan coups failed because the rebels failed
to overcome popular suspicion of men in uniforms offering solutions to their
problems. In Peru, Mr Fujimori was forced to hold elections last month to
reinstate Congress. Without external pressure - mainly through the
international financial institutions - it is doubtful whether Mr Fujimori
would have made this concession.
Recent political troubles should be taken more as signs of progress than of
despair. As De Tocqueville wrote, the most perilous moment for a bad
government is when it seeks to mend its ways.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3589</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Faults in EC package
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By SAMUEL BRITTAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
The so-called EC growth package lies mainly in the realm of gesture
politics. The Ecu60bn a year injection of demand, first mooted in Brussels,
was obviously meant to be 1 per cent of Community GDP - something like its
budget - rather than a specific programme. The likely EC action, involving
the European Investment Bank, is about a tenth of that amount.
Meanwhile the British government mainly wants to give the label 'growth
package' to what it has already announced in the Autumn Statement in which
it supposedly 'rebalanced' expenditure and which it holds out as an example
to other governments. As for the genuine growth package proposals, there is
a danger that they will come too late. They are being brought up just as the
first signs of recovery are appearing in at least some parts of the
international economy. There is thus a risk of aggravating rather than
dampening the boom and bust cycle. The risks of mistiming are greater at the
international level, where the lags between diagnosis and policy
implementation are even longer than they are domestically.
Admittedly, mere signs that output may no longer be dropping (outside
Germany) or could be rising slightly do not themselves make a growth package
mistimed. An anaemic recovery which increased the gap between actual and
potential output, and was accompanied by high and rising unemployment, would
still be a case for treatment. But would a conventional package be the right
treatment for such below-par performance?
The one precedent we have to go on is at the level not of the EC, but of the
Group of Seven countries at the Bonn summit of 1978. This was undertaken
fairly late in the recovery phase of the business cycle, when it was felt
that the upturn was not strong enough to make a sufficient dent in world
unemployment. The centrepiece was a promise by the German government to
stimulate demand by 1 per cent of GDP.
Many participants subsequently concluded that it had all been a mistake and
merely aggravated the inflationary boom of 1979, which coincided with the
deposition of the Shah of Iran and the consequent shock to oil prices. Some,
such as the former German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, changed their minds
more than once on the issue.
A proper analysis, either of the 1978 package or the one suggested now,
would have to take account of the elementary fact that a fiscal stimulus -
whether government spending or a monetary relaxation - can only add to
spending in money terms. Whether the result is real growth, just more
inflation or some mixture of the two depends on the state of the economy and
on the reactions of businessmen, unions, financial market participants and
many other economic agents.
Although it took place all those years ago, there has never been a proper
analysis of the Bonn summit package. It was simply assumed that all the
stimulus represented real goods and generated more jobs. The same naive
assumption is being made by the more enthusiastic proponents of concerted EC
action today. This confusion between nominal and real is especially likely
when all the talk is of infrastructure projects. It is taken for granted
that bridges, roads and buildings must add to GNP. This is to reckon without
the more far-reaching effects on wages, prices and interest rates, and
second and third-round effects in general.
There is a more far-reaching criticism. It is taken for granted that, if the
economy needs a kick-start, it must always take the form of public
investment and never of tax cuts. There is no warrant for such belief, which
is simply a return to the conventional wisdom of the pre-Thatcher and
pre-Reagan eras, without anything having been learnt in between. If it
really is true that the European economy needs a demand stimulus, and that
stimulus has to take in part a fiscal form, then it is just as appropriate
to have temporary tax cuts.
A tax cut is quicker to implement, and quicker to reverse. It is not, of
course, plain sailing. An income tax cut known to be temporary might have
reduced effects on spending. On the other hand, a temporary VAT cut might
bring people into the shops more quickly, but would not have the same
incentive or supply-side effects. Nevertheless any kind of temporary tax cut
would avoid the danger of a continuing upward drift in national debt ratios.
Above all it would avoid the danger so apparent in the British plans, which
show public expenditure rising to more than 45 per cent of GNP next year.
The alternative of a concerted tax cut among several countries is moreover
much less open to the objection that the extra spending will leak abroad, as
one country's leakage will be another's stimulus. We are mainly talking
about the need to find some fiscal kick-start until German interest rates
begin to tumble, as they surely will before we are many moons older; and for
that purpose, a temporary tax cut meets the bill admirably.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3590</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Urban policy
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE GROWTH of an 'underclass' in decaying inner-city areas is the most
formidable challenge facing western democracies in the 1990s, according to
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the UK home secretary. In a thoughtful lecture to the
Tory Reform Group two weeks ago, Mr Clarke acknowledged that, even when the
economy was growing, it was not automatically the case that a fair share of
it trickled down to inner-city residents. A partnership between the public,
private and voluntary sectors was needed, he said, to help local communities
find their own solutions.
These were fine words, but they were said only days after the chancellor's
Autumn Statement which cut the government's urban spending plans from Pounds
987m this year to Pounds 806m in 1995-96. Within that total, the Urban
Programme, the main source of regeneration funds for local authorities, is
to be reduced by 66 per cent. The budgets of some urban development
corporations will be cut (including that of the nascent Birmingham
Heartlands UDC). Only the new Urban Regeneration Agency will receive more by
the mid-1990s.
Funding is also to be cut back for City Challenge, the bidding process
introduced 18 months ago to encourage inner-city councils to form local
partnerships with the private and voluntary sectors to regenerate small
areas. In the first two rounds of bidding, 31 of the 57 urban priority areas
won Pounds 7.5m a year each of government money for five years. Many of the
rest were equally deserving and hoped to be successful in a third round. But
it is clear from the Autumn Statement that there will be no further rounds
in the next three years. Indeed, the totals set aside for City Challenge
indicate that ministers expect some winners in the first two rounds to
underspend or fail to secure approval for their detailed plans.
Yet City Challenge is the very epitome of the approach commended by Mr
Clarke, widely seen as a success even by local authorities which found the
notion of winners and losers hard to swallow. Instead, urban authorities
will be able to bid for a much smaller pot of Pounds 20m as part of a new
scheme, Capital Partnership, designed to encourage councils to raise funds
themselves by selling off assets. Capital Partnership may well offset the
fall in established urban funding programmes overall, but there is no
guarantee that it will be the most needy councils which will benefit.
Such zigzags in urban policy may reflect ministerial comings and goings at
the environment department and changes in economic policy after the UK's
ignominious exit from the exchange rate mechanism. But this further upheaval
in the funding regime for urban regeneration will make it harder for
responsible inner-city councils to plan for the future and build the
partnerships Mr Clarke commends. It is certainly no way to tackle one of the
most formidable challenges facing western democracies. The case for a single
funding agency, at one remove from the politicians' grasp, with clear
objectives and long-term stability is unanswerable.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3591</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Arts: Sparse beauty in a drab landscape - Architecture
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By COLIN AMERY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Every year the Civic Trust announces its awards for schemes that it
considers to be the best contributions to the improvement of the quality of
the environment. The quality of the architecture, planning, landscape and
civic design are all taken into account.
In order to cover the whole country thoroughly it is divided by alternate
years into the Metropolitan counties and the 'shire' counties. This year is
the turn of the shires of England as well as Scotland, Wales, Northern
Ireland, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man. The awards are sponsored
by Redland plc.
The value of these wide ranging and catholic awards is that they paint a
clear picture of the state of the arts of architecture and design. In the
middle of the harshest recession in the building and construction industry
for some 45 years it may be surprising to find that nearly 1,100 entries
were received. Cynics may say that publicity is even more important during
recession; or is it that architects and developers have time on their hands?
Despite the large number of entries, the trust is forced to admit that high
quality new development is disappointingly rare. The assessors reported that
far too many were mediocre and ordinary and that there are still far too
many 'overscaled, bland and totally inappropriate modern developments.' It
is a depressing picture of the new buildings of the last two years and a
very poor reflection of the low standards that the majority of the
architectural profession finds acceptable.
The report of the awards, written by the director of the Civic Trust, Martin
Bradshaw, makes depressing reading. On the evidence before him of all the
entries he is forced to say that the centres of too many British provincial
towns and cities are spoilt by new schemes that 'seem designed to secure
planning permission and avoid criticism, and are all too often lifeless and
ordinary.' Commercial interests come in for particularly strong criticism.
One assessor pointed out the horror of a group of truly awful luxury
headquarters built by nationally known insurance and financial institutions.
The overall gloom of the report makes the highlighting of the few good
schemes more important. There are some 18 award winners and one special
Redland Prize. The winners do not exactly glow like beacons of quality, but
a few are exceptional and several are on the road to excellence. In terms of
sheer architectural quality, Stansted Airport and the Crescent Wing at the
Sainsbury Centre for the Visual Arts at the University of East Anglia, both
designed by Sir Norman Foster and Partners, are outstanding.
The two commercial award winners are good, but not quite in the Foster
league. Royal Insurance House, on a landscaped country site near
Peterborough designed by Arup Associates, is distinguished by its successful
integration of buildings and landscape. The landscaping, a series of outdoor
rooms with beech and lime plantings, is by Derek Lovejoy and Partners. The
second commercial scheme is a shopping and office development in Belfast by
the Building Design Partnership for John Laing Developments. I have not seen
this in the flesh, but it looks to be only of average standard from the
photographs.
If these awards are in any way a reflection of the economic state of the
nation, then we have to face the fact that the growth area seems to be in
tourism and restoration of historic buildings. The assessors were full of
praise for high standard of much conservation work and it is undoubtedly
true that the architects who work in this area show dedication and skills
that are absent from much new development. It appears that, when faced with
a clean slate, architects are unable to decide what to do with any real
conviction.
One award winning building is a set of studios and workshops dedicated to
training courses in crafts and restoration at West Dean College, near
Chichester, Sussex. In designing an addition to the long range of a partly
17th-century listed mansion, The Architectural and Planning Partnership has
pulled off something of a coup. The firm has designed a strong flint and
stone wing with almost William Burgess-like projecting windows: powerful
stuff. At Buckfast Abbey, Devon the addition of a restaurant in stone and
slate shows the value of using local materials as well as the ingenuity of
incorporating the remains of a 13th-century gatehouse.
There is one inevitable but usually grim modern building that architects
have failed to tackle convincingly: the multi-storey car park. This year
there are two among the 18 award winners. The Cathedral and Quay Car Park in
Exeter, designed by Niall Phillips Architects, is singled out for the
special Redland Award because of the way it achieves the remarkable feat of
fitting a car park onto a city slope, and in the process managing to dignify
the whole function of car parking. The other car park award winner is the
more flamboyant and controversial Avenue de Chartres car park in Chichester,
Sussex, designed by Birds, Portchmouth, Russum Architects. This intriguing
complex won an architectural competition, and its five circular brick towers
and honeycomb brick walls have become a landmark.
Tourist buildings and visitors centres that have won awards include the
extraordinary White Cliffs experience in Dover and the more discreet
reception centre at Brodick Castle on the Isle of Arran. A lead mine, an
iron furnace, disused Welsh quarries and restored canals all reflect the new
uses for a defunct industrial past, and all are good of their kind.
But what is missing from this year's awards are any significant and good new
houses. The Civic Trust rightly complains of the low standards that are
accepted by the volume house builders. This is ultimately the most
depressing element of all. A low standard of house design means a
universally low awareness of the value of good design. And good design, like
so many other values, begins at home. The people of Britain suffer from a
design vacuum on the domestic front, which is not a good omen for the
future.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3592</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Arts: Bosses reduce their mutual entertainment - Sponsorship
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANTONY THORNCROFT
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
This is the time of year when arts sponsorship makes news. Last week the
Association for Business Sponsorship of the Arts released its annual survey
of the size of the sponsorship honey pot; next Friday ABSA entertains its
Patron, the Prince of Wales, and hundreds of corporate chairmen, arts
directors, and general hangers on at the annual awards ceremony for
imaginative (or enduring) sponsorships.
Sponsorship has so far survived the recession remarkably well. ABSA has come
up with a total spend of Pounds 64.4m in 1991-92, a rise of 14 per cent on
the year. However, as ever, the statistics hide the real story. Direct
sponsorship has performed brilliantly, growing by 28 per cent to Pounds
57.5m while money invested in corporate membership schemes has fallen by 37
per cent to Pounds 7.8m.
It is obvious what has happened. Companies are concentrating their money on
sponsorships which might give commercial benefits, and cutting back on some
of their corporate memberships, which are mainly used for entertaining -
sometimes directors just enjoying each other's company.
As ever festivals and opera remain the favoured areas. But while virtually
all the Pounds 14.2m that festivals received was in sponsorship, opera
attracted Pounds 12m this way and another Pounds 4.3m through membership
schemes. ABSA's director general, Colin Tweedy, expects slower growth in
1992-93.
The 30 short listed companies from over 500 nominations for Friday's prize
day contain the biggest ever northern presence - six companies - reflecting
the successful opening of ABSA North, based at Halifax. Among the lesser
known names at the National Theatre for the awards will be Sherlock Hairshop
from Hexham, which competes with Champagne Piper-Heidsieck and the Harwood
Company for First Time Sponsor.
Other names are more familiar. Marks &amp; Spencer and Sainsbury's battle it out
with Turner Kenneth Brown for the Long Term Commitment prize while Cable &amp;
Wireless, Lloyds Bank, Brazil and Thorn EMI are the big names up for British
Art Overseas. The other key 'Oscar', for the best Corporate Programme, will
go to either Mobil, Northern Electric or VAG.
Sponsorship is growing thanks to small and medium sized companies. The
minnows seeking recognition and the Sponsorship by a Small Business prize,
are Carroll, Dempsey &amp; Thirkell, a London based design group; Edwin Shirley
Trucking, also from the capital; and Renwicks Garages of Newton Abbott.
The manufacturers of fast moving consumer goods have been conspicuously
absent as arts sponsors. This could be changing. Unilever is getting more
involved through its subsidiaries like Lever Bros and Van den Bergh's. The
collective pot was Pounds 50,000 to support Hamlet and The Tempest at the
RSC. This allows the RSC to apply for top-up money from the Business
Sponsorship Incentive Scheme, which is designed to encourage new sponsors.
The programmes and front of house material will feature three brands,
Persil, Comfort and Flora, rather than the Unilever corporate identity.
Another part of the group, Walls Ice Cream, has put Pounds 10,000 towards
this year's Bristol Old Vic's panto, Aladdin. The money has been doubled
through the BSIS.
The 1992 Mobil Playwriting Competition for the Royal Exchange Theatre has
been won by Simon Burke for his play The Lodger. He receives Pounds 15,000
and five other writers will share Pounds 25,000. The Royal Exchange will
certainly produce one of the short listed plays, ideally The Lodger.
The Mobil biennial is still supreme in the under-sponsored area of drama
competitions. It has a good track record, with Amongst Barbarians and Your
Home in the West among the previous winners. Organising the whole enterprise
 -there were 1,250 entries - costs Mobil Pounds 175,000, but it is sticking
with the venture. Unlike some other oil companies Mobil is happy with its
investment in the arts. It also contributes Pounds 175,000 to a lavish
touring production of a a good old pot boiler which it can use for
entertaining: this year, Charlie's Aunt; next year, Crucifer of Blood.
The death of arts sponsorship has been much exaggerated. With good marketing
of an attractive product companies are prepared to invest funds tocreate new
arts events.
In May 1993 the BOC Covent Garden Festival will take place, building on a
rather faltering debut in 1990. BOC is using the Festival to make a Pounds
500,000, three year, commitment to the arts. The original backer, Guardian
Royal Exchange, is maintaining the link, committing Pounds 300,000 over
three years, and American Express has come up with Pounds 50,000. With
top-ups from the BSIS and one off contributions, the joint chairmen of the
Festival, restauranteurs Laurence Isaacson and Neville Abraham, expect to
have Pounds 1m in the bank by the New Year, enough to underwrite three
successive festivals.
The Festival has attracted backers because it is targetted - on youth, and
on opera and music theatre. Ironically, neither the Royal Opera House nor
the ENO is participating directly but Isaacson has gained access to a 2,000
seat auditorium in the heart of the district which will provide a
spectacular venue for National Youth Opera: the Freemason's Hall. This will
be the first time it will be open to non-Masons. The Donmar Warehouse, St
Paul's Church (for Monteverdi's Vespers), as well as the Piazza, are other
venues already booked.
Sponsorship in kind, and mutually beneficial deals, are a feature of the new
hard-nosed attitude to sponsorship. The current Patrick Caulfield show at
Hyde Park's Serpentine Gallery has a splendid catalogue, thanks to the
Academy Group, publishers of Art &amp; Design magazine.
Academy has paid for the all colour catalogue and given the Serpentine 600
copies, which should bring it over Pounds 5,000 in income. The catalogues
are also incorporated in the latest issue of Art &amp; Design, increasing its
appeal. Add in a Royal College of Art dinner for the artist and the
investment tops Pounds 20,000.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3593</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Arts: Terrible tales of very silly mice - Tales of Beatrix
Potter
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CLEMENT CRISP
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
It is reasonable to assume that one does not see waltzing mice until
delirium tremens has set in. The Royal Ballet proved otherwise on Friday
night at the first stage performance of Tales of Beatrix Potter - though my
suspicions are that only a company seriously in its cups would consider
staging this bizarre entertainment. There were waltzing mice all over the
place, and tittuping pigs, terminally winsome squirrels, a hedgehog
laundress, and the entire and exhaustingly cute cast of Beatrix Potter
characters whom Sir Frederick Ashton set jiggling in a film 21 years ago.
That the film was a treat for youngest children is without doubt. Its
small-scale dances, its rumty-tum music and pervasive quaintness, were a
clever exercise in capitalising on a childhood classic. But that this thin
stuff should be transferred to the stage; that an opera house should expend
funds upon a ballet to attract a juvenile audience, when major works -
Cinderella, The Nutcracker - can do this with choreographic and musical
distinction; that sketchy little incidents about animals should be
considered a proper use of a national ballet company, is beyond belief.
The staging is misguided and unworthy of the Royal Ballet and of the
reputation of its founding choreographic genius. During seventy interminable
minutes we watch serious and gifted artists scuttling about, heavily masked,
paws up, whiskers a-twitch, making tiny, tiny jokes, and burdened and
extinguished by bloated outfits that are scrupulous copies of Beatrix
Potter's drawings, while saccharin or vulgar tunes proclaim the dubious
delights of Victorian musical taste.
It is ballet conceived as the art of nostalgia - and psychologically very
odd indeed. It is back-to-the-nursery as an aesthetic creed. It is
entertainment for the tiniest tots that feeds off a brilliant original to
make a calculated and commonplace show. It is, I am forced to conclude, a
ploy by Covent Garden to bring in an audience on the tugging arms of
children. It is an abrogation of the Royal Ballet's duty to show works of
art.
The set design by Christine Edzard is anaemic and looks amateurish:
washed-out backcloths with elaborate properties that crowd the stage. The
dancers are invisible, their performances lost under masks and the
ballooning outlines of their costumes; only Matthew Hart makes something
lively of Squirrel Nutkin. Of the narrative of the tales there is but the
sketchiest evidence.
Perhaps the most serious implication of this sorry affair is the existence
of a body of Ashton work which should - to the advantage of audience and
dancers - be restored to the repertory. Ashton, a master craftsman, made
these dances for the camera and the special circumstances of the cinema. To
show them on stage is to minimise their small but acutely judged effects and
to minimise Ashton thereby.
The sums expended on this apotheosis of the quaint and furry might have
secured the revival of Ashton's Sylvia, whose enchanting and witty three
acts, miraculous score and brilliant design, deserve to be rescued from
oblivion. Tales of Beatrix Potter only merits the attentions of Rentokil.
To complete this evening, the return of The Dream, not in the happiest of
conditions. Originally the piece trod a skilful path over an abyss of
Victorian prettiness and excessive Mendelssohnian charm. Characters had an
edge: Titania was wilful, sexually intriguing; Oberon's androgynous air
masked temper, passion; the lovers were sincere. The ballet is now saturated
with roguishness. Neither Lesley Collier nor Bruce Sansom convinced me of
the otherworldly allure of Titania and Oberon; the lovers played for laughs
in a singularly leaden way. It was Tetsuya Kumakawa, giving the finest
danced performance I have seen of the role, who makes Puck a truly magical
being. His ability to turn and soar without apparent effort, his dazzling
clarity of step, were marvellous. The rest was sentimentality - and fatal.
Tales of Beatrix Potter is at the Royal Opera House December 12, 16, 22, 30,
31
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3594</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Arts: A Venetian feast - Concert
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW CLEMENTS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Connoisseurs of fine Monteverdi have much to savour in London at present.
Last week the New London Consort presented Philip Pickett's performing
edition of the Vespers of 1610; in a fortnight's time the same performers
are introducing to Britain Pickett's much more contentious version of the
favola in musica, Orfeo.
Separating them on Thursday was a programme of Monteverdi that threw down no
textural or musicological challenges, just a succession of delights: the
Paris-based Les Arts Florissants under their founder-director William
Christie offered a selection of madrigals from the seventh and eighth books,
the two collections that summarise Monteverdi's secular lyricism during his
Venetian years.
Christie has an unerring knack of recruiting vivid young voices to his
group, skillfully deploying and complementing their talents. So for this
programme he had three sopranos of vividly contrasted tone and personality,
a male alto of rounded subtlety without a hint of hoot or acidic edge, and
pairs of tenors and basses of disarming enthusiasm and agility. Each is
nurtured and encouraged to give of their best; Christie's drawing together
of the threads, relating voices to instruments (a string septet, which he
directed from the harpsichord), became an ever-changing web of
possibilities, constantly renewing itself.
The concern for detail that Christie lavishes on the performances - right
down to his strict marshalling of every stage entrance and exit - logically
informs his programme-building too.
With Il combattimento di Tancredi e Clorinda as the centrepiece, the concert
was framed by two of the eight-part madrigali guerrieri from book 8, ending
with the extraordinary 'Hor ch'el ciel e la terra', and in between offered a
tour around some of the more intimate settings. The placing of Il
combattimento was perfectly judged to maximise its dramatic contrast, with
Nicolas Cavallier as a compelling narrator, nimble never bombastic, and
muscular, intense instrumental playing.
Yet the smaller-scale pieces offered equal delights: the seductive meshing
of soprano (the luscious-toned Calire Brua) and men's voices in the madrigal
sequence of Lamento della ninfa; the bright, crystalline accuracy of
Sandrine Piau in 'Chi vol haver felice'; the extraordinary sombre textures
of 'Interrote speranze' from book 7, with its pair of tenors, Bernard Loonen
and Adrian Brand, emerging from a swarm of buzzing theorbo and lirone
figures.
But then everything was lit with the same happy inspiration; it was
altogether an enthralling occasion, a joyous feast of vital, committed
singing.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3595</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Arts: Today's Television
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTOPHER DUNKLEY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Everything happens at nine o'clock. BBC2 shows the first in its two part
drama by Simon Gray, Unnatural Pursuits. Described as a 'musical comic
fantasy', it has an impressive credit list beginning with its star, Alan
Bates, who plays heavy drinking, chain-smoking playwright Hamish Partt. The
director is Christopher Morahan, who moves easily between live theatre and
television, and the producer Kenith Trodd, responsible for many of the BBC's
best original dramas in the last 20 years. ITV screens the first episode of
its 3-part Victorian murder mystery The Blackheath Poisonings, adapted by
Simon Raven from Julian Symons's novel. This has a cast including Zoe
Wanamaker, Judy Parfitt, Patrick Malahide, Ronald Fraser, and Kenneth Haigh.
C4's often excellent documentary series Cutting Edge offers a programme
investigating allegations of malpractice in Broadmoor. The same series
produced the programme last year about Ashworth in Merseyside which led to
the Blom-Cooper inquiry. I shall watch BBC2, tape ITV, and wait for the
repeat of the C4 documentary on Friday.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3596</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / People: Greycoat draws in its horns
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Greycoat, the troubled property investment company which on Thursday
reported pre-tax losses of Pounds 39.2m, up from 5.8m, for the six months to
September 30, is taking the reduction of its administrative overheads
seriously.
In the words of Richard Guignard, managing director, finance: 'it's not just
a question of getting rid of a few secretaries'.
Three directors of the 12-person board are to resign at the end of the year.
Barry Cockerell, deputy managing director and a member of the board since
the founding of Greycoat in 1978, is to leave, as is Walter Kumar, who
joined the company as a development executive in 1985 and moved up to the
board in 1989. Alastair Fergusson, a non-executive director since the
company's inception, is also going.
All this follows Geoffrey Wilson's decision earlier in the year to move from
executive to non-executive chairman. He was the founder of the company, but,
says Guignard, is now paid 'a fraction of what he received before'.
*****
John Menzies, formerly non-executive deputy chairman of Corah, has been
appointed to the board of ROBERT H LOWE as md of the childrenswear division,
Babygro.
*****
Michael Guerin, director responsible for NORTHUMBRIAN WATER's Enterprise
division, is appointed group commercial director and md of Entec Europe; Ian
MacMillan, md of Northumbrian Environmental Management, is appointed
director of customer services at Northumbrian Water. Peter Wilson, md
Integrated Environmental Management, the group's joint venture with
International Technology of America, also becomes md of Northumbrian
Environmental Management. Stuart Raistrick is to become md of Amtec Europe;
and David Watson, company secretary of Northumbrian Water Group.
*****
Leonard Rose, currently md, and Richard Rose, currently commercial director,
are to become joint md of WHOLESALE FITTINGS from January.
*****
Geoffrey Miller, formerly md of BARCLAYS UK Banking Division, has been
appointed banking adviser to MOORES ROWLAND.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3597</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Civil Engineering: Military accommodation
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
TILBURY DOUGLAS CONSTRUCTION has been awarded a Pounds 6m contract by the
Ministry of Defence for the construction of accommodation facilities at HMS
Collingwood in Fareham, Hampshire.
Work on the 62-week project entails the demolition of four three-storey
blocks and the construction on the same site of six accommodation blocks for
single junior ranks.
The contract also covers the construction of an electricity sub-station and
assorted general works.
Architect is PSA Projects (London B Design) and the contract was let through
the MoD's defence works services department.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3598</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAB9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Civil Engineering: Installing infrastructure
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The Midlands office of CLUGSTON CONSTRUCTION has been awarded a contract to
implement infrastructure works on Bass Developments Centrum 100 site at
Burton upon Trent. The contract forms phase one of larger infrastructure
works amounting to some Pounds 10m.
Clugston will be constructing a roundabout on Wellington Road and the first
section of the principal spine road, which will provide access to up to 70
acres of serviced land.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3599</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAB8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / People: Building up Taylor Woodrow
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Colin Parsons, the new chairman of construction group Taylor Woodrow, has
looked elsewhere in his own struggling sector to boost the non-executive
content of the board and chosen Sir George Russell, chairman and chief
executive of building materials group Marley.
It is the first time Taylor Woodrow has lured the chairman of another
industrial public company into a non-executive directorship. Sir George
joins Charles Hambro, chairman of Hambros, the company's merchant bank, who
has been on the board for as long as thirty years, and Sir Kit McMahon, who
joined in September 1991, but whose background is financial not industrial.
Lord Bellwin, who had been a director since 1985, retired shortly after
Parsons arrived.
The company, which cut its interim dividend after losing Pounds 16m in the
six months to June 30, hopes that Sir George's breadth of experience will
help address charges that the board has long been too introspective, as well
as complement the skills of Parsons, an accountant who has worked in Canada
for 30 years. The appointment comes as part of a thorough reorganisation
initiated by Parsons, who arrived at the end of March, and who has been
overhauling the board, prompting several departures and simplifying what was
previously an opaque hierarchy.
While Sir George has been unable to shield Marley from the ravages of
recession, analysts credit him with being clear-thinking and unafraid of
tough decisions. He is perhaps better known as chairman of the Independent
Television Commission, a post he has held since 1991.
Taylor Woodrow, which closed its North American construction operation but
which still retains large housing interests in the USA, is attracted by Sir
George's experience in North America - beginning in 1968 when he worked with
Welland Chemical of Canada, before joining Alcan in 1972. He is still a
member of the worldwide board of Alcan Aluminium Limited.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3600</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAB7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Civil Engineering: Turbine buildings
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The major projects company of TRAFALGAR HOUSE CONSTRUCTION has begun work on
a Pounds 16m contract for the civil engineering works at Keadby Power's
combined cycle gas turbine power station. The 680MW station is being
constructed by John Brown Engineering, also part of Trafalgar House, on a 26
acre site at Keadby, South Humberside.
The largest element of the work involves constructing a gas turbine building
and a steam turbine building. Both buildings will be steel framed with
acoustic cladding.
The company will also be responsible for the substructure for the waste heat
recovery boiler and building a water treatment area containing two steel
tanks. Other work involves constructing a gas reception area, site
preparation, roads, car parks, switchyard and site services.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3601</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAB5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Management: Ex-pats and Poles apart
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTOPHER BOBINSKI
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Three years after the collapse of communism in Poland, managers recruited
locally by foreign companies are experiencing the frustrations of reporting
to expatriate superiors.
There are at least 1,000 locally-recruited Polish managers working for
foreign companies. By offering high salaries (by local standards) the
foreign companies were able to cream off the best of the experienced
managerial talent as well as attract young graduates.
But one expatriate management consultant says: 'The younger staff are
beginning to get bored now that they have learned the jobs that they were
taken on to do.'
Marius Bialek, from H Neumann, an Austrian management consulting company,
says: 'I know there is something wrong when good people I recruited a year
ago come to me looking for another job.'
He believes some frustration will be alleviated by sending the more talented
managers to run new offices elsewhere in eastern Europe. As for those who
leave, few are likely to seek jobs with Polish-owned companies. Instead they
will look to other multinationals.
One reason is pay. A senior executive working for a Polish company earns
about Dollars 12,000 (Pounds 7,900) a year although top salaries can go as
high as Dollars 80,000. Foreign companies pay between Dollars 28,000 and
Dollars 72,000 to locally-recruited senior executives. That contrasts,
however, with the Dollars 60,000 to Dollars 200,000 a year their expatriate
colleagues and superiors are earning.
But the era of the expatriate manager in Poland may be limited. Gaspol, for
example, is a joint venture between a number of Polish liquified petroleum
gas distributors and the UK's Calor group, Primagaz of France and SHV from
Holland.
Bob West, the managing director, says 'The four expatriates in place should
be out of here in three years. After all, I shall never know the market, the
language and the country as well as the local people.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3602</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAB3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Civil Engineering: Oceanographic research centre
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) has awarded WIMPEY
CONSTRUCTION SOUTHERN a Pounds 29m contract to build the Southampton
Oceanography Centre.
Wimpey is set to start work on the project, which is jointly funded by NERC
and the University of Southampton, in the New Year.
The development at Empress Dock, adjacent to Ocean Village, will be a
striking addition to the Southampton waterfront. Set on a five hectare site,
the project comprises a multi-storey, brick clad and concrete framed
building offering 22,000 sq metres of research and teaching facilities for
the Research Council.
The centre will act as the national focus for all subjects of oceanographic
research, training and teaching. It brings together NERC's Institute of
Oceanographic Sciences Deacon Laboratory and its Research Vessel Services as
well as the University of Southampton's departments of oceanography and
geology, and the underwater acoustics group from the faculty of engineering
and applied science.
Along with a research aquarium, temperature controlled investigation areas
and test tanks, the development will also house the National Oceanographic
library.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3603</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAB2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / People: Salomon goes global
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
This year's list of 21 new managing directors at Salomon Brothers exhibits a
markedly more international flavour than in previous years, with as many as
8 of the 21 new managing directors based in London and a further 3 in Japan.
This reflects not only the solid and increasing profitability of the London
operation in recent years, but also a change in philosophy at the top of the
Wall Street investment bank since the arrival of British-born Deryck Maughan
as chairman and chief executive officer. Salomon normally appoints around 20
managing directors at a time; last year just three were London-based.
Including the new appointments, there are 130 managing directors worldwide,
with 21 in London.
The new managing directors are: Henry Clark III, Mark Davis, Gregory Erardi,
David Fisher, James Forese, Ellis Jones, David Levy, John Lipsky, Jonathan
Sandelman, and George Shapiro.
In London, Salomon has appointed Jeremy Amias, Simon Bowden, Paul Brewer,
Frederic DiGuisto, Bruno Gabriele, Sara McKerihan, David Turnbull, and
Steven Tye. In Japan, the three are: Louis Faust, Yoshihiro Mikami and Ikuo
Morimoto.
*****
Christopher Dreyfus has been appointed a director of RIVER &amp; MERCANTILE
AMERICAN TRUST.
*****
Stephen Denford, formerly a director of 3i, is joining SUMIT Equity
Ventures.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3604</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAB1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Management: Following in Eskimo footsteps - Health Check
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By Dr MICHAEL MCGANNON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Old wives' tales used to claim that eating fish was good for your brain.
That has never been proved, but medical research over the last decade
suggests that fish does help to reduce cholesterol levels.
Eskimos, who eat enormous amounts of marine mammal blubber and fatty cold
water fish have markedly low levels of damaging cholesterol.
Indeed, compared with other races, Eskimos have a higher level of
cardio-protective HDL-cholesterol (the so-called good cholesterol). So what
is the effect of eating fish?
The cardio-protective substances contained in many cold-water fish are
unsaturated omega-3 fatty acids, the most common of which are eicosapentoic
acid (EPA) and docosahexanoic acid (DHA) which increase the levels of
cardio-protective HDL cholesterol.
Another potentially beneficial effect of these fish oils is that as they
become incorporated into capillary cell membranes, they help the red blood
cells flow more easily in the tiny vessels.
Moreover, there is preliminary evidence that omega-3 fatty acids may lower
blood pressure and reduce inflammatory reactions.
The highest concentrations of EPA and DHA are found in all seafoods and
particularly in cold-water fish.
Atlantic mackerel, Pacific salmon and Albacore tuna have the highest levels.
The added oil in a can of fish is likely to be vegetable oil and not omega-3
fatty acid. However, draining the oil - a good idea because the added
vegetable oil doubles the calorie load - does remove 15-25 per cent of
precious omega-3 fatty acids because these are oil soluble.
Although there are many fish oil supplements on the market, their long-term
safety record is not known.
So the best bet at present is to eat fish at least three times a week,
remembering that the greater the amount of dark flesh on the fish, the
greater the fat and the omega-3 fatty acid content.
The author is the medical director of the Insead Business Health course.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3605</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAB0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / People: Study in journalism
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Peter Cole, founding editor of the short-lived Sunday Correspondent and
editor of the Sunday Times News Review for the past two years, is exchanging
Wapping for Preston to take up the newly created professorship in journalism
at the University of Central Lancashire. He starts towards the end of
January.
Cole, 46, denies any unhappiness at the Sunday Times, calling the move
'positive rather than negative.' He says it is prompted 'partly by age' and
adds that he likes dealing with students. He answered an advertisement, and
remarks on the 'exhaustive 2 day interviewing process' - quite unlike the
generally much less time-consuming affair for a journalistic job.
In contrast with the US and some continental European countries, Britain has
hitherto largely resorted to the cult of the amateur when educating its
journalists. Last year, however, the University of Central Lancashire, then
Lancashire Polytechnic, introduced one of the country's first undergraduate
degrees in journalism.
Can the profession be taught? A Cambridge economics graduate himself, Cole
thinks that, given the increased complexity of the subjects journalists are
supposed to report upon, there is indeed a lot that can usefully be learned
as part of an academic discipline. And public relations, which features this
year as an option in the combined honours programme? 'We'll find out' he
says.
Cole adds that his wide experience in the newspaper business - he was news
editor and deputy editor of the Guardian before moving across for the Sunday
Correspondent launch - will determine that the course is 'fairly practically
directed.'
Some 200 students are currently studying journalism or public relations in
the department.
The university, which strikes Cole as 'a very ambitious place', boasts a
total of 14,000 students, including part-timers.
*****
Jon Snow, Channel Four news presenter, is to become a visiting professor at
Nottingham Trent University, associated with the new Broadcast Journalism
degree and other related courses.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3606</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / The Week Ahead: Diary Dates
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
UK Companies
TODAY
COMPANY MEETINGS:
Kleinwort Development Fund, 20, Fenchurch Street, EC, 12.45
Paterson Zochonis, Holiday Inn Crowne Plaza Midland Hotel, Peter Street,
Manchester, 12.00
BOARD MEETINGS:
Finals:
Airtours
Berisford Intl.
Faber Prest
Radio Clyde
Tunstall
Interims:
Acal
Compco
Cranswick
In Shops
Morris Ashby
Rolfe &amp; Nolan
Scottish &amp; Newcastle
South Wales Electricity
Total Systems
Vega
Wellman
TOMORROW
Finsbury Growth Trust, Great Eastern Hotel, Liverpool Street, EC, 12.00
London &amp; St. Lawrence Inv., 111, Cannon Street, EC, 12.30
Photo-Me Intl., Church Road, Bookham, Surrey, 6.00
River &amp; Mercantile Extra Income Trust, New Connaught Rooms, Great Queen
Street, WC, 12.00
BOARD MEETINGS:
Finals:
Carlton Comms.
Eurocopy
Grainger Trust
Ossory Estates
Perstorp
Sage
Sturge
Vaux
Interims:
Atkins
Avesco
BTP
Bogod
Campbell &amp; Armstrong
East Midlands Electricity
M &amp; G 2nd Dual Tst.
Mansfield Brewery
Safeland
Siebe
Umeco
Whitecroft
WEDNESDAY DECEMBER 9
Barry Wehmiller, 1, Finsbury Avenue, EC, 10.00
TIP Europe, Butchers' Hall, 87, Bartholomew Close, EC, 11.30
Verson Intl., National Exhibition Centre, Birmingham, 10.00
BOARD MEETINGS:
Finals:
Avon Rubber
Countryside Props.
Grainger Tst.
Greenalls
River Plate &amp; Gen. Inv.
Interims:
Assoc. British Engineering
Manweb
NMC
Phoenix Timber
Protean
Stirling Group
Tams (John)
THURSDAY DECEMBER 10
Castle Communications, Alderman's House, Alderman's Walk, EC, 12.00
China &amp; Eastern Inv., 155, Bishopsgate, EC, 11.00
Dickie (James), Royal Scottish Automobile Club, Blythwood Square, Glasgow,
12.00
Fleming Japanese Inv. Trust, 25, Copthall Avenue, EC, 12.00
Manganese Bronze, 1, Love Lane, EC, 12.00
Nesco Invs., Great Eastern Hotel, Liverpool Street, EC, 12.00
Raglan Property Trust, 3, Cloth Street, EC, 10.00
Scottish Metropolitan Property, Forte Crest Hotel, Bothwell Street, Glasgow,
10.30
Wardle Storeys, Brantham Works, Brantham, Manningtree, Essex, 9.30
BOARD MEETINGS:
Finals:
API
Archer (AJ)
Compass
Eldridge Pope
Johnson &amp; Firth Brown
Lynx
Whessoe
Widney
Interims:
Arlen
Booth Inds.
British Land
Eve
Fine Art Developments
Fuller, Smith &amp; Turner
Great Universal Stores
Hunter Saphir
IWP Intl.
Joseph (Leopold)
London Merchant Secs.
Midlands Electricity
Moorgate Inv. Tst.
Moorgate Small Co's.
Pilkington
South Western Electricity
Stewart &amp; Wight
Taunton Cider
FRIDAY DECEMBER 11
British Empire Securities &amp; General Trust, Saddlers' Hall, Gutter Lane,
Cheapside, EC, 12.00
Molyneux Estates, 22-24, City Road, EC, 11.00
Wolseley, Vines Lane, Droitwich, Worcester, 2.30
BOARD MEETINGS:
Final:
Southern Radio
Interims:
Barrow Hepburn
Osborne &amp; Little
Parkland Textile
Company meetings are annual general meetings unless otherwise stated.
DIVIDEND &amp; INTEREST PAYMENTS TODAY
Antofagasta 6p
Automated Security 2.25p
Chemical Banking Gtd. Fltg. Rate Nts. 1996 Dollars 131.22
Densitron Intl. 0.4p
Elys (Wimbledon ) 1.5p
Enserch Dollars 0.20
Gerrard &amp; National 6p
Higgs &amp; Hill 1p
Lockheed Dollars 0.53
Mercury Offshore Sterling Tst. European 0.114p
Do. O'seas. Fd. 0.21
Do. Pacific 1.753p
Do. UK Fd. 3.248p
Do. Reserve Fd. 3.922p
NFC Var. Vtg. 1.55p
Northern Rock Bldg. Soc. Fltg. Rate Nts. 2002 Pounds 2855.87
Paterson Zochonis 9.2p
Do. A 9.2p
Pochin's 21p
P &amp; O Property 7 1/2 pc Deb. 1997/2002 Pounds 3.75
Racal Security 8pc Ln. 1992/95 0.5p
River &amp; Mercantile
Extra Income Fd. 1.96875p
Rockwell Intl. Dollars 0.23
Sanwa Finance Aruba Gtd. Step-up Fltg. Rate Nts. 2002 Dollars 493.16
Sears 1p
Securities Trust of Scot. 1p
Sketchley 1p
Spirax-Sarco 2.7p
3i Gtd. Fltg. Rate Nts. Pounds 264.17
TOMORROW
Cadbury Schweppes ADR Dollars 0.3379
Ferguson Intl. 4.25p
Finsbury Growth Tst. 2p
Fuji Intl. Finance Dollars 499.63
Green (E) &amp; Partners 4.25p
Lon. &amp; St. Lawrence Inv 3.84p
Natl. Australia Bank Sub. Var. Rate Nts. 2000 Pounds 272.56
National Westminster Var. Rate Cap. Nts. 2009 Pounds 267.28
Nationwide Bldg. Soc. Fltg. Rate Nts. 1995 Pounds 258.89
New Zealand Fltg. Rate Nts. 1996 Dollars 212.89
Reed Intl. 5pc Pf. 1.75p
Do. 7pc Pf. 2.45p
Standard Chartered Und. Prim. Cap. Fltg. Rate Nts. Dollars 220.49
Tenneco Dollars 0.40
WEDNESDAY DECEMBER 9
Anheuser-Busch Dollars 0.32
Boxmore Intl. 1.15p
Euro. Inv. Bank 9 1/2 pc Ln. 2009 Pounds 237.50
Glynwed Intl. 4.15p
Lon. Atlantic Inv. Tst. 0.78p
Office &amp; Elect. Machines 0.1p
Treasury 10pc Ln. 1994 5pc
THURSDAY DECEMBER 10
Allied-Signal Dollars 0.25
Bank of Scotland 1.77p
Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank Y4.25
Dun &amp; Bradstreet Dollars 0.57
Exxon Dollars 0.72
Fuji Bank Intl. Finance Fltg./ Fixed Rate Gtd. Bds. Var. Rate Nts. Y4.25
General Motors Dollars 0.20
Grace (WR) Dollars 0.35
Hammerson Prop. Inv. 3.5p
Do. A 3.5p
Honda Motor Y7
Houston Inds. Dollars 0.75
IBM Dollars 1.21
Leeds Permanent Bldg. Soc. 13 5/8 pc PIBS Pounds 3406.25
Manganese Bronze 1p
NEC Y5
Radamec 0.5p
Sakura Bank Y4.25
Sanwa Bank Y4.25
Sun Co Dollars 0.45
Texaco Dollars 0.80
Toray Inds. Y3.5
Do. BDR's Y3.5
Travelers Dollars 0.40
Utd. Technologies Dollars 0.45
USX-Marathon Dollars 0.17
Warner-Lambert Dollars 0.51
Yasuda Tst. &amp; Banking Y3.5
FRIDAY DECEMBER 11
Aegis (Netherland Antilles) 9 3/4 pc Gtd. Pf. 2004 0.0975p
BM 2.9p
Bracken Mines R0.30
Canadian O'seas. Packaging Inds. CDollars 0.55
Chase Manhattan Fltg. Rate Nts. 1997 Dollars 132.71
Coles Myer ADollars 0.08
DAB Invs. R7.87
East Daggafontein
Mines R0.25
English China Clays 6.6p
Essex Water A 36.8p
Do. B 36.8p
FR 2.46p
Govett Oriental Inv. Pounds 0.40
Hongkong &amp; Shanghai
Banking Prim. Cap. Und. Fltg. Rate Nts. Dollars 63.19
Investors Capital Tst. 1.275p
Kleinwort Dev. Fd. 7.75p
Leslie Gold Mines R0.15
Lloyds Bank Prim. Cap. Und. Fltg. Rate Nts. Dollars 222.40
Meggitt 1.25p
M &amp; G Recovery Inv. Tst. 0.85p
Do. Geared Units 0.85p
Do. Package Units 0.85p
Monsanto Dollars 0.56
Nichii 5 1/2 pc Bds. 1998 Y139027
Pressac 1.65p
Suffolk Water 23.7p
Tarmac 3p
Temple Court
Mortgages Class A1 Mort. Backed Fltg. Rate Nts. 2031 Pounds 271.01
Do. Class A2 Mort Backed Fltg. Rate Nts. 2031 Pounds 274.74
Unisel Gold Mines R0.10
Woolwich Bldg. Soc. Fltg. Rate Nts. 1994 Pounds 262.20
SATURDAY DECEMBER 12
Eaton Fin. 12 1/2 pc Ln. 2014 Pounds 6.25
Exchequer 12pc 2013/17 6pc
Hewden-Stuart 0.875p
PARLIAMENTARY DIARY
TODAY
Commons: National Heritage, Attorney General's and Overseas Development
questions. Social Security Bill, remaining stages.
Lords: Debate on Liaison Committee report. Damages (Scotland) Bill, third
reading. Bankruptcy (Scotland) Bill, committee. Debate on the National
Association of Citizen's Advice Bureaux report ''A Charter for All?''
Committees: Home affairs, 11.30. Subject: The work of the home office.
Witness: Kenneth Clarke, home secretary. Public accounts, 4.30. Subject:
Quality of service. Witnesses: Sir Michael Partridge, permanent secretary,
department of social security and M Bichard, chief executive, Benefits
Agency.
Home affairs sub-committee on immigration advice, 4.45. Subject: Delays in
the immigration and nationality department. Witnesses: Charles Wardle, home
office minister, FCO and
Lord Chancellor's
Office officials.
TOMORROW
Commons: Health questions. Questions to the Prime Minister, 3.15pm. Debate
on unemployment, opened by Labour. Mink Keeping Order.
Lords: Agriculture Bill, committee. Child Support Fees Regulations. Estate
Agents (Specified Offences Amendment) Order. Gas (Exempt Supplies) Bill,
third reading.
Committees: Trade and industry, 10.30. Subject: British energy policy.
Witnesses: European Commissioner for Energy (at 10.30) and Mobil North Sea
(at 12 noon).
WEDNESDAY
Commons: Environment questions. Debate on the Common Fisheries Policy. Sea
Fish (Conservation) Bill, Lords amendments.
Lords: Debates on Hong Kong and China and the Sudan.
Committees: Environment, 9.30. Subject: Forestry and the environment.
Witnesses: National Trust, the Woodland Trust and the Association of County
Councils. Transport, 10.00. Subject: The future of the railways. Witnesses:
Representatives of Banverket and SJ (Swedish railway companies), DB (at
10.45), SNCF (at 11.30), Lord Marsh (at 12.15). Social security, 10.30.
Subject: Public expenditure on social security. Witness: Peter Lilley,
social security secretary. Trade and industry, 10.30. Subject: British
energy policy. Witnesses: Scottish Power (at 10.30), Association of British
Mining Equipment Companies (at 11), British Nuclear Fuels (at 12 noon).
Welsh affairs, 10.30. Subject: The work of the Welsh Office. Witness: David
Hunt, Welsh secretary. Transport, 4.00. Subject: The future of the railways.
Witnesses: Sir Peter Parker, former BR chairman and Senor Kogan, Argentine
railway restructuring unit (at 4.30). Employment, 4.15. Subject: Employment
consequences of British Coal's proposed programme of pit closures. Witness:
Gillian Shephard, employment secretary. Health and social security, 4.15.
Subject: Community care - transfer of funding to local authorities.
Witnesses: Association of County Councils and Association of Metropolitan
Authorities. Public accounts, 4.15. Subject: Irregular payments to MoD
staff. Witness: Sir Christopher France, permanent secretary, MoD. Treasury
and civil service, 4.15. Subject: Implementation of interest rate changes.
Witnesses: Brian Pitman, chief executive, Lloyds Bank (at 4.15), Council of
Mortgage Lenders (at 5.00). Home affairs, 4.45. Subject: Domestic violence.
Witness: Lord Chancellor's department officials.
THURSDAY
Commons: Treasury questions. Questions to the Prime Minister, 3.15.
Estimates debate on coastal zone protection and planning. Banking
Co-ordination (Second Council Directive) regulations. Package Travel,
Package Holidays and Package
Tours regulations.
Lords: Crown Proceedings (Armed Forces) Bill, report. Criminal Justice Bill,
third reading. Agriculture Bill, committee. Overseas Companies and Credit
and Financial Institutions (Branch Disclosure) Regulations.
Companies Act (Disclosure of Branches and Bank Accounts) Regulations.
Companies (Fees) (Amendment) Regulations.
Committees: National Heritage, 10.30. Subject: Privacy and media intrusion.
Witness: James Bishop, chairman, Association of British Editors. Foreign
affairs, 4.00. Subject: Role of the United Nations. Witness: Lord Owen.
FRIDAY
Commons: Private Members' Business. Local Government (Overseas Assistance
Bill, second reading.
Lords: Not sitting.
RESULTS DUE
Pilkington, the glass maker, reports interim results on Thursday and is
expected to see profits fall once more, and cut the dividend after a
reduction in the year-end dividend in June.
There is a wide range of estimates, with the pessimists expecting pre-tax
profits of Pounds 10m or less, against Pounds 50.6m, after more exceptional
costs.
Interim results from Scottish &amp; Newcastle today should reflect tougher
trading conditions in the beer market and two disappointing summer months
for its UK holiday operations. A 5 per cent decline in interim pre-tax
profits to about Pounds 110m is forecast.
Siebe, the engineering systems and controls group, looks set to continue its
solid performance since its Pounds 357m acquisition in 1990 of US group
Foxboro. Analysts forecast a modest improvement in pre-tax profit to Pounds
76.5m (Pounds 75.2m) for the six months to September, when results are
published tomorrow. The interim dividend is likely to be increased
marginally, to 3.3p. - last year's payout was 6.05p, but there was a
one-for-one capitalisation issue in September.
Airtours, the UK's third largest package holiday company, should report
today pre-tax profits of between Pounds 34m and Pounds 36m for the year to
September, against Pounds 27.5m last time.
It is thought the group will have net cash of more than Pounds 100m, having
bought for Pounds 16m the Pickfords travel agency chain from NFC in
September. The full-year dividend is likely to be 6.5p (5.75p).
Also reporting today is Westland, the helicopter group. Profits should edge
up from last time's Pounds 23.7m to about Pounds 24m, or Pounds 24.5m at the
most. The group's order gap could continue until after 1994, when it is
possible there will be no helicopter deliveries. So profits could stay at
the current level for the next couple of years, until the EH101 reaches
completion. Exceptional charges for redundancies are likely to be down but
then so are operating profits. The final dividend will probably be held at
2.75p for an unchanged 4p total.
Carlton Communications, the television and video group, is likely to report
tomorrow a rise of some 15 per cent in pre-tax profits for the year ended
September to around Pounds 102m.
Expectations are that Thursday's pre-tax profit at Great Universal Stores -
the mail-order, financial services and property group - will increase in
line with the prediction by Lord Wolfson, chairman, at the annual meeting in
October that profits would be 'somewhat ahead'. The market sees an
improvement to Pounds 193m (Pounds 187m) in the half-year to September, with
a relatively small increase on the 12.75p dividend recommended last time.
Compass Group, the catering and hospitals concern that recently bought the
Travellers Fare snack shops business, is expected to report a rise of about
Pounds 3m in annual pre-tax profit to Pounds 35m.
While both sides of the business have proved robust, questions at Thursday's
meeting will focus on the impact of unemployment on staff canteens and the
squeeze at private hospitals.
Looking ahead, Compass's penetration of the huge catering market in state
hospitals and schools will be one of the issues, as will its plans for
expansion overseas now that it seems unlikely to buy any part of its rival
Gardner Merchant.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3607</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Economics: Recovery hopes rest on figures
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By EMMA TUCKER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A SENSE that brighter news on the economy is lurking in the wings lifted
spirits in the UK towards the end of last week, so today's consumer credit
numbers will be looked at closely for further evidence of a recovery in
retail sales.
While the credit business series from the Central Statistical Office
measures only about 15 per cent of total private sector debt, the numbers
provide a useful snapshot of consumer behaviour.
The forecast is for a small change in net consumer borrowing in October  -
after September's net repayment of Pounds 60m.
The release of the final cost of living figure for November in west Germany
is also expected this week. The preliminary number, a year-on-year rise of
3.7 per cent, surprised economists. A modest downwards revision may be
announced, but is unlikely to be steep enough to ease Bundesbank worries
over inflation.
Last week, Helmut Schlesinger, president of the Bundesbank, complained
inflation was too high - and M3 growth continues to overshoot its 1992
target.
This is also an important week for European politics. The Edinburgh summit
starts on Friday. John Major, the prime minister, will want a successful
summit at the end of the UK's troublesome 6 months at the presidency of the
EC.
Following are some of the other economic highlights of the week. The figures
in brackets are the median of economists' forecasts from MMS International,
a financial information company. Unless stated otherwise, the figures are
the month-on-month comparison.
Today: UK, October credit business (up Pounds 20m); Canada, November housing
starts (170,000 units); Switzerland, deputy governor of the Bundesbank
Tietmeyer speaks on European monetary integration; Brussels, EC agriculture
ministers meeting.
Tomorrow: US, October consumer credit (up Dollars 0.4bn); October motor
vehicle sales (down 0.5 per cent), October labour income (unchanged);
Switzerland, G10 Central Bank governors meeting at Bank of International
Settlements; Brussels, EC foreign ministers meeting for pre-Edinburgh summit
discussions; Austria, Italy, Portugal and Spain, markets closed.
Wednesday: US, October wholesale trade; Australia, October retail trade (up
0.4 per cent); Switzerland, November CPI (up 3.2 per cent on year); UK, EC
commission president Jacques Delors meets UK prime minister, John Major;
Portugal, parliament debates and votes to ratify Maastricht treaty.
Thursday: US, November producer price index (up 0.1 per cent), excluding
food and energy (up 0.2 per cent), October home completions, money supply
data for the week ended November 30, money supply data for month of
November; Canada, October department store sales; Australia, November
employment (up 5,000), November unemployment (11.2 per cent); Norway, CPI
(up 2.1 per cent on year); Sweden, November CPI (up 0.2 per cent on month,
up 2.1 per cent on year); France, Bank of France conference, 1992 and 1993
monetary policy; UK, Treasury monthly report on monetary policy;
Switzerland, EFTA ministerial meeting in Geneva for 2 days; Germany,
Bundesbank council meeting with year-end M3 target review.
Friday: UK, EC Edinburgh summit opens, RPI (up 0.1 per cent on month, up 3.2
per cent on year, up 3.8 per cent on year excluding mortgage interest
rates); Holland, November CPI (flat on month, up 3 per cent on year);
Switzerland, Swiss National Bank 1993 monetary programme; US, November CPI
(up 0.2 per cent), excluding food and energy (up 0.2 per cent), November
retail sales (up 0.2 per cent), excluding cars (up 0.4 per cent), December
Michigan sentiment, November real earnings; Japan, Bank of Japan quarterly
Tankan report released; Australia, October award pay rates.
During the week: Germany, November cost of living - final, October retail
sales (up 1 per cent on year); Sweden, November unemployment rate (5.6 per
cent).
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3608</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Survey of Israel (10): Easier in principle - Privatisation
proceeds slowly
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   ByJUDY MALTZ
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ISRAEL'S privatisation programme appears to be gaining some momentum after a
painfully slow start.
In February, the government sold off 20 per cent of its shares in Israel
Chemicals, the largest state-owned industrial concern, for Dollars 235m, in
the biggest share offering ever made on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange (TASE).
Early next year, it plans to issue an international tender to sell off a
controlling stake in the national telecommunications company, Bezek, which
has already been partly privatised on the TASE.
It is difficult to find anyone in Israel these days who disputes the
benefits of privatisation. What remains an issue of heated controversy,
however, is the method of going about it. Specifically, should the
government sell its companies on the local stock exchange - a process which
generally takes longer but also allows the public to benefit - or should it
sell control immediately to private investors and thereby turn in a quick
profit?
Since taking power last July, Israel's new Labour-led government has taken
great pains to show that it wholeheartedly supports privatisation. In spite
of its Socialist roots, it has no intention of abandoning free-market
reforms begun by the previous Likud government.
To prove its point, the first decision taken by the newly formed cabinet
last summer was to re-establish a special interministerial committee,
charged with overseeing the privatisation programme. On the committee,
headed by Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, sit the finance minister and the
justice minister.
The decision was taken a day before the former US Secretary of State, James
Baker, arrived in Jerusalem for his first meeting with the prime minister
and was interpreted as a clear message to the Americans that the new
government views privatisation as one of its top economic priorities.
The government of Israel is currently a shareholder in 170 companies, which
last year employed 24 per cent of the country's total labour force and
accounted for just under 24 per cent of its total exports. The privatisation
programme is directed at about 25 of these companies, active mainly in
utilities, chemicals, transport and construction. On the whole, these
companies have tended to be profitable.
The government formally adopted a policy of privatisation in the mid-1980s,
when it commissioned First Boston, the New York investment bank, to draw up
a master plan for selling off state-owned companies. Owing to opposition by
the various ministers responsible for the companies, their management and
workers, First Boston's recommendations were never implemented.
The only major government company sale to take place in recent years has
been that of Paz, Israel's largest oil company, to Australian businessman
Jack Liberman.
Realising that its programme was going virtually nowhere, the government
last year set up the special three-man interministerial committee in the
hope that it would facilitate more rapid decisions.
Still, Mr Joseph Nitzani, head of the Goverment Corporations Authority - the
body responsible for carrying out these decisions - believes there remain
major obstacles which stand in the way of privatisation. 'The way things are
going today, I can't say I'm very optimistic,' he says. 'There is still a
lot of bureaucracy in the decision-making process, and when a company
decides it does not want to be privatised, it can put many obstacles in my
path.'
Mr Nitzani has already submitted a proposal to the interministerial
committee which would significantly enhance his authorities and limit the
number of parties involved in the decision-making process concerning each
company.
Within the framework of its privatisation programme for the coming year, the
government plans to further reduce its holdings in Israel Chemicals and
Bezek, sell off control in El Al, the national airline, and divest itself of
its remaining shares in the Zim shipping company. In addition, it intends to
draw up a proposal for privatising Israel Aircraft Industries - as well as
prepare the groundwork for a share offering in the Israel Electric
Corporation.
The government has set as a target the sale of Dollars 3bn in state-owned
assets by 1994. 'The main goals of our privatisation policy are to develop
and stabilise the capital market, attract foreign investment, improve the
efficiency of natural monopolies and relieve the burden on the state budget
cause by unprofitable government companies,' says Mr Nitzani.
Through its emphasis on privatisation, it appears the new government is
trying to show its genuine commitment to the principles of reducing state
intervention in the economy, freeing the capital markets and furthering
competition by breaking down monopolies and cartels and admitting imports.
Indeed, despite mounting pressure from industrialists, the government has so
far held fast to a trade liberalisation programme introduced last year. As
part of this programme, Israel abolished all existing administrative
restrictions on imports from third countries, such as quotas and licensing
requirements, and replaced them with tariffs, which are to be gradually
reduced over a period of five to seven years.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3609</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Survey of Israel (12): More jobs as exports climb -
Industrial good news outweighs the bad
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JUDY MALTZ
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THEY may hesitate to admit it, but 1992 has been an exceptionally good year
for Israeli industrialists.
Industrial exports are expected to grow by an impressive 14 per cent this
year to total nearly Dollars 9bn after dropping two per cent in 1991;
industrial production is forecast to rise eight per cent, creating close to
7,000 new jobs.
These good tidings come in spite of the slump which continues to affect most
of Israel's main export markets and the crisis plaguing its all-important
military industries.
'In general, we can't complain,' says Mr Yoram Blisovsky, director-general
of the Israel Manufacturers Association. 'What seems clear is that now, in
contrast to the past few years, export industries have taken the lead as the
main areas of growth.'
Indeed, ever since the Soviet Jewish immigration wave began in 1989, the
main industries to benefit had been those which produce goods for the local
market, mainly food and textiles, as well as those supplying inputs to the
construction sector, which underwent a boom owing to the population
explosion.
After immigration slowed in the past year, however, industrial growth has
been fuelled mainly by exports, particularly electronics, textiles and
plastics. Some of the increase in exports this year is merely compensation
for the drop that occurred last year, owing to the Gulf War. But according
to Mr Jonathan Katz, managing director of Economic Models and Forecasts, a
consulting firm, a good part of the increase can be attributed to government
policy which has helped ensure profitability.
'As a result of the new exchange rate policy adopted last December, whereby
the government announces in advance the rate of devaluation over the course
of the year, there's more certainty for industrialists, and this has
undoubtedly helped them with sales,' he says.
The jump in exports has been accompanied not only by improved profitability,
but by a drop in real wages and higher productivity. These developments have
come more gradually, however, resulting from efficiency-boosting measures
undertaken by most of Israel's leading industries in the late 1980s.
'Today, there are no longer any more 'sacred cows'. Israeli industries know
that the government will no longer pump money into them just to avoid
massive lay-offs and that they must justify their existence,' says Mr Katz.
'As a result, previously financially-strapped companies like Koor Industries
and Israeli Aircraft Industries (IAI) have in the past year begun showing a
profit.'
But like most of Israel's defence industries, even IAI, the country's
biggest company, has been experiencing difficulties of late and was recently
forced to seek Dollars 180m in emergency government assistance.
Israel's defence industries, which managed to overcome sharp national
spending cuts in the mid-1980s by relying more heavily on export markets,
have indeed become one of the key casualties of the post-Cold War era. In
the past five years, the share of military sales in total exports has
dropped from 25 per cent to 12 per cent.
For Israel's new Labour party government, which has made fighting
unemployment one of its top national priorities, the prospect of sizeable
layoffs in the military industries is extremely daunting. On the one hand,
it cannot allow unemployment to rise; on the other hand, it cannot permit
itself to pump state funds into industries which have no future prospects.
As a result, how the government chooses to deal with the collapse of the
military industries will be one of its key tests in the coming months.
The military industries are not the only ones exerting pressure on the
government these days. Manufacturers in the textile and clothing businesses
have been hoping to find a more attentive ear in the new government, because
of its concerns regarding unemployment, on the issue of import
liberalisation. Thus far, however, their repeated threats to close down
factories and dismiss thousands of workers if the market is opened further
to cheap imports from the Far East have made little impact.
Ironically, it is the textile industry which has experienced one of the
highest rates of export growth in recent years.
Mr Blisovsky believes 1993 will probably be as good a year as 1992 for
Israeli industry. 'A lot will depend on what happens in the world market and
to what extent we can maintain our competitive edge. As it looks now, there
probably won't be any further improvement, but there certainly won't be any
deterioration,' he says.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3610</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABTFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Survey of Israel (8): Sun worship - Tourists rediscover the
Holy Land
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HUGH CARNEGY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ISRAEL'S tourism industry is set to break records in 1992. Mr Uzi Baram, the
tourism minister, reckons the number of visitors to Israel and the occupied
territories will reach 1.65m by the end of the year, outstripping the
previous best performance of 1.52m in 1987.
The slump caused in 1990 and 1991 by the Gulf crisis and the subsequent war
has been quickly left behind. The depressant effect of the Palestinian
intifada, or uprising, in the occupied territories which was felt in 1988
and 1989 has also largely evaporated.
Instead, officials, hoteliers and tour operators alike say the establishment
of Middle East peace talks, giving some hope of a settlement of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, has been an important factor in encouraging tourists
and investors to come to the Holy Land.
'Every tourist and investor is taking a risk when coming to Israel,' says Mr
Baram. 'If the perception of the political situation is positive, if we are
pushing the peace process ahead, in cooperation with the US and Europe, then
people are more enthusiastic to come. And we have all the attributes to
attract more people.' Indeed, the story of Israeli tourism is one of great
potential thwarted by political instability. Even this year's record looks
meagre when set against the extraordinary combination of holy shrines,
archaeological sites, scenery, climate and warm seas that Israel and the
occupied lands can offer. Israel lags far behind Greece, for example, in the
number of tourists it attracts each year.
Mr Baram and his officials are aiming to raise the annual total number of
visitors to 2.5m over the next five years. They believe ultimately, the
'optimal' figure the country could handle without excessive overcrowding is
4m-5m. 'Our priority is still quantity, not quality,' says a senior official
at the ministry.
The importance to the overall economy is hard to overestimate. Already the
sector employs directly 50,000 people. The Dollars 2bn that tourism earns
Israel annually is equivalent to about one sixth of industrial exports. This
year, it will amount to about twice the current account deficit on the
balance of payments. As the deficit rises while Israel steps up investment
to cope with mass immigration, the importance of tourism earnings will be
greater than ever.
The government is therefore channelling considerable investment into
tourism, targetted mainly at three chief locations: Jerusalem, the Dead Sea
and Eilat on the Red Sea.
Over the next three years, it will spend some Shk250m on grants to new
projects, including those by foreign companies, with up to 30 per cent
available of the cost of an investment. An additional similar sum will be
spent directly on infrastructural and other facilities.
The core of tourism to Israel and the occupied territories has been Jews and
Christians from the US and western Europe. Israel is looking to the
Christian markets in the southern states of the US and the Far East for
expansion. The experienced and remarkably resilient Palestinian operators,
strong in the Christian pilgrimage business, are fighting to expand their
market share. Both look longingly at the prospect of Moslem pilgrims who
have largely been absent since Israel won all of Jerusalem in the 1967 Six
Day War.
This year has shown how even the prospect of peace can produce a surge in
numbers. The benefits of open borders that a peace settlement would yield
would be great. By the same token, however, an enormous amount is riding on
the success of the peace process. Any breakdown of the talks and resort to
violence in the area would send the numbers tumbling downwards once more.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3611</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABSFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Survey of Israel (9): Trying to withdraw - The government
and the banks
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HUGH CARNEGY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE big issue for 1993 facing four of the five banks which dominate Israel's
financial sector is not so much how they will perform, but what will become
of their ownership.
If the government sticks to its target, it will in the coming year move
decisively at last to resolve the question of how to divest the state of the
majority shareholdings it has in the four biggest banks - Bank Hapoalim,
Bank Leumi, Israel Discount Bank and Bank Mizrahi. (The fifth-largest, First
International Bank of Israel, is privately owned.)
The state took on the bank stock at the cost of some Dollars 7bn after a
share collapse in 1983. A preferential share system left control in the
hands of the original owners. But under agreements with all four banks, the
government-held shares will have full voting rights when they are sold back
to the private sector.
In theory there is a deadline of October 1993. Under the terms of the
government rescue, the banks would come under full state control from that
time if they have not previously been re-privatised. The Labour-led
coalition is anxious to earn the receipts this would bring the government
and is committed not to preside over a full-scale nationalisation.
Overall, the banks look relatively well positioned for sale. Mr Ze'ev
Abeles, the Banks' Examiner at the Bank of Israel, says that despite a
problem of non-performing debt in the agricultural sector, which has
required big provisions over the past five years, the bad debts, strikes and
other problems of the past decade have been largely overcome.
The banks, which cover the spectrum of financial activity including retail
banking, mortgages, asset management, brokerage and insurance, should report
improved profitability this year over last year's inflation-adjusted average
of less than five per cent net return on capital. Privatisation should
inject keener competition into a sector notable for the almost total absence
of foreign banks.
But the process has to date proved slow and uncertain and many question
marks still hang over how it may turn out. Mr Saul Bronfeld, the managing
director of the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange (TASE), which is hungry for big bank
equity issues to soak up heavy demand, voices the frustration of many at the
way the bank sales are being handled. 'Mexico privatised 18 banks in 12
months. The Israeli government has not succeeded in privatising one bank in
nine years. We are annoyed. The market is having its best year since 1982.
The government may miss an opportunity.'
This criticism irritates Mr Gil Leidner, the chief executive of MI Holdings,
the government company charged with handling the bank sales. He argues that
progress is being made. Agreement has been reached to sell a 51 per cent
stake in Bank Mizrahi, previously owned by the World Mizrahi religious
organisation, for Dollars 185m to Mr Gad Ze'evi, an Israeli businessman,
which now only requires Bank of Israel assent. The balance will then be
floated on the TASE.
A long-delayed similar tender process will be launched in three to four
months for Bank Igud, a profitable unit that is being split off from Bank
Leumi. Meanwhile, Israel Discount Bank has been split from its parent, IDB
Holdings.
A controlling share of IDB Holdings, a big investment group, has been sold
back to its original owners, the Recanati family of Tel Aviv. The remaining
42 per cent government stake in the holding company, valued at Shk950m, was
due to be floated on the TASE late last month. Mr Leidner then intends to
issue tenders for a 26 per cent stake in the bank - worth perhaps Dollars
250m - in the first half of 1993 that would establish a new owner.
'Our attitude is to sell a controlling interest first. We think it is
important to secure long term, stable ownership of the banks before selling
shares to the public,' Mr Leidner says.
This approach is disputed, not least by the Bank of Israel. 'We need to
think over whether the process of sale of control by auction is the right
way to sell (Bank Hapoalim, Bank Leumi and Discount Bank),' says Mr Abeles.
Mr Leidner himself admits that the sheer size of Bank Hapoalim, controlled
by the Histadrut trade union federation, and Bank Leumi, controlled by the
Jewish Colonial Trust, makes selling them 'a completely different ballgame'.
Their combined assets of some Shk150bn are more than twice the combined
assets of the other three banks. He intends a test flotation on the TASE of
a 10 per cent stake in each (both had shareholder's equity last year of more
than Shk3bn).
There is still considerable debate on how to proceed from there, however. Mr
Abeles, who doubts it will be possible to find investors willing even to buy
a 10 per cent stake in Hapoalim or Leumi, says a steering committee should
be set up with Bank of Israel participation to decide.
It looks highly unlikely the issue will be resolved by October next year,
leaving the government with an additional problem of how to avoid taking
direct control of the country's two dominant banking groups.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3612</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Survey of Israel (6): Likud seeks a young leader - Politics
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ERIC SILVER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE LIKUD party is set to leapfrog an entire court of 'crown princes' as it
prepares to elect a new leader and start down the road to recovery from its
defeat in the June elections, writes ERIC SILVER.
Neither of the frontrunners to succeed Mr Yitzhak Shamir as Likud leader -
Mr Binyamin Netanyahu and Mr Binyamin Begin - has cabinet experience. Both
entered parliament as recently as 1980. 'Bibi' Netanyahu is 43; 'Benny'
Begin, son of the late Mr Menachem Begin, is 49.
The high-flyers previously tipped to succeed the old warriors of the Irgun
Zvai Leumi and the Stern Gang - smooth lawyers in their 50s like Mr Dan
Meridor, the former justice minister, and Mr Ehud Olmert, previously health
minister - have pulled out of the race. Mr Ariel Sharon, at 64 the oldest of
the original contenders, has made a tactical retreat.
Mr David Levy, the 55-year old former foreign minister and standard bearer
of Israel's north African immigrant community, is still running hard, but
his chances have diminished. He is blamed for weakening the party on the eve
of the general election by reviving ethnic resentments. Two younger Sephardi
candidates, Mr Moshe Katsav and Mr Meir Sheetrit, are putting down a marker
for the future.
Mr Netanyahu confirmed his position as early favourite on November 15 by
persuading the 3,000-member Likud central committee to adopt a system of
primaries for choosing a leader who would command them through the present
parliament to the next elections, due in 1996.
The committee overwhelmingly rejected Mr Begin's alternative proposal which
would have left a decision about the candidate for prime minister to a later
stage. His father's memory is a dwindling asset. The younger Begin, an
earnest geologist with an American PhD, appeared extensively in Likud's
television commercials last spring, but he lacked his father's showmanship
and passion. The party managers gambled on the name and the name was not
enough.
The elections left Likud politicians weary and dejected, a party with a
lame-duck leader, a ramshackle machine and debts of Dollars 50m. Only Mr
Netanyahu, who introduced the 10-second sound-bite to Israeli diplomacy,
first as ambassador to the United Nations, then as deputy foreign minister,
seemed ready for another battle.
His rivals accuse him of importing American techniques - and American money
in the form of donations from US Jewish supporters - into the contest. But
they have failed to brand him an outsider.
He presses the flesh. His oratory owes more to Hebrew football commentators
than to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (his alma mater). He is
rapidly making good his lack of a power base within the party by recruiting
new members to Likud - about 25,000 since June.
Mr Netanyahu's critics complain that they don't know what he stands for.
What he has vouchsafed so far is that he favours electoral reform and a
market economy of Thatcherite rigour. He wants to hold on to all the
occupied territories. He does not trust the Arabs.
That may suffice to win the Likud leadership in the March primaries. But
unless Mr Rabin disappoints those who voted for a change of national
priorities, it may not be enough to make Mr Netanyahu prime minister in
1996.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3613</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Survey of Israel (4): Area of conflict - Arabs seek economic
powers
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HUGH CARNEGY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
IF NEGOTIATORS at the Middle East peace talks in Washington are to succeed,
they will have to include the resolution of an economic conflict which is
not much less fraught than the political one.
Along with the other levers of power, Israel's military administration in
the West Bank and Gaza Strip has, since the occupation began in June 1967,
exercised what Mr Hisham Awartani, a prominent Palestinian economist, has
described as 'the complete usurpation of control on all facets of economic
life in both territories'.
It is true that the early years of the occupation saw a dramatic rise in per
capita income and living standards in both the West Bank and Gaza. These two
former backwaters of the Jordanian and Egyptian economies had suddenly been
exposed to a developed Israel.
Mainly due to the availability of work in Israel which West Bankers and
Gazans had previously not had access to, the two areas grew in prosperity.
However, tight Israeli restrictions on indigenous economic development
within the territories, for reasons ranging from security policy to
suppression of potential competition for Israeli producers, have left them
economically fragile.
In recent years, this has been exacerbated by the Palestinian uprising, or
intifada, against Israeli rule which erupted in late 1987, and subsequently
the 1990-91 crisis over Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. The protest strikes and
disruptions of the intifada have damaged many Palestinian businesses; the
Gulf crisis hit exports and cut remittances.
The West Bank and Gaza have a combined population of some 2m people,
compared with Israel's 5m. But the territories' combined GNP is estimated at
around only Dollars 2bn compared with more than Dollars 50 bn for Israel.
Some 40 per cent of Palestinian GNP is accounted for by employment in
Israel, mainly in the construction sector.
Services, including tourism, construction and agriculture, make up the bulk
of domestic production in the West Bank and Gaza. According to figures
compiled in a recent report by the American Academy of Arts and Sciences,
industry comprises only 7.7 per cent of GDP in the West Bank and 13.7 per
cent in Gaza. The mainstays are clothing, shoes, pharmaceuticals, furniture
and other light industries. Many businesses subcontract on behalf of Israeli
companies: only 30 companies are thought to employ more than 50 people.
Palestinians complain that the military administration has consistently
blocked the issue of manufacturing licences; barred the export of
agricultural products to Israel; limited exports to third countries;
expropriated and limited land use. Two other sources of complaint are the
military's punitive tax collection and restrictive water allocations. The
American Academy report says 83 per cent of West Bank ground water is used
by Israel or Israeli settlers.
In the peace negotiations, the Palestinians are seeking to win control over
these tools of economic management. While water and land are especially
sensitive, Israel has signalled its willingness to help in the economic
development of the territories. It sees benefits for both sides in the
growth of the Palestinian economy and wants to reduce its dependence on
cheap Arab labour.
Aid from the EC and the US to the West Bank and Gaza amounts to more than
Dollars 25m a year and much more is anticipated if there is a political
settlement. However, there are no significant banking or credit institutions
in the West Bank and Gaza to provide a flow of investment capital. Access to
Israeli and Jordanian markets and ports would also be vital.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3614</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Survey of Israel (3): In unknown territory - Diplomats see
opportunities - and new perils
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ERIC SILVER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE new world order of the 1990s tempts Israeli diplomacy with unprecedented
opportunities. The accompanying disorder haunts it with unprecedented
dangers.
The good news for Israel is that its Arab neighbours can no longer rely on
the Soviet Union to back them in international forums, to supply them with
advanced weapons or to bail them out if they overbid their hand. They have
little choice but to ingratiate themselves with the US.
Operation Desert Storm cut President Saddam Hussein of Iraq's army, the most
powerful in the Arab world, down to size and divided Israel's potential
enemies. The danger of unconventional Iraqi attack, or of a coordinated
eastern front, has receded.
For the first time since the 1948 war over Israel's foundation as a state,
all the parties directly involved in the Arab-Israeli conflict are
negotiating. And since the June elections, Israel has a government which has
staked its political capital on making peace, unlike its predecessor under
Mr Yitzhak Shamir which appeared interested in the process largely as an
exercise in public relations.
The bad news from Israel's perspective is that the collapse of central
control in the former Soviet Union has threatened an international
supermarket in nuclear know-how and materials. The taboo of
non-proliferation is eroding and other suppliers - China and India among
them - are joining the rush. Israel's most dedicated foe, the Islamic regime
in Iran, has the money and the motivation to buy into the nuclear family and
break Israel's regional nuclear monopoly.
At the same time, the end of the Cold War has reduced mainstream demand for
sophisticated weapons and the recession has made it very difficult for
American and other Western producers to turn away Arab business. If the
choice is between thousands of aerospace jobs in St Louis, Missouri, and
upsetting the Middle East balance, the jobs tend to win.
The peace process itself has stimulated hardliners on both sides. Islamic
fundamentalists and Palestinian rejectionists have stepped up attacks, with
everything from knives and molotov cocktails to sub-machine guns and car
bombs both within Israel and in the occupied territories. The Shi'ite
Hizbollah, inspired actively by Iran and passively by Syria, is harassing
Israel and its proxy militia in southern Lebanon and, occasionally, in
Israel itself.
On the Israeli side, the Jewish settlers in the West Bank and Gaza Strip
have seized on the government's readiness for at least partial withdrawal on
the Golan Heights to revive their campaign against territorial compromise on
any front. And the most extreme are more disposed to take the law into their
own hands.
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the Prime Minister, will not be put off easily. 'I believe
that we are on a path of no return,' he told a Tel Aviv University audience
in mid-November. He remained confident that peace would be reached, even if
it took another year or two.
'The reality of the international situation, the regional situation, the
genuine need of nations and countries, is to arrive at a resolution of the
dispute,' he argued. 'Therefore, even if my position was not received
enthusiastically, certainly not in regard to the Golan Heights, I am
convinced that we must continue on our way.
'We must distinguish between dealing with terror and continuing, even as we
grit our teeth, with the negotiations, and not giving those who wish to
sabotage the peace process by means of terror the pleasure of stopping the
negotiations.'
On a broader canvass, Mr Yossi Beilin, the deputy foreign minister, defined
the object of Israeli diplomacy as 'to use the new situation in order to
become a more welcome member of the international club'.
The peace process has already yielded dividends. Israel now has diplomatic
relations with 120 countries, the highest number in its 44 year history.
Before the 1967 war, the figure was 96. After the 1973 Yom Kippur war, it
fell to a low of 62.
Mr Beilin mapped Israel's course: closer integration with the European
Community; a constructive role in the rebuilding of the former Soviet
republics; cooperation with the new US administration; a concerted
international effort to restrict the transfer of nuclear capability, which
he described as a 'cloud hanging over us all the time'.
Although the team surrounding President-elect Bill Clinton are not exactly
strangers in Jerusalem, Israel is bracing for a change of emphasis on the
part of its staunchest ally and most generous benefactor. Mr Binyamin
Netanyahu, the former deputy foreign minister and current frontrunner to
succeed Mr Shamir as leader of the opposition Likud party, has warned his
countrymen to prepare for a sharp drop in US aid, now running at Dollars 3bn
a year, as the focus in the US shifts to the domestic agenda.
Washington is expected nonetheless to continue working for Middle East
peace, if only because the stability of a region which supplies such a large
proportion of its energy needs is essential for Western economic recovery.
As Mr Beilin put it: 'They understand the linkage between home and foreign
policy.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3615</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Survey of Israel (5): The pains of adjustment - Russian Jews
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By EFRAT SHVILY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
TWO and a half years after the beginning of mass immigration from the former
Soviet Union, many of the 450,000 newcomers often still feel lost and
helpless in their struggle for full and successful absorption into Israeli
life, writes EFRAT SHVILY.
As a group, however, the immigrants have quickly made a big impact on
society and politics. Most striking was their significant contribution to
the change of government in the June 1992 elections.
The big immigrant vote for the Labour party is commonly explained by
economic hardship and high unemployment which the newcomers associated with
the Likud government and which is the biggest obstacle to smooth integration
into society of a group that is now Israel's largest ethnic community.
In June 1992 immigrants were a quarter of 195,000 unemployed Israelis.
Absorption Ministry data show that among 150,000 immigrant breadwinners,
only 70,000 are employed, two thirds of them not in their professions and
often in minimum-wage jobs. Another 30,000 are still enrolled in Hebrew
schools or undergoing vocational training.
Fears two years ago of an ethno-social 'explosion' between newcomers and
Israelis over competition for jobs have not been fulfilled. The two groups
found themselves 'sailing in the same boat of hardship and unemployment,'
says Moshe Lisak, sociology professor at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
But lack of work is a key grievance of immigrants.
Marina and Yuri, both in their mid-30s, immigrated to Israel from Georgia
two years ago. They live in one of Haifa's suburbs and are unemployed now.
For several months they worked not in their professions. Marina, a lawyer,
worked as a supermarket cashier and Yuri, a car electrician, worked as a
plumber. But pay was too low to keep them in unsatisfactory jobs.
Marina, who is currently enrolled in a lawyers' training course, says she
has no hope of finding work in her profession even after she graduates.
'There are no jobs out there. I am taking this course for the lack of
anything better to do,' she says. She believes, however, that 'things are
tougher in Russia and in Georgia,' and is content to be out. But the
Absorption Ministry says 4,450 Soviet immigrants have left Israel since the
beginning of 1991.
Marina speaks good Hebrew but she has no Israeli friends and she does not
feel 'Israeli'. Professor Lisak says that despite 'adoption' attempts on the
part of Israelis, Soviet immigrants failed to become part of Israeli social
networks and remain closed inside their own circles.
Interestingly, integration is often more evident in the peripheral
development town communities than it is in the main cities. The immigrants
find it easier to mingle in small centres despite the fact that in these
places they are often breaking the ethnic homogeneity of Sephardi Jews who
themselves were mass immigrants two generations ago.
The problems of absorption, particularly unemployment, led this year to a
sharp drop in arrivals from former Soviet territories to 70,000 from 175,000
in 1991. This slower pace of immigration may have the effect of easing the
pressure on Israeli society of integrating newcomers.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3616</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Survey of Israel (7): An electronics success story -
Profile, Elron
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HUGH CARNEGY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MR UZIA GALIL, who in the 30 years since he founded Elron has built it into
one of Israel's top high-technology producers, is not much troubled by the
cold economic winds blowing in Europe and the US where his companies sell
most of their products, writes HUGH CARNEGY.
In his view from Haifa, overlooking a Mediterranean Sea still warm in the
December sun, the worldwide electronics market is so big that relatively
small players like those in Israel can go on making money in a recession if
they have the products and skills to compete.
In recent years, the Elron companies have garnered fewer headlines than
other stars of the Israeli high-tech firmament like Scitex, the computerised
imaging systems maker, or ECI Telecom, a manufacturer of advanced circuit
multipliers. But the group, with combined sales of Dollars 50m, accounts for
about 17 per cent of the country's electronics industry and is a mainstay of
the export-driven sector.
It includes, in Elbit, Elscint, Fibronics and Optrotech, four of the growing
number of Israeli high-tech companies quoted on US stock markets which, Mr
Galil points out, have recently spectacularly outperformed the main market
indices.
Not that all has been plain sailing in the group. Both Fibronics, a pioneer
in fibre-optic networking, and Optrotech, which services printed circuit
board production, have fallen into the red in the last 18 months. They
dragged down net group profits to Dollars 6m in the first half of 1992, from
Dollars 13.5m in first half 1991.
But Elbit, which makes defence electronics, and Elscint, which makes
advanced medical diagnostic equipment, have performed strongly to allow
Elron to support the weaker companies to get back on track. Elbit has taken
over Elscint to diversify out of the weakening defence sector. But Mr Galil
says companies like Elbit can still make money in the defence market by
concentrating on enhancing efficiency for clients looking to cut costs.
Niche markets are what Israeli electronics companies have traditionally
exploited successfully to make the sector account for about 30 per cent of
the country's industrial exports, employing more than 30,000 people. Now the
flow of immigrants from the former Soviet Union and heavy layoffs in the
heavy end of the local military industries have increased the pressure on
the electronics industry to expand.
Uzia Galil says this requires a dramatic shift in attitude, looking to
produce components for mass consumer products. 'The next step is to start
from the market, not from the technology we have. We have to assume we have
the technology and look for the markets that we could supply.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3617</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Survey of Israel (2): Three fat years - Economy is
reinforced by mass immigration
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HUGH CARNEGY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
GIVEN the recessionary gloom in Western Europe and the US, there is
understandable satisfaction in Israel that the country will show real growth
this year of some six per cent, the third year running the economy has
expanded by more than five per cent, writes HUGH CARNEGY.
The engine of this growth has been mass immigration from the former Soviet
Union which has since late 1989 totalled some 450,000 - increasing the
population by no less than 10 per cent.
This huge inflow has at once posed great problems and offered great
opportunities for the economy. The newcomers have pushed up unemployment to
record levels at more than 11 per cent of the workforce. But the
highly-educated immigrants are seen as a precious resource for generating a
period of sustained, export-oriented growth the like of which Israel has
failed to achieve since the early 1970s.
This year, a sense of optimism that this can be achieved has been augmented
by the prospect of regional stability held out by the Middle East peace
negotiations, and the advent of the Labour-led government which promises
growth-oriented policies.
There remain nonetheless big question marks. Successive Israeli governments
have for the best part of a decade promised to reform the heavily
state-dominated and aid-dependent economy but have largely failed to
deliver.
For the moment, however, some important indicators are pointing in the right
direction. Unlike 1991, when per capita growth was zero, real GDP growth per
capita will grow by up to three per cent. Inflation has tumbled from 18 per
cent last year and may be in single figures for the whole of 1992 for the
first time in years. It is expected to stabilise at around nine per cent in
1993. Exports, which fell in 1991, have grown by an encouraging 14 per cent.
A government-fuelled construction boom accounted for as much as 50 per cent
of growth both in 1991 and in 1992. This has now peaked, reined in partly by
the new government, and will result in lower growth rates in 1993, with
business sector growth forecast in the 1993 budget at four per cent after
seven per cent this year.
But, assuming immigration remains steady at around 100,000 a year, the
government expects this to surge significantly again in the subsequent two
years. It forecasts that exports will rise by more than eight per cent for
each of the next three years.
During that time, the state will spend Dollars 8bn on infrastructural
programmes. Unemployment is seen falling to nine per cent by 1993. This
year, the growth in jobs in the economy slowed despite the growth in output.
This worries many in the government. 'Some ministers want me to pay to
create more jobs artificially,' says Mr Avraham Shochat, the finance
minister. 'But we would have to carry the burden of this on our backs for
years. It would prevent real growth in the economy.'
Instead, the intention is to bring down the budget deficit from 3.2 per cent
of GDP next year to close to zero in 1995. The expanded foreign borrowing
programme built into the government's planning is underpinned by Dollars
10bn in US loan guarantees spread over five years approved by Washington
this autumn.
Optimism is reflected in a dizzying bull run on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange
(TASE) and growing signs of interest by foreign investors. The TASE equity
index is up 65 per cent this year, and has been rising since 1990. A flurry
of new issues has taken the capitalisation of the equity market, at Dollars
28bn, ahead of the traditionally dominant government bond market for the
first time.
In September, the First Israel Fund aimed at foreign investors was launched
by four US investment houses. Others are set to follow. 'Suddenly foreign
brokerage and investment houses have discovered Israel,' says Mr David
Friedman, chief executive of Bank Leumi. 'They are attracted by the
performance of the TASE and industry, the expectations surrounding the peace
process, the change of government and the approval of the US guarantees.'
There are, however, still plenty of factors at play which fuel the fears of
the sceptics.
The country still relies heavily on unilateral transfers of funds. These
totalled more than Dollars 6bn in 1991 - the majority made up of US military
and economic grant aid - or a whopping 10 per cent of GDP. Without them a
current account balance of payments deficit of Dollars 850m would have been
of unmanageable proportions.
With the deficit set to grow as investment rises, Israel will be extremely
vulnerable to any cuts in US foreign aid programmes under the Clinton
administration.
On the other hand, despite the recent increase in foreign investor interest,
the uncomfortable fact is that total net foreign investment has been
negative in three of the last four years - to the tune of Dollars 460m in
1991.
More than two thirds of economic activity in Israel is still accounted for
by the public sector, government-owned companies or government-controlled
institutions, a far higher proportion than, for example, in Israel's main
European trading partners. The export-oriented private sector is relatively
small.
'That part of the economy works - but it is the only part of the economy
that works,' says Mr Alvin Rabushka, an economist from California's Stanford
University who is a harsh critic of Israel's economic structure.
The government has enacted significant reforms in the capital markets and
begun a privatisation programme. But many doubt the Labour government's
ability to achieve such reforms.
The defence industries offer only one example of several areas which require
expensive and difficult reform - but which are bastions of the Histadrut
trade union federation, to which Labour is affiliated.
Mr Jacob Frenkel, the Governor of the Bank of Israel, is one of those who
believes the Israeli economy is 'well positioned to take off'. But, as he
also stresses, there is a very long way to go.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3618</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Survey of Israel (1): Stirrings of optimism - After decades
of war, Israel feels that events are moving its way on the diplomatic and
economic fronts. Hugh Carnegy describes the mood in the Jewish State as it
tackles mass immigration and holds peace talks with its Arab neighbours
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HUGH CARNEGY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
IN ISRAEL, which has been in a constant state of conflict throughout its
four decades as a state, the years have taught the wisdom of placing
prudence before optimism.
But as 1992 draws to a close, there are many Israelis who dare to imagine
that this has been a watershed year, when the country at last embarked on a
path of peace with its Arab neighbours and moved towards well-founded
prosperity.
This powerful and enticing vision is by no means assured, nor universally
shared: the Washington-based Middle East negotiations not only carry no
guarantee of success, they are opposed by Israel's vocal right-wing as
containing the seeds of a dangerous sell-out.
A surge in export-oriented growth this year is just a fragile beginning in
the daunting task of economic reform required if the country is to absorb
successfully hundreds of thousands of immigrants from the former Soviet
Union who have arrived since 1989.
But it is the belief that the Jewish state stands on the threshold of
opportunities unprecedented since its violent inception in 1948 that drives
the government of Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the prime minister who led his Labour
party to a landmark election victory in June.
The election produced a political sea-change. Mr Rabin, the army chief of
staff during the 1967 Six Day War, succeeded where Labour had hitherto
failed since its chief opponent, the hardline Likud party, first came to
power in 1977. He persuaded Israelis to vote for a party committed to
withdraw from Arab territories captured in 1967 in exchange for peace.
The Likud, under former Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, and its far-right
allies argue that there was no great popular swing away from the commitment
never to yield the West Bank, Gaza Strip and the Golan Heights. Indeed,
Labour was carried to victory largely by the votes of Israeli Arab citizens
and big support from the new immigrants who above all blamed the outgoing
government for their harsh economic predicament.
Nevertheless, it also appeared that many Israelis no longer believed in the
Likud's uncompromising stance in an era when the pro-Arab influence of the
Soviet Union had disappeared and many Arab countries had, in effect, taken
the same side as Israel in the 1991 Gulf conflict with Iraq.
Likud's representation was slashed from 40 to 32 members of the Knesset.
Labour won 44 seats and was able to build a coalition with the left-liberal
Meretz alliance and the ultra-orthodox Shas religious party that excluded
Likud for the first time in 15 years.
In his inaugural address to the Knesset, Mr Rabin made it clear he intended
to pursue a very different path from the siege mentality that characterised
Mr Shamir's leadership. 'We must overcome the sense of isolation that has
held us in its thrall for almost half a century,' he said. 'We must join the
international movement towards peace, reconciliation and cooperation that is
spreading across the entire globe these days - lest we be the last to
remain, all alone, in the station.'
His priority was to breathe new life into the Middle East peace talks
launched in October 1991 in Madrid, based on his government's acceptance of
the 'land for peace' formula contained in UN resolution 242 and demanded by
the Arabs as the foundation of any settlement.
Five months later, the process has not moved on much. The eighth official
round since Madrid of the core bilateral talks with Syria, Jordan, Lebanon
and the Palestinians is due to start today, but significant progress looks
unlikely at least until the new Clinton Administration is in place.
Talks with the Palestinians are bogged down in disputes over the scope of
power Israel will hand over to a Palestinian authority in the West Bank and
Gaza during an interim stage of self rule preceding negotiations on a final
settlement over the territories. Mr Rabin has offered Syria a partial
withdrawal from the Golan Heights, but Syria has baulked at signing even a
joint agenda for further talks without clear Israeli commitments to a full
withdrawal.
The disputes with Jordan and Lebanon appear more susceptible to quick
agreement, but are dependent on progress respectively with the Palestinians
and Syria. Meanwhile, in Israel, Lebanon and the occupied territories,
radical Arab groups hostile to the talks have stepped up acts of violence
aimed at upsetting the process; right-wing Israeli groups, including Jewish
settlers in the occupied territories, are also mobilising their opposition.
Mr Rabin has warned that the opportunity for peace must be seized within the
next two or three years or may lapse, to be replaced by the risk of
non-conventional war in the region. But he is not yet pessimistic. 'I
believe that we are on a path of no return. The reality of the international
situation, the regional situation, the genuine need of nations and
countries, is to arrive at a resolution of the dispute,' he said last month.
The perception that peace is possible has had an important bearing on the
other priority of the government - the economy. The advent of 450,000
immigrants since 1989 - a 10 per cent leap in the population - and their
continued arrival at a pace of some 70,000 a year has put a huge onus on the
economy to produce rapid and sustained growth.
This year, the growing anticipation of political stability has stirred the
interest of both domestic and foreign investors. The Tel Aviv Stock Exchange
has boomed. Tourism is at record levels. The business sector has grown by
around seven per cent - with exports rising by 14 per cent. Real GDP growth
will be around six per cent, giving per capita growth of up to three per
cent. Inflation is nearing single figures for the first time since Israel
was plagued by three-digit inflation in the early 1980s.
But unemployment, at around 11 per cent of the workforce, is also at record
levels. It has resulted in a slowdown in immigration rates which has
undoubtedly given the economy some valuable breathing space to adjust to the
inflow. But if Israel is to fulfil its most fundamental Zionist commitment -
to attract as many immigrants as possible - it must produce rapid growth
over a prolonged period.
This has been achieved before, in the 1960s, when Israel's per capita income
was similar to Japan's. Since then, however, the Israeli economy has largely
stagnated. Despite huge injections of US aid, currently running at Dollars
3bn a year, Israeli GDP per capita of around Dollars 10,000 a year has been
overtaken by countries such as Hong Kong and Singapore.
Mr Rabin's government has committed itself to dismantle much of Israel's
traditional state control over the economy to re-inject growth. It says it
will conduct a wide programme of privatisation and liberalisation, will
invest heavily in infrastructure while keeping a tight rein on public
spending. It is looking to extend Israel's 1975 free trade agreement with
the EC to cement links with what has become the country's main trading
partner.
There remains considerable scepticism over whether the government will live
up to its own rhetoric on reform, particularly given Labour's historical
role in building the state edifice and its continued close links with the
powerful Histadrut trade union federation. While the privatisation programme
has yet to see the government shed control of a major company, last month
two new government companies were founded to build a highway and to
administer the bank debts of the moshavim collective farms.
Nevertheless Mr Jacob Frenkel, the governor of the Bank of Israel, says he
believes the peace process is moving in the right direction. He says the
peace process could give its efforts an immeasurable boost by encouraging
investment and opening up new trade opportunities. 'If indeed peace breaks
out we can envisage a dam cracking and things happening in a big way.'
In both political and economic terms, therefore, a great deal is riding on a
successful outcome to the peace negotiations. That in itself gives Mr Rabin
more incentive to push them forward. If he succeeds, 1992 will indeed be a
turning point in Israel's history.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 9
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3619</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / UK Car Registrations
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN DONE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
NISSAN Motor, the Japanese carmaker, is regaining ground it lost in the new
car market last year during its prolonged legal conflict with Nissan UK, its
privately owned former importer-distributor, Kevin Done writes.
A year ago Nissan's share fell to only 2.3 per cent of the UK market, but by
last month it had more than doubled its share to 5.5 per cent, figures from
the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders show. Nissan took over direct
control of its UK dealer network from the beginning of 1992 after dismissing
its former distributor. Volkswagen of Germany is also recovering, helped by
growing sales of its new-generation Golf. The Golf range accounted for 2.4
per cent of the car market in November, compared with only 1.3 per cent a
year ago. That allowed the Volkswagen marque to capture 4.4 per cent of new
car sales last month compared with 3.1 per cent a year ago. The VW group has
also been helped by the success of Audi, its executive car division.
The Vauxhall Cavalier and Rover 200 were the two best-selling cars in the UK
in November, reflecting in part the growing weakness of Ford, the UK market
leader, whose Escort fell to third place in November compared with first in
the first 11 months.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                UK CAR REGISTRATIONS - JAN-NOV 1992
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                          November 1992                  Nov 91
                    Volume   Change%   Share%            Share%
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Total market       106,902      +6.3    100.0             100.0
UK produced         50,468      +6.3    47.2               47.2
Imports             56,434      +6.2    52.8               52.8
Japanese makes      14,708     +49.8    13.8                9.8
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Ford group          20,623     -18.7    19.3               25.2
 -Ford              20,273     -19.2    19.0               24.9
 Jaguar                350     +33.1     0.3                0.3
General Motors      18,870     +10.1    17.6               17.1
 -Vauxhall          18,081      +9.4    16.9               16.4
 -Lotus                 17     -63.8     0.0                0.1
 -Saab*                772     +37.6     0.7                0.6
Rover**             17,955     +16.4    16.8               15.3
Peugeot group       12,018      -7.5    11.2               12.9
 -Peugeot            7,607     -17.9     7.1                9.2
 -Citroen            4,411     +18.4     4.1                3.7
Volkswagen group     7,268     +49.1     6.8                4.8
 -Volkswagen         4,712     +49.8     4.4                3.1
 -Audi               1,380     +75.3     1.3                0.8
 -SEAT                 685     +67.5     0.6                0.4
 -Skoda*               491      -7.9     0.5                0.5
Renault*             4,490     +18.6     4.2                3.8
Nissan               5,894    +157.8     5.5                2.3
Volvo*               2,526     +14.6     2.4                2.2
Toyota               3,387     +69.1     3.2                2.0
BMW                  2,685     -11.9     2.5                3.0
Fiat group           1,700     -16.6     1.6                2.0
 -Fiat               1,530     -12.2     1.4                1.7
 -Lancia                56     -49.5     0.1                0.1
 -Alfa Romeo           114     -38.7     0.1                0.2
Honda                1,408     -36.6     1.3                2.2
Mercedes-Benz        1,441      -0.1     1.4                1.4
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                      January-November 1992            Jan-Nov 91
                    Volume   Change%  Share%             Share%
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Total market     1,513,698      -1.3   100.0              100.0
UK produced        677,385      +0.1    44.7               44.1
Imports            836,313      -2.5    55.3               55.9
Japanese makes     183,238      +2.3    12.1               11.7
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Ford group         345,495      -8.4    22.9               24.6
 -Ford             340,038      -8.5    22.5               24.2
 -Jaguar             5,457      -3.8     0.4                0.4
General Motors     264,944      +6.2    17.5               16.3
 -Vauxhall         255,042      +6.4    16.9               15.6
 -Lotus                466     -52.9     0.0                0.1
 -Saab*              9,436      +6.8     0.6                0.6
 Rover**           194,895     -10.2    12.9               14.2
Peugeot group      181,160     +10.7    12.0               10.7
 -Peugeot          119,032      +6.7     7.9                7.3
 -Citroen           62,128     +19.4     4.1                3.4
Volkswagen group    95,975      -5.9     6.4                6.6
 -Volkswagen        62,808     -13.5     4.2                4.7
 -Audi              17,374     +24.6     1.2                0.9
 -SEAT               7,744      +3.7     0.5                0.5
 -Skoda*             8,049      +1.1     0.5                0.5
Renault*            70,663     +15.3     4.7                4.0
Nissan              67,386      +6.5     4.5                4.1
Volvo*              41,654      -7.9     2.8                3.0
Toyota              39,502      -0.8     2.6                2.6
BMW                 39,271      +4.7     2.6                2.5
Fiat group          32,776     -15.3     2.1                2.5
 -Fiat              29,964     -11.6     2.0                2.2
 -Lancia               655     -49.5     0.0                0.1
 -Alfa Romeo         2,157     -38.8     0.1                0.2
Honda               25,718      -2.6     1.7                1.7
Mercedes-Benz       21,493      +6.7     1.4                1.3
*GM holds 50% of Saab Automobile and has management control. ** Includes
Range Rover/Discovery. Honda holds 20% of Rover.  *VW holds 31% of Skoda
and has management control. *Renault and Volvo are linked through cross
shareholdings.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3620</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Long recession knocks stuffing out of south-east: How a
traditionally prosperous area has been coping
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL CASSELL
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MARTIN PASLEY struggles to hold on to a twisting, screaming toddler as he
scans the vacancy cards in Hemel Hempstead's busy Jobcentre.
There is little to delay him. 'Thank God this won't take long,' he sighs, as
son Todd savages the board displaying Christmas bar staff vacancies at
Pounds 2.91 an hour.
Mr Pasley is not unemployed. But he is convinced that the hard-pressed
printing company for which he has worked since 1985 will make him redundant
before Christmas.
If it does, he will join the swelling ranks of Hertfordshire's 40,000
registered jobless - six times the number recorded before the economic rot
gnawed away at a county that in the 1980s boasted one of Europe's lowest
unemployment rates.
Mr Pasley has never been in a Jobcentre before. He is not alone in finding
the experience unnerving. The impact of lasting recession has knocked the
stuffing out of the south-east.
The enduring, if over-simplified, images of a 'depressed north' and
'prosperous south' may not have been overturned in the past two years, but
conventional notions about the distribution of prosperity across the nation
are under scrutiny.
The 1980s saw the south-east economy overheat, fanned principally by the
rapid expansion in service industries and aided by a revival in
manufacturing activity. The 1990s have ushered in the big freeze.
Southerners, already saddled with high rates of personal indebtedness,
exploited what proved to be an unsustainable rise in house prices to borrow,
spend and borrow more. The party ended with a cocktail of collapsing asset
values and mounting job insecurity.
The statistics of recession in the south are stark. In London, where the
unemployment rate stands above the national average, 72 people are chasing
every vacancy, twice the rate elsewhere.
Less than three years ago, the unemployment rate in northern England was
three times that of the south-east; now the differential has almost
disappeared. An analysis in the National Institute Economic Review suggests
unemployment in the south will exceed the national average for the first
time by the end of 1993.
The annual benefits bill for the jobless in Tottenham, north London, is
running at Pounds 107m; in Mr John Major's Huntingdon constituency it is
Pounds 38m a year.
East Sussex has a higher unemployment rate - 11.5 per cent - than most parts
of the north and Scotland. In traditionally more prosperous West Sussex,
1980s boom towns such as Crawley are in intensive care.
Earnings in some parts of the south-east are lower than on Merseyside and
Teesside. Seven out of 10 companies in the region, the highest proportion in
the country, have shed staff.
Business failures in the region, reflecting the decline in manufacturing
activity and the contraction of the service industries that were supposed to
replace it, are running at twice the rate of a year ago.
House prices in the south have fallen on average by more than a quarter in
three years. Four in 10 people who bought property in greater London after
1987 have mortgages exceeding the value of their homes.
Three years ago Britain's most expensive housing - located in and around
London - was on average 140 per cent more costly than in the north. Today,
the gap is down to 45 per cent.
While new car sales over the last six months rose in much of the north, they
fell by up to 15 per cent in parts of the south-east.
Hertfordshire, like Mr Pasley, is in uncharted waters, faced with a severely
weakened local economy and forced to seek Pounds 700,000 in EC regional
funds from Brussels; every bit helps.
The announced closures of Rolls-Royce and British Aerospace factories in the
county, with the loss of up to 5,000 jobs, are helping to decimate a highly
skilled workforce facing both structural changes to the local economy
brought about by a decline in aerospace activities, and deep recession.
Mr Brian Briscoe, chief executive of the county council, says: 'We
desperately need to keep our engineers and computer scientists. If these
people are not redeployed, they will go to the US and the Far East. We have
to show them there will be a dawn after the darkness.'
The area's woes have also forged a promising partnership with the community
aimed at stimulating retraining and reversing the 1980s strategy of fending
off new inward investment from an already overheated local economy.
Mr Briscoe says: 'We spent most of the last decade trying to slow things
down to prevent unacceptable pressures on our environment. Now we have to
try and stoke things up.'
The same pattern is emerging in the Thames corridor to the west of London,
in the so-called economic 'golden triangle', which led Britain's
high-technology revolution in the 1980s.
From Slough to Swindon, moves are afoot to attract businesses back to areas
that did not always make them feel welcome.
In Slough, some improvement in optimism is mingled with continuing
dissatisfaction with the government's economic policies.
Over lunch at the Thames-Chiltern Chamber of Commerce, local business
leaders are impatient for progress. 'Orders have picked up but the vital,
missing ingredient is confidence,' Mr Geoff Day, managing director of
Flexello Castors, from the nearby Slough Estate, says. 'That's the
government's job.'
Outside, vacant office blocks line the Bath Road. Mr Richard Cross, deputy
chief executive of the chamber, says, 'The buildings are monuments to the
1980s. When they start to fill up we will know the worst is over. Don't hold
your breath]'
There are some signs, however patchy, of improving business activity and
rising optimism along the Thames Valley, confirmed in a survey published
today by Henley Management College.
According to the authors, 'lean times have made business in the area fit and
focused'.
But there will still be difficulties when the upturn arrives, Mr Ray
Sinclair-Smith, principal of East Berkshire College, says: 'Despite the
recession, there are skill shortages, which will come back with a vengeance
when things pick up. We need much more government investment to boost
engineering training; there have been no new machine tools in some local
colleges since the 1970s.
Further down the M4, in Swindon, agents for one business park offer a free
BMW with every unit rented. The local chamber of commerce and the borough
council are jointly preparing a promotional push to attract investors.
According to one participant: 'The council has frustrated big potential
investors in the past. Now it will have to be much more accommodating.'
The same can be said of stockbroker Surrey and Kent, where the
anti-expansion sentiment of the 1980s has also given way to a new initiative
between councils and business to lure jobs.
'The tight planning regime of old will now have to be more relaxed. A new
attitude towards incoming business will be critical,' according to Mr Julian
Gregory, a Confederation of British Industry spokesman based in Sevenoaks.
Up the hill from his office, the town's high street has lost many old names,
replaced by '99p' retailers on short leases. Hamptons, the estate agency,
says local house prices have fallen by 20 per cent but may have touched
bottom.
Mrs Eileen Toombs, an auxiliary nurse, peers at properties in the window:
'Who will ever again assume that buying a house is a one-way bet?'
Nowhere has the recession hit harder than in East Sussex, where Brighton,
Hove and Hastings are petitioning the government for the assisted-area
status granted only the worst economic blackspots.
In spite of its proximity to the markets of Europe, East Sussex is the
Cinderella of the south-east. Without a mile of motorway to call its own,
communications are bad. There is little manufacturing activity and the area
is largely dependent upon service industries primarily supplying the local
economy.
Another combined community effort is under way to attract broad-based,
incoming investment. Mr Peter Masters, the county's deputy planning officer,
says one idea is to exploit good links with towns across the channel: 'If
the British won't invest here, perhaps the French will.'
Mrs Ann Crichton, chief executive of the Federation of Sussex Industry and
Chamber of Commerce, says the recession has set back efforts to catch up
with the rest of the south-east: 'The gap was beginning to close but the
downturn has set back the process.'
Next door in Kent, also seeking assisted-area status, unemployment has
reached 16 per cent in blackspots such as Sheppey. Although the opening of
the Channel tunnel should bring a net gain in jobs, most of the benefits
might be felt further afield.
Throughout the region, signs of improvement in the economy remain patchy and
unimpressive. The personal debt burden and the prospect that any eventual
upturn in employment will initially help manufacturing, rather than
services, means recovery is likely to be unspectacular; only when it gets
under way can it become clear whether the traditional disparities in
regional economic performance will reappear.
Meanwhile, Kent strives to look on the bright side. Leeds Castle, near
Maidstone, romantically perched on its island, is preparing for Christmas.
Mr Graham Jackson, managing director, says his Christmas Kentish evenings
are solidly booked. The New Year's Eve banquet, at Pounds 83 a head, is
almost sold out.
Perhaps, for a few weeks at least, the recession-hit south is preparing to
shrug off its problems and planning to party.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3621</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Retail recovery 'remote'
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By GUY DE JONQUIERES
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
RETAIL SALES volumes will not start to recover until the second half of next
year and will grow at only a modest pace in the three following years,
Verdict, the retailing market research company, says, Guy de Jonquieres
writes.
It forecasts that sales volumes will grow by 7.5 per cent between 1991 and
1996 - barely half the rate during the previous five years - and that in
real terms sales per sq ft at the end of the period will still be below the
1988 peak.
According to Verdict, retailing is suffering from a surplus of capacity
caused by over-rapid expansion in the 1980s. Although the number of shops
fell by 44,000 to 271,000 during the decade, total selling space increased
by 72m sq ft to about 460m sq ft - a level last seen in 1950.
In spite of the recession, the number of shop closures this decade will be
lower than in the 1960s and 1970s, Verdict says. In the next five years,
selling space is forecast to grow by about 3 per cent, almost half the
increase being accounted by multiple grocers.
Verdict on Retail Space, Verdict Research, 112 High Holborn, London WC1V
6JS. Pounds 950.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3622</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Row likely over compromise on airline slots
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PAUL BETTS, Aerospace Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE government is expected to reach a compromise agreement today with other
EC countries on regulations to allocate scarce take-off and landing times or
'slots' at congested European airports.
The proposals are expected to tighten the rules that provide for an airline
to lose a slot if it does not use it. An earlier plan to confiscate slots
from dominant carriers at congested airports has been dropped.
The compromise is expected to provoke angry reactions from smaller
independent carriers such as Virgin Atlantic Airways which want additional
slots at London Heathrow, Europe's biggest and most congested airport, to
expand their operations.
Mr Richard Branson, Virgin's chairman, said the slot proposals expected to
be approved by EC transport ministers were 'perhaps the most
anti-competitive piece of legislation ever suggested for an industry which
is still rife with anti-competitive practices'.
UK officials argued that the new proposals would give smaller airlines and
new entrants in the market greater opportunities to secure slots at busy
airports, but acknowledged that the UK had been the only EC country to press
for new slot regulations as part of the liberalisation of the European air
transport market next year.
Without a compromise, there would have been little chance of securing an
agreement with the other EC countries, the officials indicated.
Mr Branson said the tighter 'lose-it-or-use-it' rules would have little
effect because large flag carriers were likely to operate slots unprofitably
if necessary to keep new competitors out of the market.
He has complained to Mr John MacGregor, the UK transport secretary, about
the declaration that airlines will be entitled to hold on to the slots they
operated the previous year. That, Mr Branson said, would legalise the
controversial system whereby airlines have automatic rights to slots they
have historically held at an airport. It would become even harder for
smaller independents such as Virgin to gain slots at busy airports to
compete against the big flag carriers. In turn, it would undermine
competition and keep fares high, he argued.
UK officials insisted that the proposals would not give airlines ownership
rights to slots but only entitle them to operate those slots for the
duration of the agreement.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3623</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Surveys disagree on buying trends
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DANIEL GREEN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
CONSUMER confidence re-mains low, according to one of two surveys published
today. The other says it is greater than a year ago and that high-street
loan inquiries are rising.
Sharp cuts in interest rates and the devaluation of sterling have failed so
far to boost consumer confidence, according to PA Cambridge Economic
Consultants, a private-sector economic research company. Its latest
quarterly survey of consumer trends, completed on November 29, shows
confidence at a new low, with consumers expecting to spend less now than
they did a year ago.
But Infolink, Britain's largest credit information organisation, said
October saw the first rise in consumer credit inquiries for two years.
Ms Nevia McKiernan, managing director, added: 'Figures from more recent
weeks indicate that consumers are more confident this Christmas than last.'
She said the figures represented credit inquiries, not sales. 'It typically
takes about six weeks between an inquiry and a sale.'
The PA survey indicated that a third of people felt they had been affected
by the fall in interest rates. Only 13 per cent said they had reacted by
increasing consumption, while 20 per cent had increased savings or cut debt.
Consumer Trends Quarterly Economic Survey: PA Economic Consultants, 62-64
Hills Rd, Cambridge CB1 2NU. Consumer Credit Report: Infolink, 2-4 South
End, Croydon CRO 1DL.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3624</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Surveys disagree on buying trends
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DANIEL GREEN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
CONSUMER confidence re-mains low, according to one of two surveys published
today. The other survey says high street loan inquiries are on the rise.
Sharp cuts in interest rates and the devaluation of sterling have failed so
far to boost consumer confidence, according to PA Cambridge Economic
Consultants, a private-sector economic research company. It completed its
latest quarterly survey of consumer trends on November 29. It shows
confidence at a new low, with consumers expecting to spend less now than
they did a year ago.
But Infolink, Britain's largest credit information organisation, said
October saw the first rise in consumer credit inquiries for two years.
Ms Nevia McKiernan, managing director, added: 'Figures from more recent
weeks indicate that consumers are more confident this Christmas than last.'
She said the figures represented credit inquiries, not sales. 'It typically
takes about six weeks between an inquiry and a sale.'
The PA survey indicated that a third of people felt they had been affected
by the fall in interest rates. Only 13 per cent said they had reacted by
increasing consumption, while 20 per cent had increased savings or cut debt.
Two thirds of respondents thought the bottom of the recession was still more
than six months away. In September 1991, fewer than half thought so.
The fall in interest rates seems to have changed consumers' priorities:
unemployment has replaced housing costs as the main indicator for economic
recovery. Respondents were increasingly divided on the outlook for
employment. More expected job losses at their places of work, but there was
also a small increase in the number expecting staff to be taken on.
The uncertainty seems to have made potential property buyers more cautious.
Only 6.1 per cent of respondents said they were thinking of buying a house
or flat in the next year, compared with 9.1 per cent last December.
Confidence in the government continued to fall. In June, PA found that 30
per cent of respondents had little or no confidence in the government. That
rose to 46 per cent in September and reached 53 per cent in the latest
survey.
'Consumers are not yet convinced by the new assurances of a government so
recently forced to turn its back on most of the central aspects of its old
economic policy,' PA said.
Infolink said new car loan credit inquiries were 0.7 per cent up on the
previous October. In the retail sector, the figure was 2.1 per cent.
Dr Brian Bailey, chairman, cautioned that last year had been a poor year for
car sales and that a trend had not yet been established.
Demand for credit from finance houses, which are involved in offering loans
on consumer durables, continued to decline but more slowly.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3625</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Armed police patrol the City
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By BETHAN HUTTON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ARMED City of London police are conducting random road checks and the force
has placed cameras on buildings around the City to monitor potential
terrorist activity.
The City force is also calling on businesses to make sure their own external
security cameras are functioning properly. Private security video recordings
have proved to be a vital source of evidence on terrorist movements.
Elsewhere in London, Metropolitan Police set up armed roadblocks at the
weekend in an attempt to detect terrorist movements and reassure the public.
Both London police forces say they are relying on increased public vigilance
in the fight against the IRA's threatened Christmas bombing campaign. The
forces are working together but they have different approaches to the
sensitive issue of armed officers and protection of the public.
City firearms officers carry their weapons openly but their counterparts in
the Met are under orders to keep them out of sight unless they are needed.
In the Met area, vehicles are searched in a 'sterile zone' between the
roadside and a solid line of police vehicles. Pedestrians and traffic are
diverted to the far side of the barricade.
In the City, pedestrians are free to walk past the search operation and
there is no barricade between it and passing traffic.
In activities on Friday and Saturday night, up to 45 armed police, dog
handlers and traffic officers stopped and searched more than 80 vehicles,
mostly vans, at roadblocks in locations around the east end of London, where
police believe an IRA cell is based.
No weapons, explosives or terrorist suspects were found in the operation,
codenamed Rolling Rock, but similar activities are likely in future. The
legal powers to conduct random checks have existed for some time, but have
not been used in London before.
The new tactic was a response to the IRA's recent bombing campaign using
vans packed with large amounts of explosive parked outside buildings or near
road junctions.
Several explosions have been prevented after suspicious vans were noticed
already parked by their targets or while on the move.
The Lord Mayor of London, Mr Francis McWilliams, has written to the prime
minister saying that the 'serious problems' between insurers and the
government over cover for commercial property damaged by terrorists must be
resolved urgently before uninsurability affects foreign investment and
London's commercial property.
The Association of British Insurers, which has recommended its members to
exclude terrorist damage from new commercial policies, said that some
insurers were considering cancelling existing policies on 30 days' notice,
rather than waiting for them to expire.
Monday Interview, Page 32
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3626</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Closing branches 'saves banks little'
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW JACK
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BANKS AND building societies will lose revenue and save little by
large-scale branch closures, a study from the Boston Consulting Group, a
management consultancy, says.
Mr Simon Farmbrough, a vice-president at Boston, said: 'As a profit
improvement strategy, branch closure is a red herring.'
The analysis says big closure plans should be dropped and banks should find
other ways to cut costs while maintaining a physical presence on the high
street. It suggests reforming branches to deliver products more cheaply, and
developing banks' selling capabilities.
Banks in the long term, it says, typically retain only 50 per cent to 70 per
cent of the customers of branches they close, while making it more difficult
to recruit customers in those areas.
Closing the smallest 20 per cent of branches would save only about 2 per
cent of a typical retail bank's total costs.
The report says there are some 18,800 bank and building society branches in
the UK, or one for every 3,064 people - the fourth-highest concentration
after post offices, hairdressing salons and fast food. Fast food alone has
35,000 outlets, one for every 1,646 people.
Maintenance costs of the branches are very high, at about Pounds 5.5bn, the
report estimates. It acknowledges that banks have been closing branches
rapidly, with the four biggest clearers reducing the number by 18 per cent
during 1981-91.
It emphasises that closure reduces revenue because of difficulties in
customer retention, sales, and recruitment of new customers. Most customers
are traditional in banking habits and on average visit a branch 2.4 times a
month.
Most also resent upheaval and have the option of turning to nearby
competitor branches following after a closure.
Four fifths of bank sales of life and pension products come from leads
approaches made in the branches, and 28 per cent of customers said they
visited their branch to have a general discussion or inquire about other
products.
Retail Banking, Boston Consulting Group, Devonshire House, Mayfair Place,
London W1X 5FH. Free.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3627</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Thames taxis will rival RiverBus
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD TOMKINS, Transport Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MR STEVEN NORRIS, minister for transport in London, is due next week to
launch a high-frequency Thames passenger service that will rival the
troubled RiverBus, currently under threat of closure.
The service is planned by Thames Fast Ferries, a subsidiary of the
Swindon-based White Horse property group which also runs the Tilbury to
Gravesend ferry downriver from the capital.
Earlier this year White Horse tried to take over RiverBus with the intention
of integrating its operations with its own planned services, but the bid was
rejected by RiverBus's owners, the administrators of Canary Wharf.
The vessel to be launched by Mr Norris is the first of a fleet of 26
high-speed river taxis, each seating 12 people. Thames Fast Ferries expects
to manufacture the others at the rate of about one a month.
That means it is likely to be 1994 before the full service is in operation,
although Thames Fast Ferries hopes to have a 'creditable' service going by
next autumn.
Initially the route will stretch from Chelsea to Docklands, but it might
later stretch upriver to Putney. The company is also planning to run fast
commuter services into London from Tilbury and Gravesend.
Within cental London, vessels will run every five to 7 1/2 minutes. The
company will have more landing stages than RiverBus: possible extra stops
may include Blackfriars, Southwark Bridge and Tower Bridge. But vessels will
stop only on demand, to shorten journey times.
The river taxi fares will be no lower than those charged by RiverBus and the
new services will not be included in the London Transport travelcard scheme.
RiverBus has lost money consistently since it started services in 1988,
partly because passengers have been deterred by high fares. Its losses are
being underwritten by Canary Wharf's administrators pending a decision on
its long-term future.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3628</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Clarke faces questions on Clinton probe
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RALPH ATKINS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MR TONY BLAIR, shadow home secretary, asked Mr Kenneth Clarke, home
secretary, yesterday why officials in Whitehall had made a search to see if
files had been kept on US president-elect Mr Bill Clinton when he was a
student at Oxford University in the 1960s.
It emerged yesterday that officials had checked Home Office archives during
this year's US election campaign to see if Mr Clinton had applied for UK
citizenship during the Vietnam war. He was accused during the campaign of
having tried to avoid military service in Vietnam.
Mr David Winnick, Labour MP for Walsall North, said Mr Clarke should state
on whose authority the files were searched. 'This may have been carried out
by officials, but it can only have been done on the instructions of
ministers,' he added.
Labour MPs are likely to raise the files issue in parliament today -
possibly when Mr Clarke gives evidence to a Commons committee.
The Home Office said it does not comment on individual cases, but officials
said privately that during the US election there were many inquiries from
journalists about whether Mr Clinton had applied for UK citizenship to help
him avoid the draft. In order to forestall false accounts in the media, the
department had looked at the indexes of files to see if Mr Clinton's name
appeared. It did not.
Two Conservative officials - Mr John Lacy and Mr Mark Fulbrook - helped in
the campaign of Mr Clinton's rival, President George Bush.
They were in Mr Major's general-election team in April and gave a seminar to
the Bush campaign on how the prime minister overturned Labour's opinion poll
lead, largely by negative campaigning.
Conservative Central Office said that there was no question of the two
acting as advisers.
The disclosure about the search brought fresh allegations that the
government had mixed party and official duties. It came as 10 Downing Street
was forced to deny that Mr John Major had been snubbed by being refused a
meeting later this month with Mr Clinton.
Officials in London and Washington denied reports of a rift between Mr Major
and Mr Clinton. Last night Mr Clinton emphasised in a telexed message to 10
Downing Street the importance of the 'historic and special relationship'
with the UK. He said he would be unable to meet Mr Major before his
inauguration in January, but would be available for discussions by
telephone.
Downing Street said Mr Clinton was compiling his administration before
taking office in January and was not meeting heads of government. The main
purpose of Mr Major's trip to the US in two weeks is for a US-European
Community summit, Downing Street said. Mr Major hopes to meet Mr Clinton in
the new year.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3629</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Dish sales increase sharply: FT Satellite Monitor
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RAYMOND SNODDY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
CUT-PRICE offers, extensive advertising and improved deliveries from
manufacturers boosted sales and rentals of satellite television dishes to
102,000 last month, Continental Research said.
The figure is comparable with pre-Christmas sales last year after several
months when sales ranged between 60,000 and 70,000. Installations increased
from 21,500 in the first week of November to 30,000 in the last week. The
independent research is based on interviews with more than 4,000 adults and
is integrated with retail figures.
To avoid double counting, more than 20,000 dish installations were excluded
last month because they represented a transfer of subscribers from the
defunct British Satellite Broadcasting to BSkyB.
Almost 250,000 homes said they had definite plans to install satellite
television and a further 1.69m said they probably would. The satellite
channels range from BSkyB, in which Pearson, owner of the Financial Times,
has a significant stake, to Eurosport, MTV and UK Gold. Together they have
30 per cent of viewing in satellite homes - the same as the two BBC
channels.
ITV and Channel 4 together have a 40 per cent share. More than 3.14m homes
can now receive satellite channels in the UK through individual dishes,
cable networks and communal aerials.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3630</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAA9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Names to discuss legal action
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
MR STEPHEN MERRETT, the new deputy chairman of the council of Lloyd's of
London, the insurance market, may face legal action after a meeting today of
Names on his underwriting syndicate 417/418.
Losses incurred by more than 4,000 Lloyd's Names on syndicate 418 in 1985
alone amount to Pounds 136.3m.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3631</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAA8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Marketmakers gain tax relief
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
MARKETMAKERS on the London International Financial Futures and Options
Exchange will be able to receive business relief on inheritance tax from
next March under rules introduced by the Inland Revenue.
Business relief and the option to pay related inheritance tax in
interest-free instalments are being extended beyond Stock Exchange
marketmakers after an announcement by Mr Stephen Dorrell, financial
secretary to the Treasury. There will be 100 per cent relief for inheritance
tax for interests in unincorporated business, and holdings above 25 per cent
in unquoted companies and those on the Unlisted Securities Mar-ket.
There will be 50 per cent relief for controlling holdings in quoted
companies, holdings of no more than 25 per cent in unquoted and USM
companies and certain assets owned by partners or controlling shareholders
in their own partnership or company.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3632</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAA7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / MPs may call for Lamont inquiry
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RALPH ATKINS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
PROTESTS that Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, might have breached rules on
MPs' interests by accepting help towards the cost of evicting a tenant from
his private house are to be considered by a Commons committee, Ralph Atkins
writes.
Sir Geoffrey Johnson-Smith, chairman of the committee on members' interests,
confirmed yesterday that complaints raised by Labour MPs at the weekend
would be looked at before Christmas. If the cross-party committee decides
there is a case for Mr Lamont to answer, it could launch a formal inquiry
into the affair in the new year.
The row is over the Pounds 18,000 Mr Lamont received from an unnamed Tory
party benefactor towards the cost of evicting a 'sex therapist' from his
London house last year. A further Pounds 4,700, paid for by the Treasury, is
already subject to an inquiry by the National Audit Office.
Whitehall officials believe the NAO will almost certainly recommend tougher
accounting procedures for the recording of such payments because of their
political sensitivity. The Treasury said it gave Mr Lamont help because the
credibility of the chancellor, in his public functions, was at stake and
that guidelines on the behaviour of ministers were followed.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3633</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAA6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Analysis service launched
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN CANE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MAID SYSTEMS, a privately owned electronic publisher, has secured deals with
six large corporate information groups to establish a screen-based service
in financial intelligence.
The service, Companyline, will provide information from Dun &amp; Bradstreet,
Disclosure, Moody's, Extel Financial, ICC and Hemmington Scott, publisher of
the Hambro Company Guide.
Maid - Market Analysis and Information Database - says Companyline will
provide access on computer screens to the financial results and reports of
4.5m companies in 40 countries, plus credit ratings, brokers' analyses and
directors' curricula vitae.
The new service will be in direct competition with Profile, owned by the
Financial Times group, and with the Swiss company DataStar as well as Mead
Data Central and Dialogue of the US. It will also compete with Reuter, the
world's largest electronic publisher.
Maid Systems was founded by Mr Wagner in 1985. Its existing services are
Researchline and Newsline. Last year it made pre-tax profits of Pounds
470,000 on sales of about Pounds 3.4m.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3634</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAA5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / CBI attacks EC proposal on data law
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN CANE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A BRUSSELS-inspired measure to ease the flow of information across national
boundaries by harmonising national data protection laws will cost UK
businesses millions of pounds, the Confederation of British Industry warned
today.
It said the measure, a directive working its way through the European
Commission's labyrinthine machinery, demanded unnecessarily high levels of
protection.
Ms Judith Vincent, head of the CBI's law department, said the regulations in
the proposed directive were over-detailed.
She said: 'It will cost firms millions of pounds in gearing up to comply
with the law and in ongoing compliance costs. Cost will arise from increased
staffing and record keeping.'
The directive, she said, had implications for all companies' customer,
personnel and other records containing personal data.
It would particularly affect Telecommunications, banking, insurance and
travel companies. It could, for example, make it unlawful for a bank to send
customers details of a new service without first obtaining the customers'
permission.
The proposed directive has been a source of controversy since its
introduction in September 1990. It was prompted by concerns about the ease
with which information held on computers can be manipulated and transmitted.
Charities, direct marketing companies, airlines and banks were among the
industries that successfully lobbied MEPs into submitting more than 150
amendments when the directive had its first reading last February.
Brussels argued that without data protection harmonisation, countries with
established legislation such as the UK and Germany might restrict the
movement of data to less well protected countries, fearing that it might be
misused.
Opponents of the directive said the Commission had placed protection of the
individual above the need to ensure an open market.
The CBI is complaining first about a regulation requiring that consent be
obtained from individuals for the use of their names and addresses and other
personal data. It says it is bureaucratic and potentially costly to carry
out. Second, it is concerned that the directive will apply to manual data
not held on a computer system.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3635</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAA4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Computer financial service launched
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN CANE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MAID SYSTEMS, a privately owned, London-based electronic publisher, has
secured deals with six large corporate information groups to establish a
screen-based service in financial intelligence.
The service, Companyline, will provide information from Dun &amp; Bradstreet,
Disclosure, Moody's, Extel Financial, ICC and Hemmington Scott, publisher of
the Hambro Company Guide. It will be available from January 1.
According to Maid - Market Analysis and Information Database - Companyline
will provide access on computer screens to the financial results and reports
of 4.5m companies in 40 countries. Credit ratings, brokers' analyses and
directors' curriculum vitae will also be available.
The new service will be in direct competition with Profile, owned by the
Financial Times group, and the Swiss company DataStar together with Mead
Data Central and Dialogue of the US. It will also compete with Reuter, the
world's largest electronic publisher.
Mr Daniel Wagner, Maid chief executive, seems to have pulled off something
of a coup in persuading traditionally competitive information providers to
agree to merge their information into a single global library.
Pricing for Companyline has not been finalised. Typically, a short Dun &amp;
Bradstreet report might cost Pounds 2 and a Moody's report Pounds 25.
Maid Systems was founded by Mr Wagner in 1985. Its existing services are
Researchline and Newsline. It has 3,000 subscribers including Boots, Cadbury
Schweppes and Goldman Sachs. In 1992 it made pre-tax profits of Pounds
470,000 on sales of about Pounds 3.4m.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3636</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAA3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Uphill task to aid 'Triangle of Death': The need for swift
action by US Marines
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JULIAN OZANNE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
In the midday heat yesterday, one of Bardere's 60 grave diggers dragged two
small corpses wrapped in white cotton shrouds on a wooden harness along a
dusty track.
In the distance, in the middle of a vast field of freshly turned earth
mounds, a colleague was busy with a pick-axe digging a shallow grave - his
tenth before midday.
Without ceremony or grief, the bodies of the children aged seven and nine
were buried in unmarked graves along with thousands of others who have died
in the past three months in Bardere, a tumble-down town which is the scene
of some of the worse horrors in war-ravaged Somalia. Bardere is 300km west
of Mogadishu, the capital.
Throughout the country at least 300,000 people have died this year and a
further 500,000 to 900,000 people are facing imminent death from starvation
unless food is delivered to them within the next eight weeks. US Marines
poised offshore to land in Somalia within the next 48 hours will have to
move swiftly to deal with the appalling situation in Bardere and other towns
if they are to achieve their humanitarian mission.
The US military intervention, which will number 28,000-33,000 troops by
Christmas, will set a precedent for massive foreign action in Africa to
guarantee the delivery of food aid to starving people.
Observers say it will be relatively easy for the US force to secure
Mogadishu on the coast and the southern port city of Kismayo. Much more
difficult will be launching a big relief operation to take food and relief
workers by truck, aircraft and helicopter to the inaccessible south-western
'Triangle of Death' between Bardere, Kismayo and Baidoa and including the
marginalised Bantu people living along the Jubba river.
As an indication of the scale of security problems in the interior,
according to Reuters news agency clan fighting in Baidoa yesterday killed 24
Somalis. The US-based charity Care was forced to evacuate most of its male
staff from the town on Saturday.
In an intensive feeding centre of sticks and plastic sheeting near Bardere's
graveyard, at least a dozen skeletal children were yesterday sliding
hopelessly and apathetically towards death from hunger and related sickness
 -too weak even to get up and defecate outside.
A Somali aid worker approached a mother holding her dead child and gently
took the girl out of her arms. The loss of a third child in three weeks left
the mother too stunned to weep.
At another feeding centre nutritionists were yesterday registering severely
malnourished children. A 14-year-old girl, her skin wrinkled over her bony
body and ribcage with legs like match sticks, was weighed at 16 kilograms -
just over a half of the average weight for a girl of her age and height.
Aid workers say they have been fighting an uphill battle to save people from
starvation. Death, disease, and hunger have gripped the district's 170,000
people in a tragedy of biblical proportions. According Care, 160 people,
mostly young children and women, die in the town every day.
A seemingly pointless civil war has inflicted remorseless suffering on the
people around Bardere. The town has changed hands three times in the past 18
months and each time things have got worse as militia gunmen go on a rampage
of looting and rape.
Two months ago Bardere fell to the clan-based faction led by Gen Mohamed
Said Hersi Morgan. Aid workers had to be evacuated and the death rate
rocketed from about 35 a day to 307. Gen Morgan immediately mined the road
from Bardere to Dinsor, the front line, preventing aid workers from reaching
the villages.
Since aid workers returned to Bardere in late October they have been
hampered by looting, banditry, hijackings and endless negotiations with Gen
Morgan's officials.
Last Friday, at 2.30am, gunmen guarding a UN compound broke into the house,
stole 3m Somali shillings (Pounds 770) and hijacked the UN's only four-wheel
drive car.
Aid aircraft flying food into Bardere have been shot at. The agency Care has
been forced to pay SSh8m a week in airport fees and SSh18m a week in wages
to armed guards supplied by Gen Morgan. The agency has also been forced to
give the gunmen diesel.
'The security problems are beyond the ability of Gen Morgan's officials to
control,' said Mr Robert Allan, Care's representative in Bardere. 'They
don't have the capacity to control the looting and anarchy.
'There are young nomads and cattle herders who have lost everything to
looters who have now taken up guns as a way of making a good living. It's
become increasingly difficult to get food to those in need.'
US forces will have to attempt immediately to confront these security
problems which have defeated massive efforts by the international aid
community to feed Somalia for the past nine months.
People in Bardere have long ago lost their humanity, their dignity and, more
importantly, any sense of hope.
While many people feel the US effort is 'too much, too late' there is still
a hope that tens of thousands of lives could still be saved in the 'Triangle
of Death'.
But the children, at best, face a life which will be permanently stunted
physically and emotionally.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3637</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAA2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Palestinians drop call for boycott of talks
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HUGH CARNEGY
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   JERUSALEM
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
PALESTINIAN leaders reluctantly gave their delegation the go-ahead to attend
the latest round of Middle East peace talks, starting in Washington today,
after their call for a boycott was brushed aside by fellow participants
Syria, Jordan and Lebanon.
The snub underlined the Palestinians' weak position in the talks. The fifth
anniversary on Wednesday of the start of the intifada - the uprising against
Israeli rule in the occupied territories - will be a further reminder of the
painful alternatives they face.
The Palestine Liberation Organisation wanted to postpone the eighth round of
bilateral negotiations with Israel until after the inauguration of
President-elect Bill Clinton next month to protest at Israel's tough stance
in the year-old talks. But the suggestion was rejected at a meeting of the
Arab parties in Beirut, attended also by Egypt.
The Palestinians fear their goal of full independence will be prejudiced by
a planned interim stage of limited self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza
Strip. But their case for far-reaching powers in the initial stage is
undermined by the PLO's acceptance of the two-stage structure when the
process was launched in Madrid in October 1991.
Both the Tunis-based PLO and local leaders fear they will not be able to
secure an interim agreement acceptable to the rank-and-file, among whom
Islamic fundamentalist and other rejectionist groups are active. Increasing
disillusionment is reflected in a recent rise in violence in the
territories. The security forces are braced for an upsurge of violence over
the anniversary.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3638</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAA1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Seoul conducts election probe into Hyundai
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOHN BURTON and ALEXANDER NICOLL
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   SEOUL
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
SOUTH Korea's government was yesterday investigating alleged electoral
malpractices by Hyundai, the industrial conglomerate, as the presidential
bid by its founder, Mr Chung Ju-yung, appeared to be rapidly gaining
strength less than two weeks before the elections.
The government's attempt to crack down on Hyundai could blunt the momentum
of Mr Chung, whose campaign may determine the outcome of the December 18
elections. He is taking votes from the candidate of the ruling Democratic
Liberal party, Mr Kim Young-sam, potentially tipping the balance towards the
main opposition candidate, Mr Kim Dae-jung.
The inquiry by police, the prosecutor's office, and tax and banking
authorities is examining allegations that Hyundai is illegally diverting
funds into Mr Chung's campaign and forcing Hyundai employees to canvass for
him. Police yesterday arrested four Hyundai executives, including the
president of Hyundai Wood Materials, on charges of illegally campaigning for
the group's founder.
The police had sought the arrests after a junior accounting clerk of Hyundai
Heavy Industries, a subsidiary of the group, told a press conference that
Won32bn (Pounds 27m) was secretly transferred from a Hyundai subsidiary to
Mr Chung's United People's party (UPP). Hyundai and the party deny the
allegation.
Mr Chung acknowledges that Hyundai employees are working in his campaign but
says their involvement is voluntary. He says his campaign is funded by sales
of his own holdings in Hyundai group companies.
Mr Chung's campaign has gained ground according to private polls conducted
by all three parties - public opinion polls are banned during the campaign.
All polls agree that Mr Kim Young-sam is the front-runner but the opposition
parties say his lead is narrowing as Mr Chung cuts into his middle-class
conservative support.
Mr Chung's populist platform, which includes promises of a trebling in per
capita income within five years and deep cuts in apartment rents, is
striking a chord with an electorate concerned about Korea's slowing economic
growth. He is attracting protest votes reflecting dissatisfaction with the
political establishment as represented by the Kims, who both stood
unsuccessfully in the last presidential election in 1987.
UPP officials say the Hyundai investigation is a deliberate attempt by the
government to undermine Mr Chung and reduce the threat he poses to Mr Kim
Young-sam.
All the parties have been under investigation throughout the campaign for
alleged vote-buying but the probe of links between the UPP and Hyundai has
been the most public.
Race to unchain the dragon, Page 16
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3639</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAA0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Accounting for the exploitation of natural resources
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MARTIN WOLF
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
WHAT HAS made the idea of 'sustainable development' so appealing, writes Ms
Frances Cairncross of the Economist, is 'the fact that the phrase implies so
many different things to different people. Every environmentally aware
politician is in favour of it, a sure sign that they do not understand what
it means.'(1)
The Brundtland commission defined sustainable development as 'development
that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of
future generations to meet their own needs'.(2) This definition does not
make one much wiser. It implies maintenance of the capital stock. But what
is the relevant capital stock, how is it to be measured and to what extent
can some parts of it be substituted for other parts?
These are questions more of value than of fact. But they already have
practical implications, amongst them being the attempts to incorporate
natural resources into national accounts. As Mr Chris Bryant and Mr Paul
Cook of the UK's Central Statistical Office, demonstrate in a recent
article, conceptual and practical problems bedevil the effort. (3)
National accounts measure economic exchange. They do not measure welfare.
They also fail to measure the economist's concept of income, defined by a
Nobel-laureate economist, the late Sir John Hicks, as the most that might be
consumed forever. Hicksian income is similar to 'sustainable development',
although those concerned with the latter would put particular emphasis on
the natural resource component of the capital stock.
In one particular area, the depletion of marketed natural resources,
environmentalists and economists have similar objections to conventional
national accounts. Both agree that output of products like oil is
overestimated, since reserves will give out and income cease.
A study by Washington's World Resources Institute has calculated that
Indonesia's measured gross domestic product would be markedly reduced by
proper estimates of depletion. This particular study used two ways of
calculating depletion, shown as 'depreciation' and 'excess profit' in the
chart, which reports the CSO's attempt to apply such methods to the UK's oil
and gas production.
Though different in detail, both methods deduct the proportion of the
industry's profits attributable to sale of natural resources, as opposed to
that attributable to use of man-made capital in their extraction. The value
of the natural resources themselves is, in effect, deducted from GDP, the
argument being that the sale of resources is not itself production.
Yet the cash obtained from selling the family silver can be invested to
generate an income. Accordingly, the World Bank has published a study
recommending an alternative, Hicksian approach. 'User cost', also shown for
the UK in the chart, is the amount that would need to be invested to
maintain in perpetuity an income equal to the difference between the value
of oil and gas output and user cost. The 'user cost' method gives rather
smaller estimates of what needs to be deducted from gross output than
'depreciation' and 'excess profits', because it counts part of the surplus
over the cost of production as a sustainable income.
Even adjusting measured output of marketed non-renewable resources is
contentious, it appears, never mind valuing the use of non-marketed natural
resources like the atmosphere. Yet the adjustments amount to billions of
pounds in the case of the UK. Much more work on environmental adjustments to
national accounts can be expected, but will statisticians ever reach
generally accepted conclusions?
(1) Frances Cairncross, Costing the Earth: The Challenge for Governments,
the Opportunities for Business (Boston, Mass: Harvard Business School Press,
1992). (2) World Commission on Environment and Development, Our Common
Future (London: Oxford University Press, 1987). (3) Chris Bryant and Paul
Cook, Environmental Issues and the National Accounts, Economic Trends,
November 1992.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC INDICATORS: PRODUCTION AND EMPLOYMENT
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Yearly data for retail sales volume and industrial production plus all
data for the vacancy rate indicator are in index form with 1985=100.
Quarterly and monthly data for retail sales and industrial production
show the percentage change over the corresponding period in the previous
year, and are positive unless otherwise stated. The unemployment rate is
shown as a percentage of the total labour force.  Figures for the
composite leading indicator are end-period values.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
UNITED STATES
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
               Retail                   Unemp-     Vacancy    Composite
                sales    Industrial    loyment        rate      leading
               volume    production       rate   indicator    indicator
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1985            100.0        100.0         7.1       100.0       102.9
1986            105.7        101.0         6.9        98.0       108.1
1987            108.3        105.9         6.1       105.5       109.9
1988            112.3        111.6         5.4       106.1       114.3
1989            115.1        114.5         5.2        99.3       113.1
1990            115.4        115.7         5.4        84.5       109.1
1991            113.4        113.5         6.6        62.0       114.7
4th qtr. 1991     -0.5         -0.5         6.9        59.5       114.7
1st qtr. 1992      3.3          1.3         7.1        58.9       116.6
2nd qtr. 1992      1.8          2.0         7.4        60.4       116.1
3rd qtr. 1992      2.5          0.8         7.5        60.1       115.2
November 1991    -1.5         -0.2         6.8        59.1       113.5
December          0.5          0.2         7.0        59.8       114.7
January 1992      5.0          0.0         7.0        56.3       115.6
February          3.9          1.4         7.2        59.0       116.5
March             1.2          2.5         7.2        61.4       116.6
April             2.0          2.5         7.1        59.3       116.8
May               1.7          2.4         7.4        61.3       116.5
June              1.6          1.1         7.7        60.7       116.1
July              2.4          1.2         7.6        59.9       115.6
August            2.4          0.9         7.5        61.2       115.2
September         2.6          0.3         7.4        59.3       115.2
October           3.8          0.5                    60.6
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
JAPAN
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
               Retail                   Unemp-     Vacancy    Composite
                sales    Industrial    loyment        rate      leading
               volume    production       rate   indicator    indicator
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1985            100.0        100.0        2.6       100.0         96.6
1986            106.5         99.7        2.8        94.3        105.4
1987            113.8        103.1        2.9       108.3        115.4
1988            122.8        112.9        2.5       135.9        122.9
1989            132.8        119.9        2.2       147.0        126.4
1990            142.0        125.3        2.1       149.7        124.4
1991            145.0        128.1        2.1       144.1        123.3
4th qtr. 1991      1.9         -1.6        2.1       140.3        123.3
1st qtr. 1992     -0.8         -4.6        2.0       132.9        123.1
2nd qtr. 1992     -3.5         -6.2        2.1       126.8        122.6
3rd qtr. 1992                  -6.1
November 1991     4.1         -1.2        2.1       139.0        123.9
December          0.0         -1.8        2.1       138.3        123.3
January 1992     -0.2         -3.6        2.1       136.1        123.3
February          2.4         -4.6        2.0       132.5        123.2
March            -4.5         -5.6        2.0       130.2        123.1
April            -2.8         -6.0        2.0       130.6        123.0
May              -1.0         -8.9        2.1       122.0        122.8
June             -6.5         -3.8        2.1       127.7        122.6
July             -1.0         -6.1        2.2       122.5        122.4
August                        -8.1        2.2       116.1        122.1
September                     -4.1
Octovber                      -6.0
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
GERMANY
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
               Retail                   Unemp-     Vacancy    Composite
                sales    Industrial    loyment        rate      leading
               volume    production       rate   indicator    indicator
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1985            100.0        100.0         7.1      100.0        105.1
1986            103.4        102.2         6.4      136.4        104.8
1987            107.4        102.5         6.2      149.4        105.8
1988            110.5        106.2         6.2      164.7        112.0
1989            114.1        111.4         5.6      218.6        114.8
1990            123.5        117.2         4.9      261.0        115.4
1991            130.5        120.8         4.3      269.9        112.4
4th qtr. 1991      1.2          0.1         4.3      264.7        112.4
1st qtr. 1992     -2.8          1.3         4.3      275.7        112.3
2nd qtr. 1992     -4.2         -1.3         4.5      273.3        111.0
3rd qtr. 1992     -1.9         -1.6                  261.1        108.0
November 1991    -0.2          1.7         4.3      261.5        112.4
December          0.6         -2.1         4.3      265.6        112.4
January 1992     -1.3          0.2         4.3      270.8        112.3
February         -2.1          3.4         4.3      278.9        112.4
March            -4.9          0.2         4.4      278.1        112.3
April            -2.4         -0.2         4.5      276.5        111.8
May              -4.1          0.3         4.5      273.3        111.4
June             -6.0         -3.9         4.5      270.0        111.0
July             -4.1         -2.6         4.6      266.8        110.3
August           -1.4         -0.8         4.7      262.7        109.4
September        -0.1         -1.3                  253.0        108.0
October                       -3.6                  240.9
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
FRANCE
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
               Retail                   Unemp-     Vacancy    Composite
                sales    Industrial    loyment        rate      leading
               volume    production       rate   indicator    indicator
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1985            100.0        100.0        10.2      100.0        102.4
1986            102.4        101.1        10.4      107.2        109.0
1987            104.5        103.1        10.5      117.6        108.4
1988            107.9        107.3        10.0      134.9        114.3
1989            109.6        111.3         9.4      161.1        113.7
1990            110.1        112.9         9.0      166.0        106.6
1991            109.7        113.2         9.6      129.7        107.5
4th qtr. 1991      0.2          1.4        10.0      124.8        107.5
1st qtr. 1992     -1.2          1.0        10.1      120.0        108.6
2nd qtr. 1992      0.2          0.1        10.3      108.5        107.7
3rd qtr. 1992     -0.3         -0.7        10.3      112.9        105.7
November 1991     0.7          1.2        10.0      126.3        107.5
December         -1.5          2.6        10.0      123.3        107.5
January 1992      0.2          0.1        10.1      122.5        107.9
February          3.3          0.4        10.2      119.6        108.4
March            -6.9          2.7        10.1      117.9        108.6
April             2.6          1.2        10.3      105.5        108.3
May              -0.9         -0.5        10.3      103.4        108.1
June             -1.3         -0.4        10.3      116.4        107.7
July             -3.5         -1.1        10.3      115.8        107.3
August            0.5         -1.1        10.2      114.1        106.6
September         2.4          0.1        10.3      108.9        105.7
October                                                          104.6
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
ITALY
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
               Retail                   Unemp-      Composite
                sales    Industrial    loyment        leading
               volume    production       rate       indicator
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1985            100.0        100.0         9.6          104.1
1986            108.0        104.1        10.5          110.9
1987            113.9        106.8        10.9          113.0
1988            109.8        114.2        10.9          117.8
1989            118.4        118.7        10.9          116.0
1990            115.0        118.0        10.3          112.3
1991            114.3        115.4         9.8          115.2
4th qtr. 1991      6.3         -0.7         9.9          115.2
1st qtr. 1992                  -0.3         9.9          114.6
2nd qtr. 1992                  -0.3         9.9          113.2
3rd qtr. 1992                  -1.2
November 199      7.5          2.7         na         114.7
December          5.0         -3.2         na         115.2
January 1992                  -1.4         na         115.1
February                       0.3         na         114.9
March                          0.3         na         114.6
April                          0.5         na         114.8
May                            1.1         na         114.4
June                          -2.6         na         113.2
July                           0.2         na         112.1
August                        -0.3         na         110.9
September                     -3.5         na
October                                    na
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
UNITED KINGDOM
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
               Retail                   Unemp-     Vacancy    Composite
                sales    Industrial    loyment        rate      leading
               volume    production       rate   indicator    indicator
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1985            100.0        100.0        11.2       100.0       101.9
1986            105.2        102.4        11.2       116.1       105.2
1987            110.7        105.7        10.3       141.2       109.3
1988            117.7        109.5         8.6       144.3       107.5
1989            119.8        109.9         7.1       124.7       105.3
1990            120.4        109.3         6.8        97.9       103.1
1991            119.5        106.1         8.7        68.9       107.3
4th qtr. 1991      0.4         -0.8         9.3        67.3       107.3
1st qtr. 1992     -0.4         -1.3         9.5        70.8       107.9
2nd qtr. 1992      1.2         -0.2         9.7        68.1       111.0
3rd qtr. 1992      0.9         -0.6        10.1        63.3       110.1
November 1991     1.6         -0.7         9.3        65.9       107.9
December         -0.4         -0.3         9.4        72.7       107.3
January 1992      0.8         -1.2         9.5        70.4       106.7
February          1.3         -1.0         9.6        71.0       107.1
March            -3.2         -1.8         9.5        71.1       107.9
April             1.1          1.4         9.6        69.7       109.2
May               1.9          0.4         9.7        68.1       110.3
June              0.5         -2.4         9.7        66.5       111.0
July             -0.3         -1.5         9.9        66.6       110.1
August            1.3         -0.1        10.1        64.1       109.7
September         1.6         -0.2        10.2        59.2       110.1
October           1.8                                 57.7
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
All series seasonally adjusted. Statistics for Germany apply only to
western Germany. Data supplied by Datastream and WEFA. Retail sales
volume: data from national government sources except Japan and Italy
(value series deflated by OECD using CPI). Refers to total retail sales
except France and Italy (major outlets only) and Japan (department
stores only). Industrial production: data from national government
sources. Includes mining, manufacturing, gas, electricity and water
supply industries except Japan (mining and manufacturing only) and UK
(also includes construction industries). Unemployment rate: OECD
standardised rate which adjusts as far as possible for the different
definitions of unemployment used in official sources. Vacancy rate
indicator: relevant vacancy measure divided by total civilian
employment, expressed in index form. Derived from OECD series. US -
help-wanted advertising, Japan - new vacancies, Germany and France - all
jobs vacant, Italy - no data available, UK - unfilled vacancies.
Composite leading indicator: OECD data. Each is a combination of series,
cyclical fluctuations in which usually precede cyclical fluctuations in
general economic activity.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3640</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAAZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Somali warlords welcome US initiative: Washington urged by
warring factions to make long-term commitment
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JULIAN OZANNE
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MOGADISHU
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
SOMALIA's two biggest warlords said at the weekend that they welcomed the
presence of US Marines, poised offshore to land in their country. But they
added that Washington must make a long-term economic and political
commitment to the war-ravaged nation rather than a purely short-term
humanitarian intervention.
In his heavily fortified compound in the shell-blasted Somali capital of
Mogadishu, General Mohamed Farrar Aideed, Somalia's most feared faction
leader, also complained bitterly about not being consulted by the US over
the military intervention which is set to begin within the next 48 hours.
'If we are not consulted by the US it will look more like an invasion force
and that could cause problems for them,' he said in an interview with the
Financial Times.
Minutes later, he contradicted himself, saying that US troops would come to
no harm in Somalia and that he would personally guarantee their safety.
Later in the day, six miles away across the green line which divides the
rubble-strewn capital in half, Gen Aideed's foe, Mr Ali Mahdi Mohamed, was
also guaranteeing the safety of US soldiers to the background sound of
intermittent shots.
The self-styled interim president said that, unlike Gen Aideed, he did not
think he needed to be consulted by the US about the landing of foreign
troops on Somali territory - a bizarre admission for a man who still claims,
despite all the chaos and fragmentation of the country, to be the legitimate
head of a sovereign government.
The war between Gen Aideed and the former hotelier, caused largely by the
general's thirst for absolute power and clan rivalry and greed over scarce
resources, has plunged Somalia in the past year into anarchy and starvation.
Both men adamantly denied they had any personal responsibility for the
disintegration of their country, the death of at least 300,000 people from
war-induced starvation this year or the Mafia-style protection racket which
has terrorised and extorted aid agencies and prevented food from reaching
those in need.
The two men appear to agree on little else except that the US must take a
much more long-term view of intervention in Somalia. The White House has
said the 28,000-33,000 US forces will carry out a humanitarian operation to
get food to an estimated 1.5m people at risk of death from starvation and
will leave Somalia as soon as that is completed, possibly by January 20, the
date of the Bush-Clinton handover.
Both warlords think that US troops should stay in Somalia for at least six
months and possibly beyond to achieve four objectives: establish security
for the relief effort, disarm the bandits and looters, help start the
process of reconstruction, rehabilitation, job creation and economic
development and broker a political reconciliation conference between the
clan-based factions which will establish an interim government to pave the
way for elections.
'Somalis have very high expectations from the US,' said Gen Aideed. 'We
expect the Americans not just to do humanitarian assistance.'
Mr Mahdi, dressed in a white safari suit and sitting behind a huge mahogany
desk with a world globe to his left, said: 'The US must disarm the faction
leaders and their few supporters. . . and if the US only distribute food and
leave people with guns then there is no hope for Somalia in the long term.'
Mr Mahdi added: 'The great danger is that with the US soldiers the Somali
people are facing a great opportunity. The world has offered a last chance
for peace and order and life in this country. If the Somali people don't
benefit from this it will be very sad and a great disaster for us.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3641</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAAYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Argentina in deal on debt reduction
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By STEPHEN FIDLER, Latin America Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE Argentine government and its leading bank creditors began signing a bank
debt reduction agreement yesterday at a televised ceremony in Buenos Aires.
The agreement covers Dollars 23bn of medium- and long-term bank debt and
Dollars 8bn of arrears on interest payments.
The signing, at which representatives from the 13 banks on Argentina's bank
advisory committee were present, is the second last stage of the Brady-style
agreement.
The signing is expected to take several weeks, as hundreds of creditors  -
including individuals who have bought the debt at a discount from face value
to make speculative gains - put their signature to the accord. The
agreement, negotiations over which were started in January, will be
completed by an exchange of concessional bonds for bank debt, probably next
April.
In a speech at the ceremony, President Carlos Menem underlined the
importance of an accord which would restore the country's creditworthiness.
Argentine officials see it as the latest step in the government's aim to
normalise the country's international relations.
Mr William Rhodes, vice chairman of Citibank, Argentina's leading bank
creditor, said the agreement 'regularised' the country's relations with
commercial banks and underlined the government's commitment to sound
economic policies.
After the ceremony, economy minister Mr Domingo Cavallo left for Japan on a
trip aimed at encouraging Japanese finance for the agreement.
The accord is the latest in a series of debt reduction agreements under the
Brady plan which have also benefited countries such as Mexico and Costa
Rica. The plan is named after US Treasury Secretary, Mr Nicholas Brady.
The agreement, bankers say, should improve the country's access to
international financial markets and reduce its cost of borrowing, at present
at least two percentage points above the costs of funds for Mexico. Under
the accord, some 65 per cent of the debt will be shielded from future rises
in interest rates through bonds carrying pre-set interest rates.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3642</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAAXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Bentsen set to head US Treasury team
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By GEORGE GRAHAM and LOUISE KEHOE
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   WASHINGTON, SAN FRANCISCO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
US President-elect Bill Clinton is expected to announce the first
appointments to his administration this week, beginning with an economic
team headed by Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas.
Mr Bentsen, who as chairman of the Senate finance committee has long
familiarity with tax and economic issues, is now thought to be all but
certain to be named Treasury secretary.
Clinton aides refused comment on the nominations, but said he was 'on the
verge' of making an announcement.
The post of deputy Treasury secretary is now widely expected to go to Mr
Roger Altman, vice chairman of the Blackstone investment banking group, with
another investment banker, Mr Robert Rubin of Goldman Sachs, likely to be
the principal economic adviser in the White House as head of a new Economic
Security Council.
Congressman Leon Panetta, chairman of the House of Representatives budget
committee, is the front-runner to become director of the Office of
Management and Budget, although Ms Alice Rivlin, a former director of the
Congressional Budget Office, is also thought to be in contention.
Mr Clinton has been in no great haste to name his cabinet, although he has
already appointed 'cluster teams' to examine the operations of each
government department during the transition period before his inauguration
on January 20.
Key nominations in the foreign affairs and national security arena may not
come for several more days.
The process has been slowed by the need for thorough background checks on
potential nominees - who may be subjected to close scrutiny during Senate
confirmation hearings - and by Mr Clinton's insistence on tough ethical
standards barring members of his administration from future dealings with
their agencies.
Mr John Young, the recently retired president and chief executive of
Hewlett-Packard, the computer and electronics manufacturer, has withdrawn
his name from consideration for a formal role in the administration.
Mr Young had been widely expected to be appointed to a cabinet position,
possibly as commerce secretary.
His substantial Hewlett-Packard stock and stock options holdings, acquired
during his 34-year career at the company, were seen as a barrier to his
participation in the administration because they might create the appearance
of a conflict of interest.
Mr Young is highly regarded for his long-time efforts to address the
competitiveness issue as chairman of President Reagan's Commission on
Industrial Competitiveness and as the founding chairman of the
private-sector Council on Competitiveness and the Computer Systems Policy
Project.
Some members of the Clinton transition team have begun to wonder whether the
new ethics rules may not prove counterproductive by deterring well-qualified
candidates for administration posts, particularly at mid-levels.
The Democrats will retain 57 seats in the Senate, to the Republicans' 43,
following the victory of Mr Kent Conrad in Friday's North Dakota
by-election.
Clarke challenged, Page 6
Just do it, Mr Clinton, Page 32
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3643</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAAWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Venezuela rulers faltering in poll
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOSEPH MANN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
VENEZUELANS, who have seen two military uprisings against their government
this year, went to the polls yesterday in nationwide elections for state
governors, mayors, city councils and parish councils.
Early projections of the results by a private television station suggested
the ruling Accion Democratica lost three of the 11 states it had held.
But politicians are concerned that disaffection with Venezuela's democracy
will mean low voter turnout.
The projection said the party won governors' seats in eight of 22 states,
while the opposition Copei won 11 seats, the leftist MAS party garnered two
seats and the more radical Causa R took the last seat.
The ruling party previously held 11 of 20 states, and two new districts were
added for these polls.
Only 10.39m Venezuelans, about half the country's population, are registered
as voters. This would suggest most voters do not believe that their ballots
will change anything.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3644</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAAVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Slovene president set for re-election
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LAURA SILBER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   LJUBLJANA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
INITIAL election results in Slovenia yesterday showed President Milan Kucan
headed for a landslide victory in his bid for re-election, winning 64 per
cent of votes in the first elections since the republic broke away from
Yugoslavia in June 1991.
The new 130-seat bicameral parliament seemed likely to be split among a
leftist coalition, liberal and centre-right parties. The Liberal Democratic
Party looked set to be the biggest parliamentary party, with 27 per cent of
the ballot, according to a television exit poll.
The Slovene National Party headed by ultra-nationalist Mr Zmago Jelincic had
9.8 per cent.
But many Slovenes in Ljubljana, the capital, yesterday worried whether Mr
Jelincic would win support.
He has called for the expulsion of some 130,000 guest-workers from the
former Yugoslavia.
Mr Peter Bekes of the reformed Communists' party warned against playing down
the significance of Mr Jelincic's popularity. 'Hitler at first captured only
3 per cent of the vote.'
Turnout was expected to be high throughout the republic. Results are
expected today.
Amid battles in Bosnia, General Aly Abdul Razek, the commander of UN forces
in Sarajevo, at the weekend declared the failure of their peacekeeping
mission. He called on the international community to set a one-month
deadline before intervening militarily to end the war in Bosnia, where Serbs
have seized control of 70 per cent of the republic.
In Sarajevo, fighting intensified after Serb forces continued their
onslaught on the Bosnian capital as they seized control of Otes, a key
western suburb.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3645</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAAUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Low poll turnout likely in Venezuela
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOSEPH MANN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   CARACAS
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
VENEZUELANS, who have seen two military uprisings against their government
this year, went to the polls yesterday in nationwide elections for state
governors, mayors, city councils and parish councils.
But politicians are concerned that long-standing disaffection with
Venezuela's democracy will translate into low voter turnout.
Only 10.39m Venezuelans, about half the country's population, are registered
as voters. This would suggest that most voters do not believe that their
ballots will change anything, despite exhortations by the media and
politicians to go out and vote.
Voter abstention nationwide stood at more than 54 per cent during the last
state and local elections, in 1989, although voting is compulsory.
Abstention in the Caracas metropolitan area, where much of the country's
population is concentrated, reached a record 73 per cent.
Even though the great majority of Venezuelans rejected a call by military
rebels and leftist extremists to join a popular rebellion on November 27,
most people still appear to have a very low opinion of the country's
democracy.
Moreover, doubts exist as to whether voters will continue to opt for the
'establishment' parties, or throw their support to the left and to
independent candidates. In past elections, Venezuelans tended to cast most
of their votes for the two mainstream political groups: the ruling
Democratic Action party and the main opposition force, the Christian
Democrat Copei Party.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3646</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAATFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Russian congress converts no-one to democracy
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LEYLA BOULTON
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MOSCOW
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
'DEPUTIES: get rid of this government of Chicago gangsters,' read the
telegram pinned on the notice-board at the Congress of People's Deputies in
Moscow.
But most Russians, concentrating on a struggle for survival, are indifferent
to the drama which will continue to unfold this week in the Kremlin as the
full parliament continues to fight President Boris Yeltsin's painful
economic reforms.
'I don't trust anybody,' was how one army officer, who moonlights as a
security guard to feed his family, summed up the feelings of many Russians.
Although many of the deputies' complaints reflect real popular grievances,
congress proposals for action adopted at the weekend either defend narrow
vested interests - such as the state farms - or make potentially disastrous
populist promises. An attempt to set up a system of parliamentary
government, narrowly defeated at the weekend, would have led to chronically
unstable cabinets that would have plunged the country further into crisis.
Not surprising, an opinion poll quoted by Ostankino television found that
while 57 per cent of the population is dissatisfied with the government, 59
per cent is also dissatisfied with parliament.
The high point of last week's proceedings, a punch-up between deputies,
spoke volumes of the absurdity of an institution which is only formally
democratic. If anything, its performance has served to encourage popular
disillusionment with democratic practice.
Elected in the days of communist domination of society, its unwieldy
1,000-plus membership makes it even more open to manipulation than the
smaller standing parliament, the Supreme Soviet. The parliamentary chairman,
Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, a power-hungry figure promoted by Mr Yeltsin to the
latter's subsequent regret, cuts an equally paradoxical figure as
standard-bearer of democracy.
Pursuing his own personal power struggle by promoting the failed attempt to
deprive the president of the right to form the government, he will resume
the offensive by backing calls for Prime Minister Yegor Gaidar's removal
today and promising new trouble when the congress next meets in April.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3647</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAASFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / History offers bad omen for Edinburgh summit: The city's mix
of pride and fear
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JAMES BUXTON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE British public may not find the European Community particularly exciting
and in Edinburgh emotions are usually understated. But the city is secretly
agog as the European summit, being held here on Friday and Saturday, draws
near.
There are dark blue European flags along the streets, and roads have been
resurfaced. The serenity of the royal palace of Holyrood, where the leaders
will meet, has been defiled by the security men's Portacabins on its lawns.
When Mr John Major announced in May 1991 that the European Council of
Britain's presidency would be held in Edinburgh, no one appears to have
worked out where in the city it might be held. Edinburgh Castle, an obvious
first choice, has no space large enough to accommodate all and participants
would have had to use a single narrow entrance - a security nightmare.
Eventually the Queen agreed (with reluctance, it is said) to allow the
meeting to be held in her official residence in Edinburgh. But making
Holyrood into a conference location has meant turning the 16th century
palace inside out.
Eighty of the 100 third-floor bedrooms have been converted into offices,
with the remainder used for storing furniture and paintings displaced to
make way for desks, fax machines and photocopiers.
The council meeting will take place in the panelled long gallery under
pictures of Scottish kings and queens. The arches around the main courtyards
have been enclosed with glass to provide a warm cloister for the 800
officials.
There will be no room at Holyrood for the 2,000 people from the media
covering the summit - they will be herded a mile away into a press centre
set up in Meadowbank stadium. Few will be allowed into the conference centre
itself.
Most Edinburgh residents will see little more than the cavalcades of cars
and outriders sweeping from the hotels to Holyrood, and down to the port of
Leith where the Queen is giving a banquet on the royal yacht Britannia on
Friday night. Many streets are to be closed for the duration of the summit,
and authorities admit traffic problems will be appalling.
Mr Major's purpose in bringing the summit to Scotland (at a cost of Pounds
6.4m) was to emphasise to Scots that not everything happens in London and
demonstrate the benefits of Scotland being in a union with England. But
opponents are taking the opportunity to state they want Scotland either to
be independent or to have its own parliament, and there is to be a
demonstration on Saturday.
Edinburgh is looking to the summit with a mixture of pride and apprehension;
pride because it is the capital of a separate nation which once had its own
links with the continent, and because it is probably Britain's most
architecturally splendid city.
But there are enormous security risks posed by a city like Edinburgh. The
streets between the hotels and Holyrood are narrow, and the palace is
overlooked by Arthur's Seat, a hill where the army has set up posts to
protect against terrorist snipers.
The other fear for Edinburgh is that the city's name will be linked to a
summit which goes down in history as a failure.
Holyrood is no stranger to political conflict of the most lethal kind. It
was there that in 1566 a group of Scottish nobles stabbed to death David
Rizzio, the Italian secretary of Mary Queen of Scots. That is not a good
omen.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3648</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAARFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Scots up in arms over subsidiarity
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID MARSH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE British government is being criticised by supporters of Scottish
devolution for backing subsidiarity in the European Community but failing to
practise it in the UK.
Critics say Britain's support for this week's expected Edinburgh summit
declaration on subsidiarity - making Community decisions at the lowest
practicable level of government - is hypocritical. The issue focuses
particularly on how Scotland will be represented in the Committee of
European Regions, which is being set up under the Maastricht treaty as a
consultative body of representatives from regional and local groups
throughout the EC.
A discussion paper by Mr Andrew Scott and Mr David Miller from Edinburgh
University's Europa Institute charges that the UK's unwillingness to cede
power to British regions may block overall Community moves towards more
regional representation.
Criticism also comes from the Scottish Council Development and Industry,
which in its latest policy report, published today, asks how Scotland will
be represented in Brussels.
Backed by the Labour party, local authorities in Scotland argue they are the
only institutions with the democratic legitimacy to represent Scotland on
the committee. However, Mr Ian Lang, secretary of state for Scotland, has
not yet decided on the matter. Mr Lang's officials play down the idea that
the secretary of state - or his representatives - should sit on the
committee.
The British government says there is no urgency for a decision on the issue
as the Maastricht treaty will not be ratified until summer. In contrast,
German and French contingents will be made up largely of elected
representatives of Lander (states) and conseils regionaux (regional
councils).
Under an amendment to the German constitution, the Lander will also be
allowed representation on the Council of Ministers in areas where EC
decision-making affects the German states' interests.
In search of a common meaning, Page 17
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3649</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAAQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Talks likely to put EFA back on track
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID WHITE, Defence Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A THREATENED collapse of the four-nation partnership working on the European
Fighter Aircraft is expected to be averted at a meeting this week in
Brussels. But differences over the aircraft's planned capabilities and the
timing of production have still to be resolved among the partner countries -
Britain, Germany, Italy and Spain.
Defence ministers and chiefs of staff of the four countries are due to hold
talks on the future of the Pounds 20bn project on Thursday, when they are in
Brussels for a two-day meeting of Nato's defence planning committee.
British officials said they were 'reasonably confident' the meeting would
secure Germany's continued participation in EFA development.
Germany announced in June it did not intend to proceed with the project,
arguing the EFA was too costly and unsuitable for post-cold war needs. About
Pounds 5.5bn of the Pounds 8bn development cost has been spent.
Mr Volker Ruhe, German defence minister, has since come under strong
internal pressure to drop his campaign for a totally new European project
and to proceed with the current airframe and engines.
The other partners are expected to hold out an olive branch to Mr Ruhe,
acknowledging his success in bringing about significant cost reductions
through a rethink on the project.
Development is expected to continue on the present basis, with the UK and
Germany each taking 33 per cent shares, Italy 21 per cent and Spain 13 per
cent. But the shares will have to be readjusted when the fighter goes into
production, according to the number each partner plans to buy.
Ministers will approve a joint document on revised operational requirements
which was signed by the four chiefs of defence staff in Rome two weeks ago.
This is seen as allowing for a 'family' of aircraft of varying capability,
which might mean Germany opting out of the new British-led ECR90 radar.
A decision on investment to set up production was scheduled for next summer,
but the date is expected to slip. Germany is reluctant to commit funds
before elections in 1994 and does not want the EFA in service before 2002.
This conflicts with British and Italian plans.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3650</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAAPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Paper claims EC states may break law with impunity
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DANIEL GREEN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
EC states are probably able to break the law with impunity by substituting
EC cash for their own funds for regional development, says a research paper
published yesterday, writes Daniel Green.
Procedures set up to check that Community structural funds are paid on top
of national payments are 'inadequate', says Prof Richard Barnett, of the
University of Ulster's Centre for Policy Research. The payments are to
ensure regions on the EC's periphery do not lose out in the process of
economic integration.
Assessing the Impact of European Community Structural Funds, by Prof Richard
Barnett and Dr Vidya Borooah, University of Ulster.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3651</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAAOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Danish deal on treaty at risk
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HILARY BARNES
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   COPENHAGEN
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
DENMARK'S national compromise on resubmitting the Maastricht treaty to a
second referendum is in jeopardy because of disagreement over Britain's
proposals to resolve the Danish problem.
If the national compromise disintegrates it is widely believed the chances
of persuading the electorate to approve the treaty will be seriously
reduced.
Three opposition parties, which hold the key to the compromise, meet today
to thrash out differences over the national stance, supported by seven of
the eight parties in the Folketing (parliament).
The three are the Social Democratic Party (SDP), the Radical Liberals and
the left-wing Socialist People's Party (SPP). They hold a majority in the
Folketing and jointly wrote the draft of the national compromise, which was
subsequently accepted as the official Danish position.
The compromise is under attack by the SPP, whose leader, Mr Holger K
Nielsen, says the British proposals do not respect the electorate's
rejection of the treaty last June. He says the electorate rejected European
union, and therefore any agreement between Denmark and the 11 other EC
countries must clearly dissociate Denmark from the aim of European union,
which the British text does not do.
Mr Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, foreign minister, has warned the opposition that
the SPP's demand would face rejection by other EC governments. He called on
the party not to start a 'religious war' over the issue of European union.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3652</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAANFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Key Facts
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
POPULATION: 6.8m, including 65 per cent German-speaking, 18.4 per cent
French-speaking, 9.8 per cent Italian-speaking and 0.8 per cent
Romansh-speaking.
el,3
ECONOMY: GDP at market prices (1991) SFr332.7bn (13th in OECD), GDP per
capita (1990) SFr47,977 (highest in the OECD).
TRADE: Exports total (1990) SFr88.3bn, to EC countries 57.8 per cent (1970
50.6 per cent), to Efta countries 6.6 per cent (1970 11 per cent). Imports
total (1990) SFr96.6bn, from EC countries 71.6 per cent (1970 69 per cent),
from Efta countries 7.2 per cent (1970 8.8 per cent).
EMPLOYMENT: Labour force (1990) 3.6m.
Agriculture 5.5 per cent, industry 34.9 per cent, services 59.6 per cent
(incl bank and insurance 5.3 per cent, hotel and restaurant 5.9 per cent).
Unemployment rate (November, 1992) 3.9 per cent.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3653</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAAMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / UN gloomy on ex-Soviet states' economic hopes
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By FRANCES WILLIAMS
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   GENEVA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE sharp downturn in eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union has
deepened this year and for most of the region will continue into 1993,
according to the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe.
In its Economic Bulletin for Europe published today, the ECE says output in
1992 has fallen even in those countries expecting a recovery, and 'most
people have had to endure further cuts in their standards of living'.
Popular enthusiasm for a new order has given way 'to widespread feelings of
disappointment and anxiety about the future', the ECE says. Initial
over-optimism about the speed at which the transition from centralised
planning to a market economy could be achieved has fuelled discontent and
provided 'fertile ground for the revival of ancient hatreds'.
The ECE says that, despite the generally sombre situation, 'there are signs
of improvement' in Poland, Hungary and the Czech and Slovak Republics. In
Albania, Bulgaria and Romania, national output is expected to fall further
in 1993, but more slowly than this year. However, in the former Soviet
republics economic decline has accelerated in 1992 and short-term prospects
'leave little room for optimism'.
The ECE expects national output in eastern Europe to fall on average by
about 10 per cent this year, a drop of almost a third since 1988. By the
first half of 1992 industrial production had fallen by more than 40 per cent
since 1988.
In the Commonwealth of Independent States economic activity fell by nearly a
fifth in the first half of this year, to about 30 per cent below 1989
levels. In Russia alone, the ECE expects net national product (output
excluding services) to drop by a quarter in 1992, a fall of 36 per cent
since 1989.
In the three Baltic states the situation this year has been worse still. In
Latvia, GDP in the first half of the year was nearly a third down on 12
months earlier, 'the largest decline in any transition economy not racked by
civil war or armed conflict'.
Unemployment in eastern Europe has risen rapidly and will soon accelerate
sharply in the former Soviet Union, the ECE predicts. 'The prospect of mass
unemployment in countries where the social safety net is only rudimentary
must inevitably increase the danger that social and political support for
economic reform will quickly evaporate.'
The ECE has consistently argued for a co-ordinated approach to western
assistance for eastern Europe along the lines of the post-war Marshall Plan
for western Europe. In the latest bulletin it says there needs to be a
'safety net' for the transition process.
Instead, it says, those in most urgent need of assistance appear to have the
greatest difficulty in obtaining it. In addition, most of the so-called
'aid' to eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union is in fact
debt-creating, while the total amount of credits and other assistance to the
region in 1991 and 1992 adds up to less than half the Dollars 184bn (Pounds
121bn) in transfers from west to east Germany alone.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3654</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAALFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Advertising to rise 0.7%
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By GARY MEAD, Marketing Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
WORLD advertising expenditures are expected to grow by 0.7 per cent in real
terms in 1993, against a real decline of 0.2 per cent this year, according
to a bi-annual survey by Zenith Media Worldwide, of the Saatchi and Saatchi
group, writes Gary Mead, Marketing Correspondent.
The report expects 'no return to real growth' before 1994 in the crucial US
market, which accounts for 37.8 per cent of global media advertising
expenditure. Europe is expected to end 1992 with a real decline of 0.4 per
cent.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3655</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAAKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Cronyism row for Italian diplomats
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HAIG SIMONIAN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MILAN
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
A SIMMERING row over political favouritism in Italy's diplomatic service has
boiled over just as the government announced two apolitical appointees to
the European Commission in an attempt to break away from party cronyism.
Mr Antonio Ruberti and Mr Raniero Vanni d'Archirafi will replace Mr Carlo
Ripa di Meana and Mr Filippo Maria Pandolfi as Italian commissioners. Mr
Ripa di Meana, who returned to Rome earlier this year as environment
minister, was in charge of the EC's environmental activities, while Mr
Pandolfi is in charge of research.
The two appointments mark a further effort by the government of Mr Giuliano
Amato to break away from the stranglehold of the main political parties,
which previously had almost automatic claims to jobs such as Italy's EC
representation.
Although Mr Ruberti, now research minister, has been a Socialist MP since
April's general elections, he has the reputation of being a non-party
technocrat who was formerly a professor of engineering at Rome university.
The choice of Mr Vanni d'Archirafi, currently director of political affairs
at the Foreign Ministry, is even more telling, as it is the first time a
non-politician has been awarded such an important representative job.
The appointments come just as Italy's state council decided to freeze 120
promotions in the diplomatic service on the grounds of alleged political
favouritism. Resentment has been growing among Italy's diplomats at the
apparently headlong rise of some younger colleagues, often those who have
benefited from close contacts as personal attaches to ministers.
Matters reached a head under Mr Gianni De Michelis, the former Socialist
foreign minister, who is now under investigation in a political corruption
scandal.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3656</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAAJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Swiss stop the clock on Euro integration
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID MARSH, European Editor, LIONEL BARBER, DAVID GARDNER, ROBERT
TAYLOR, RALPH ATKINS and ERIC FREY
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BRUSSELS, STOCKHOLM, LONDON, VIENNA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
SWITZERLAND'S rejection yesterday of a free trade area linking Alpine and
Nordic countries to the European Community means one small, wealthy nation
has virtually ruled itself out as a candidate for EC membership.
While Swiss diplomats voiced their dismay at the vote, other members of the
European Free Trade Association such as Sweden, Norway and Austria remained
confident that the European Economic Area would take effect next year as
planned.
However, the date for creation of an EEA, originally scheduled for January 1
to coincide with the single European market, will be delayed, probably until
the second half of 1993.
The British government, currently the EC president, put a brave face on the
Swiss No vote. The Foreign Office stressed the benefits of the EEA, but said
the outcome would be raised at a meeting of EC foreign ministers in Brussels
today.
Although the vote is a setback for Community efforts at widening
integration, there was some quiet relief in Brussels. Switzerland's
predilection for referendums and its entrenched tradition of neutrality have
long been viewed with a degree of concern in Brussels. As a result, some
diplomats and officials there had expressed reservations about Switzerland's
application to join the EC and had been braced for a No vote on the EEA.
The vote upsets the Swiss government's decision in May to apply for EC
membership. Mr Frans Andriessen, the external affairs commissioner, said
yesterday the Swiss had chosen isolation. A community official pointed out
that EEA membership required countries to take on all EC legislation. 'It is
the best preparation for eventual EC membership,' he said.
The Swiss government had been adamant the country could not be content with
EEA membership as it would mean taking on existing EC legislation without
becoming full 'partners'. Now the dilemma about applying for the EC seems to
have been cut short.
On the shorter-term question of forging an EEA without the Swiss, the 12 EC
member states and other Efta countries are likely to convene a 'diplomatic
conference' to amend the treaty. This is a procedure set down in the event
of the EEA's rejection by any of the Nordic and Alpine nations.
British officials in Brussels say this conference probably cannot be
convened in time to pass the revised treaty by March 1 1993, the second date
provided for the EEA to start up, as signatories have to re-ratify the
agreement once elements in it specifically relating to Switzerland are taken
out. Progress on passing the treaty into national law was already patchy;
only a handful of EC members have ratified it and, Switzerland apart,
Iceland and Liechtenstein among the Efta group have still not pronounced.
It was not clear yesterday whether the EC-Switzerland transit agreement  -
regulating Community freight and lorry traffic through Swiss Alpine passes -
will be a casualty of Switzerland's rejection of the EEA.
Sweden, which among other Efta countries had seen the EEA as a stepping
stone toward eventual EC membership, said it regretted the outcome of
yesterday's vote. But it added it was confident the economic pact would go
ahead.
Mr Ulf Dinkenspiel, the Swedish trade minister, acknowledged it might take
about six months to make the required adjustments for the EEA to come into
force. But, he added, it was necessary to 'avoid any uncertainties' by
reassuring the financial markets and European industry that the EEA was only
being delayed for a limited period.
The general view in the Nordic area was that the Swiss decision would not be
a serious setback to European business. 'Its economic effects will be
limited,' said Mr Dinkenspiel.
Mr Bjorn Tore Gordal, Norway's trade minister, gave an optimistic assessment
of the delay to the agreement. He believed a revised EEA agreement could
come into force within two to three months.
Under provisions for the 'diplomatic conference' of nations still involved
in the EEA, governments will have to adjust the size of the proposed
financial fund covering the EEA to allow for Swiss withdrawal.
As part of the agreement, Efta countries joining the EEA had been expected
to make small contributions to EC funding for poorer European regions - an
annual net figure of no more than Ecu145m (Pounds 117.3m) or an estimated
0.02 per cent of Efta annual income.
The Nordic countries have had no difficulty in securing support for the EEA.
Only in Norway was there any sizeable opposition and this failed to mobilise
a necessary one third of the votes in parliament to block its
implementation.
For at least the past 18 months the EEA agreement has been regarded
increasingly in the Nordic region not as an end in itself but merely a step
towards full EC membership for the countries of Efta.
Sweden, Norway and Finland are waiting for this week's Edinburgh summit of
EC heads of government for what they hope will be endorsement for
negotiations to begin early in 1993 on their EC membership applications.
Mr Carl Bildt, Swedish prime minister, is drawing comfort from last week's
declaration by German Chancellor Helmut Kohl and French President Francois
Mitterrand that Bonn and Paris would press for EC enlargement talks to start
as soon as possible. The Nordic governments believe that neither the
differences inside the EC over the Danish and British ratification of the
Maastricht treaty nor the squabble over the EC budget will block the start
of negotiations early in 1993.
Additional reporting by Lionel Barber and David Gardner in Brussels, Robert
Taylor in Stockholm, Ralph Atkins in London and Eric Frey in Vienna.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3657</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAAIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / World News in Brief: Sentenced for swearing
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
British hospital manager David Brown, 32, has been sentenced in Saudi Arabia
to 50 lashes for allegedly swearing at his staff. Labour MP Bob Cryer called
for the Foreign Office to make strong representations 'to halt this barbaric
medieval punishment'.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3658</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAAHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / World News in Brief: UN's economic forecast
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
United Nations economists in Geneva predicted a new wave of unemployment in
the West and further economic decline in former communist countries.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3659</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAAGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / World News in Brief: Emergency proposal
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Britain's fire, police and ambulance services are outdated and should be
merged, says a report for the right-wing think tank, the Adam Smith
Institute. It suggests a joint emergency control centre to eliminate delay
and inaccuracy.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3660</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAAFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / World News in Brief: European Monetary System
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Statements from Paris and Bonn defending the parity of the franc and D-Mark
within the EMS helped ease tension in a fraught system by the end of last
week. The statements were prompted by speculation that the franc would be
devalued as it hovered near the floor of the ERM grid. Concerted efforts,
including intervention, helped to bolster the franc. Many ERM currencies
were also helped by the gloomy economic statistics out of Germany, which hit
the D-Mark towards the end of the week. Currencies, Page 29
The chart shows the member currencies of the exchange rate mechanism
measured against the weakest currency in the EMS's narrow 2.25 per cent
fluctuation band. In practice, currencies in the narrow band cannot rise
more than 2.25 per cent from the weakest currency in that part of the
system. The Spanish peseta and Portuguese escudo operate with 6 per cent
fluctuation bands.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3661</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAAEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / UK draws up new plan to break EC deadlock
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LIONEL BARBER and RALPH ATKINS
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BRUSSELS, LONDON
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
BRITAIN is preparing new proposals aimed at breaking the deadlock on the
European Community budget which hangs over the EC summit in Edinburgh this
week.
Mr John Major, the prime minister, is hoping that a more generous approach
will win the support of Spain, which is threatening to block progress on the
budget in an attempt to secure more 'cohesion' funds for poorer EC members,
including Greece, Ireland, and Portugal.
Spain's tough tactics are being compared in London with the pursuit of a
budget rebate in the early 1980s by Mrs Margaret Thatcher, the former
British prime minister. UK officials are guardedly optimistic that a deal
can be struck, probably by using the structural funds budget, the
contingency fund, or both.
Yesterday, Sir Leon Brittan, the European competition commissioner, said on
BBC television that a deal on future financing could be reached if Britain
kept its rebate but agreed to increase its proposal for the EC budget 'by a
small amount'. He also said an agreement by Britain that the new European
central bank should be based in Bonn would help to secure 'Britain's
objectives in all other respects'.
Another problem is how to meet Danish demands for exemptions from parts of
the Maastricht treaty, including a deal allowing it to opt-out of a single
European currency, a putative European army and European citizenship as
defined in the treaty. EC foreign ministers meet in Brussels tomorrow to
discuss a UK paper although no agreement is expected.
Without a deal on the Danish question, British officials fear relations
between EC leaders could be damaged so badly that the summit could not be
salvaged. Conversely, a Danish solution would increase the chances of
success on other pressing issues, notably future financing for the EC and
subsidiarity.
Mr Tristan Garel-Jones, a UK foreign office minister, appeared pessimistic
about the task at Edinburgh - perhaps deliberately so as to lower
expectations. On London Weekend Television, he said EC members were 'a long
way apart' on the question of future financing, while finding agreement on
subsidiarity and enlargement would be a 'very difficult exercise indeed'.
A British paper on the Danish issue has been criticised by Danish opposition
parties, as well as five Christian Democratic leaders in Europe, including
Germany's Chancellor Helmut Kohl. They have called for revisions in the
text. These difficulties are viewed in London as inevitable but not
insuperable.
Britain, which chairs the rota-ting EC presidency, has worked closely with
the European Council secretariat on the proposed text. It is described as an
international agreement binding by law which falls short of re-opening the
Maastricht treaty or requiring re-ratification by states.
An EC ambassador described the document as 'tougher than expected'; other
diplomats gave it a cautious welcome because it damped suspicions that the
UK intended to take Denmark's side.
British officials noted that the official Christian Democrat declaration in
Brussels last week was less specific in its criticism of the UK text,
restating old demands that the Maastricht treaty not be renegotiated.
One idea floated by Mr Garel-Jones to resolve the Danish problem is to
revise the Maastricht treaty at the next European inter-governmental
conference in 1996 - so Denmark does not have to say it would 'never' accept
the final stages of monetary union.
'The Maastricht treaty will then end. It will be modified,' Mr Garel-Jones
said.
Danish deal on treaty at risk, Page 2
Samuel Brittan, Page 16
Twelve men in search of common meaning, Page 17
Observer, Page 17
Last chance for Maastricht treaty, Page 32
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3662</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAADFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Costs of closing London hospitals challenged
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN PIKE, Social Affairs Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE CASE for restructuring London's hospital services is thrown into doubt
by a study which challenges a central element of the financial basis of the
closure proposals.
The study, by Ernst &amp; Young, management consultants, was commissioned by the
Royal Marsden and Royal Brompton hospitals. It says the capital costs of
closing them under the government-commissioned Tomlinson report would be up
to Pounds 62m. This conflicts with a health authority calculation that the
closures would be Pounds 10.6m cheaper than alternative options.
Ministers will make final decisions on the Tomlinson report next month. Sir
Bernard Tomlinson, former chairman of the Northern regional health authority
and author of the report, will today discuss his recommendations at a
conference of National Health Service managers in London.
The Tomlinson report's opponents believe the financial evidence with which
ministers would have to defend some of the proposed hospital closures is
thin and flawed. They will see the Ernst &amp; Young study as evidence that more
research into the likely costs and savings of a closure programme is
required.
Under the Tomlinson recommendations, the Charing Cross hospital at
Hammersmith would close. The Chelsea-based Royal Marsden and Royal Brompton
 -the former a leading cancer centre and the latter specialising in heart
and lung conditions - would then transfer to the vacant Charing Cross
buildings.
This plan mirrors a proposal put to the Tomlinson inquiry by North West
Thames regional health authority, which concluded that it would be Pounds
10.6m cheaper than simply closing Charing Cross and leaving the Royal
Marsden and Royal Brompton unchanged.
However, the Ernst &amp; Young study concludes that the health authority's
analysis contained a number of items - including income from the sale of two
other redundant hospitals, the Western Ophthalmic and Samaritan - that would
occur regardless of whether Charing Cross closed. When these factors were
excluded, says the Ernst &amp; Young report, the net capital cost of closing the
Royal Brompton and Royal Marsden instead of Charing Cross 'could be as much
as Pounds 62.5m, but not less than Pounds 47.4m.'
The Ernst &amp; Young study was handed to Dr Brian Mawhinney, health minister,
late last week.
Under the Tomlinson recommendations, several of London's most famous
hospitals, including St Bartholomew's in the City, would close. Sir
Bernard's opponents were initially doubtful of their chances of success,
given the broad support for transferring resources to family doctor and
community services.
However critics now feel that the financial basis of the proposals can be
challenged. They believe government hopes of using revenue from the sale of
surplus hospitals to fund the restructuring will prove unattainable in the
current economic climate.
The Ernst &amp; Young study estimates the current market value of the Charing
Cross site at Pounds 25m-Pounds 30m, compared with a Department of Health
valuation of Pounds 70m in 1990.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3663</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAACFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Swiss reject closer European ties: 'No' vote will delay
EC-Efta treaty - Issue splits French and German speakers
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By IAN RODGER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   ZURICH
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
SWITZERLAND yesterday said No to closer European integration, causing a
domestic political crisis and further problems for the European Community.
In a national referendum on joining the European Economic Area, 50.3 per
cent of voters rejected the government proposal.
Under Swiss law, a majority of of the 23 cantons is also required. A
decisive 16, including industrial and financial cantons such as Zurich and
Zug, rejected the proposed move towards closer European integration.
The rejection of the EEA treaty, which would link the seven countries of the
European Free Trade Association and the 12 European Community countries in
an enlarged common market, may also hurt the prospects for economic recovery
in other Efta countries. The planned introduction of the EEA on January 1
will now have to be delayed for at least six months while these countries
renegotiate the details of EEA entry.
European governments registered disappointment at the Swiss vote, but
expressed determination to start the EEA without Switzerland. In Brussels,
Mr Frans Andriessen, the EC external affairs commissioner, said Switzerland
had chosen the path of isolation.
Mr Jacques Delors, the Commission president, said there would now be talks
to change the treaty. He confirmed that the vote added up to a rejection not
only of the EEA but also of the EC, which the Berne government had applied
to join.
Among Switzerland's partners in Efta, Finland's foreign trade minister, Mr
Pertti Salolainen, said he was disappointed by the Swiss rejection of the
EEA and that the implementation of the agreement would be delayed.
'This means difficulties . . . because we cannot start the agreement at the
same time as the internal market is realised in the EC,' Mr Salolainen said.
Mr Bjoern Tore Godal, the Norwegian trade minister, said the other 18
countries planning to take part in the EEA would have to negotiate technical
changes, but there would be 'no change in the agreement's substance'. Mr Ulf
Dinkenspiel, Sweden's trade minister, said the financial markets needed to
be assured that EEA delays would be limited.
In Switzerland, there was also concern yesterday that the vote could prolong
Switzerland's recession and could put pressure on the Swiss franc and Swiss
shares in financial markets.
In Tokyo this morning the Swiss franc fell against the dollar, which was at
SFr1.43825 after an hour's trading, as against its Friday closing figure of
SFr1.4145. In New York the dollar had closed at SFr1.4285 on Friday.
The political crisis arises because of the clear split in the voting between
the country's majority German-speaking community, which voted heavily
against the treaty, and the minority French-speaking community, which voted
equally decisively for it. The Swiss have until now been successful in
protecting minorities, but the outcome of this vote could inflame passions
on both sides of the linguistic divide. Both were clearly determined to give
no quarter to the other. There were record turnouts in many cantons, and
every German-speaking canton, except Basle, rejected the EEA.
The linguistic division showed up even in the cantons which have both French
and German-speaking communities. In the cantons of Fribourg, Valais and
Bern, the minority communities voted on linguistic lines.
Mr Rene Felber, the Swiss president, said the clear rift between the
language communities 'was a subject of great concern', and he called on all
Swiss to unite.
The most important immediate result of the vote may be decisions by
companies to move production out of Switzerland into other European
countries. During the campaign, the pharmaceutical group Roche said the
outcome could influence where it built a SFr130m (Pounds 59.6m) vitamin
plant.
Sulzer Brothers said it was considering building a SFr60m factory to make
artificial hips and knees elsewhere because it would be difficult to get EC
certification for Swiss-made products.
Mr Arnold Koller, the Swiss justice minister, said the country would have to
accelerate the adaptation of many of its laws to EC standards, including
those aimed at eliminating cartels, if it wished to remain competitive.
As a member of Efta, Switzerland would continue to have a free trade
relationship with the EC in most products.
Swiss stop the clock, Page 2
Editorial Comment, Page 16
 -------------------------------------
HOW THEY VOTED
 -------------------------------------
                      YES      NO
 -------------------------------------
Cantons                 7      16
Popular vote (%)     49.7    50.3
 -------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3664</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAABFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Robinson to quit as American Express group chief executive
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN FRIEDMAN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
MR James Robinson, embattled chairman and chief executive of American
Express, the US travel and financial services group, yesterday said he would
resign as chief executive next year, as soon as a successor had been chosen.
He would not be drawn on whether he will also surrender the position of
group chairman.
Mr Robinson denied that he was being forced out because of losses at the
company's credit card business, reduced profits and pressure on its stock
price.
He claimed he had never wished to serve more than 15 years in the job.
However he agreed with some recent criticisms of his management by Wall
Street analysts.
Mr Robinson made the announcement after Fortune magazine issued a press
release foreshadowing a story which claimed the resignation had been
dictated by the American Express board 'in a quiet coup' that began last
September.
Members of the board, which includes Mr Henry Kissinger, the former
Secretary of State, closed ranks immediately after the Fortune story was
announced.
Mr Rawleigh Warner, former chairman of Mobil, yesterday denied reports he
had led a boardroom coup. Mr Frank Popoff, chief executive of Dow Chemical,
said that to characterise Mr Robinson's departure as a coup was 'totally
inaccurate."
Mr Robinson said he told the board of his plans for succession in September,
the day before a board meeting. 'I said I did not want to stay on past the
age of 60 and that it was time to develop the succession process. We had a
good, long and rigorous discussion about succession at the board meeting the
next day,' he recalled.
Mr Robinson, who is heading the search committee, said, however, that he
would probably leave the chief executive's post during 1993, when he will be
58.
Observer, Page 17
Corporate titan, Page 19
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3665</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAAAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / World News in Brief: Germans stage anti-racist rally
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
More than 300,000 Germans holding candles and lanterns formed a 25-mile
chain through Munich's main streets to protest against right-wing racist
attacks on foreigners. Bild am Sonntag newspaper said two US banks had
cancelled east German investment plans because of the violence against
foreigners.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3666</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAGBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Concern grows over China's HK stance
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By SIMON HOLBERTON
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   HONG KONG
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
CHINA'S unbending attitude toward Hong Kong is causing increasing concern
among western diplomats and some mainland Chinese officials in the colony,
who are worried about the consequences for Beijing's relations with the US
and Taiwan.
Diplomats say they are dismayed at the way in which Beijing's top leadership
has interpreted a recent instruction from Deng Xiaoping, China's 88-year-old
senior leader, to be tough with the British.
'We all know that Deng has said 'Teach the British a lesson',' said the head
of one western mission in Hong Kong. 'But for that to be interpreted in the
way it has been is quite worrying.'
Last week, the local stock market fell sharply after a series of threats
from Beijing were aimed at proposals for more democracy by Mr Chris Patten,
the governor.
Brokers expect choppy trading ahead of this week's meeting of the
Sino-British Joint Liaison Group - the body overseeing the transfer of Hong
Kong from the UK to China.
A week ago, China said it would repudiate business contracts entered into by
the Hong Kong government if they were not approved by Beijing.
Last Thursday it suggested that the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration
might be in doubt if the UK did not back down on plans for limited democracy
in the colony.
The western diplomat said that China was losing sight of its other vital
interest, namely its relationship with the US and its improving relations
with Taiwan.
Taiwan goes to the polls in two weeks for its first fully democratic
elections, and Beijing's tough stand on democracy in Hong Kong is seen as
boosting the electoral prospects of the island's independence movement.
There is growing concern in the US - especially among Democrats in Congress
 -of China's perceived intimidation of Hong Kong. China's sale of missile
technology to Pakistan is also seen as weakening further the narrow base of
support Beijing currently enjoys in Washington.
These concerns were echoed by local mainland officials in Hong Kong, who
also pointed out that Beijing ran the risk of undermining the Joint
Declaration in the eyes of local people.
The Joint Declaration provides for Hong Kong to be 'ruled by Hong Kong
people' and for it to enjoy a 'high degree of autonomy' under the concept of
'one country, two systems'.
Beijing's statement a week ago that it would act on behalf of the future
government of the colony in approving pre-1997 contracts was seen by some of
its own officials as weakening these commitments.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
International Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3667</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAGAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Spain oil slick spreads
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   LA CORUNA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
AN OIL slick from the Greek tanker Aegean Sea spread along Spain's
northwestern coast yesterday despite efforts to prevent it from destroying
valuable marine ecosystems and invading beaches, Reuter reports from La
Coruna.
Efforts to extract crude oil still stored in the stricken tanker were
frustrated by heavy swell and fires burning in the engine room, La Coruna
governor Pilar Lledo told reporters.
She said the authorities were unwilling to risk human lives in salvaging the
tanker while its situation was still unstable.
The oil had covered an area of 19 square miles by early yesterday and
environmentalists feared it could spread as far as 60 miles and devastate
shellfish beds which provide much of the region's livelihood.
Local unions and ecology groups claimed the authorities had failed to take
sufficient preventive measures.
Beaches along the Betanzos and Ares estuaries, northeast of La Coruna, were
covered with oil and the slick was bearing in on Ferrol, whose port remained
closed yesterday.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
International Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3668</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAF9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Tajik war refugees stranded at border
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TASHKENT
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
UP to 140,000 refugees fleeing Tajikistan's civil strife are stranded near
the Afghan border, Reuter reports from Tashkent.
'We were told by Russian border guards that the number of refugees near the
Afghan frontier has reached 140,000,' said Mr Dieter Pfaff, head of the
International Committee of the Red Cross mission in the Tajik capital
Dushanbe.
'We're unable to reach the area, but we are planning our relief operation on
the basis of these figures.'
Hundreds of people in the impoverished Central Asian republic have been
killed in fighting between ex-Communist rebels and Islamic militants since
former President Rakhmon Nabiyev was ousted in September.
Mr Pfaff said up to 500,000 people, 10 per cent of the population, were
believed to be have been displaced by the fighting.
The refugees were fleeing recent fighting in the southern town of Shartuz
about 15 miles north of the Afghan border, which is guarded by Russian
troops.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
International Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3669</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLHCCAF8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / World News in Brief: 30 die in Afghanistan
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Peace efforts began in Kabul yesterday as doctors reported at least 30
people dead and hundreds wounded in two days of fighting between two groups
in Afghanistan's interim government.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
International Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3670</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYADRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / International Company News: Sandoz in Dollars 300m deal with
US research body
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By IAN RODGER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BASLE
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
SANDOZ, the Swiss pharmaceutical and chemicals group, is to contribute at
least Dollars 300m to Scripps Research Institute of the US over the next 14
years as part of a basic research alliance.
In return, Sandoz is to receive first rights to develop medical discoveries
of Scripps, a non-profit institute based in California which specialises in
immunology, nervous system disorders and cardiovascular research.
The deal reflects a continuing shift in Sandoz's research strategy from
concentration in internal laboratories in Basle to external alliances.
Last year, Sandoz committed itself to spending up to Dollars 100m over 10
years in oncology research at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston and
invested Dollars 392m in a 60 per cent stake in SyStemix, a Californian
biotechnology company.
Sandoz will begin contributing to Scripps Research Institute gradually, as
joint research projects are agreed over the next four years.
Mr Marc Moret, chairman of Sandoz, said the agreement would enable Sandoz to
lift basic research capability by about a quarter.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3671</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAB6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Civil Engineering: Pounds 20m Hong Kong bridge development
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
BRIDON ROPES, a subsidiary of Bridon, and RYLANDS-WHITECROSS, a subsidiary
of TWIL, have won what is believed to be the world's largest order for high
carbon steel wire through their joint venture company, European Bridge Wire.
The contract, worth over Pounds 20m, has been awarded by Cleveland
Structural Engineering, part of Trafalgar House Construction, and is for the
supply of specialised high tensile galvanised steel bridge wire.
The wire will be produced in equal quantities at Doncaster and Warrington
and shipped to Hong Kong to be aerially spun on site to form the suspension
cables for the Tsing Ma Bridge.
The bridge will be one of the world's largest single-span structures,
accommodating a double deck for road and rail traffic, with a total length
of 2,100 metres and a main spain of 1,377 metres.
The most technically difficult part of the whole bridge is the erection of
the steel deck and the supporting suspension cables which will be carried
out by Cleveland Structural Engineering. The bridge is expected to be open
for rail traffic in 1996.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3672</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYAB4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Civil Engineering: Linking Scotland and Eire
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The pipeline and offshore division of COSTAIN OIL, GAS &amp; PROCESS has
recently received contracts valued at over Pounds 24m for work in the UK and
overseas.
In the Irish Sea, work on two pipeline landfalls associated with the Bord
Gais Eireann interconnector project linking Scotland and Eire is about to
commence with completion due in April 1993.
A contract has also just been awarded by British Gas Exploration &amp;
Production for the installation of a 5km 914mm gas pipeline across Walney
Channel at Barrow, part of the North Morecambe gas field development, which
is due to commence at the beginning of January for completion in September
1993.
Overseas, in the international directional drilling market, work on
contracts worth more than Pounds 7m is under way or about to commence in the
US, Indonesia and Europe.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3673</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Management: Tempo changes at heartbreak hotel - Michael
Skapinker finds staff at the Aerostar struggling to provide creature
comforts for visitors to Moscow
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
When Yana Yevinzon emigrated to the US in 1976, the Soviet authorities tore
up her passport. Two years ago, she returned to become executive housekeeper
of the new Moscow Aerostar Hotel. When she boarded the Aeroflot flight, she
was so frightened that her Russian momentarily deserted her.
Aly Rehemtulla, a former refugee from Idi Amin's Uganda, spent his first
nights at the Aerostar fighting off mosquitos in a hot windowless room. He
had given up a successful career with Holiday Inn in Toronto to become rooms
manager in a half-built hotel in a country convulsed by political and
economic change.
Why did they do it? 'The challenge,' says Yevinzon. 'Russia is the new
frontier,' says Rehemtulla. 'This is the biggest adventure I have ever had.'
The 417-room Aerostar, a joint venture between Aeroflot and IMP, a
diversified Canadian manufacturing and services group, opened last March,
aiming to provide western business visitors with the kind of facilities they
find at home. Its brightly-lit marble lobby is certainly a warm refuge from
the bewildering streets outside. The service is friendlier than at many
western hotels.
The hotel does, however, differ from western establishments. The plumbing is
slightly eccentric and the rooms are not soundproof. And few western hotels
have mathematicians making the beds, economists mopping the floors or
surgeons doing the laundry.
The Aerostar building, a 10-minute drive from the Kremlin, was built by
Aeroflot to house athletes competing in the 1980 Moscow Olympics.
It was never completed or used, probably because the US boycott of the games
reduced the number of rooms needed.
It was spotted by Kenneth Rowe, IMP chairman, during one of his regular
visits to Moscow. IMP services Aeroflot aircraft in Canada. Rowe suggested
to Aeroflot that they turn the building into a hotel which IMP would run.
Robert Dearden, a Toronto construction worker who was hired to supervise the
work, had his own ideas about what should have been done with the building.
'I would have knocked the thing down,' he says. Only one of the nine floors
had plumbing or lights. A drainpipe descended from the roof through the
middle of the building, neatly cutting the entrance to a room in half.
The bearded Dearden, who wears an earring, a lumberjack shirt and a Montreal
Canadiens cap, tried to equip the hotel locally. 'People could get what I
wanted but they said they had to install it. And they said they wanted to be
paid in computers or television sets. I thought: 'I haven't got time for
this'.' Everything used in the refurbishment and furnishing of the hotel was
imported, including the light bulbs.
Three years on, Dearden has found local suppliers of some equipment and
material. He employs as a middleman a multilingual Iranian doctor who, after
20 years in the country, has a wealth of Russian contacts.
Patrick Doffenies, the Aerostar's French-born purchasing manager, had less
luck with Russian suppliers. Doffenies spent two months concluding an
agreement with a supplier of Russian wine. Only then did he discover that
the Russian company could not afford to buy bottles and had been planning to
sell the wine in barrels.
A farmer with 3,000 cattle offered to supply beef on condition that the
Aerostar built him an abattoir.
A supplier of fruit from Georgia seemed more promising. He appeared
well-organised and had translated all documents into English. The fruit
would be flown from Georgia.
Doffenies concluded an agreement. On the day the first consignment was due,
the supplier phoned from Georgia to say the plane had run out of fuel. 'It
was hopeless,' says Doffenies.
Apart from some produce which the hotel buys from local markets in the
summer, all the Aerostar's food arrives by lorry from France once a week.
Lobster is flown in from Nova Scotia. Cleaning materials and office supplies
are imported from the UK.
Import duties fluctuate from week to week, lorries are regularly opened by
customs and items frequently go missing. But by importing virtually
everything it needs, the hotel provides the quality of food and cleanliness
its guests expect.
The result, however, can be an unbearable temptation to staff who steal from
the hotel and occasionally from the guests. Marilyn Barker Paulson, the
Aerostar's Canadian sales and marketing director, recalls that the food and
beverage manager threatened to install a metal detector at the kitchen exits
to prevent cutlery disappearing. One employee tried to smuggle sausages out
in her coat lining.
The penalty for theft is dismissal and there are no second chances. 'To fire
someone for stealing a carton of orange juice is hard, but you have to do
it,' says Rehemtulla. 'The Russian staff feel they work here, they
contribute, they're entitled to take it. They see how abundant everything is
here and they think if they take an orange juice, who is it going to hurt?'
Of 550 Russian staff, about 30 have been dismissed for theft. Rehemtulla
says this does not seem to have deterred others.
Staff attitudes to service have also posed some problems. Andrew Ivanyi, the
Aerostar's Hungarian-born general manager, said the hotel decided not to
hire anyone who had worked in a Soviet hotel.
But even with people who had not been infected by Soviet service attitudes,
instilling new standards was difficult. When Yevinzon told an initial
training session that the customer was always right, the staff laughed. She
showed them what she meant.
When one guest asked for a hair dryer - something the hotel did not then
possess - Yevinzon went home and got her own. When another guest asked for
his shoes to be shined, Yevinzon did the job herself in front of the staff.
'The most difficult thing to get them to understand was that it was the
guest who was paying their salaries and not the government,' Yevinzon says.
The employees, however, proved quick learners because, Yevinzon believes,
they were so highly educated.
Apart from the surgeon who does the laundry, there is a doctor running the
gym, a paediatric nurse supervising one of the floors and a petroleum
engineer in charge of the storeroom. Many of the cleaning staff are
economics graduates.
For most, money was an important attraction. The Russian staff earn an
average of 12,000 roubles a month.
The hotel would like to pay an additional foreign currency bonus, but this
is illegal. Instead, it gives staff vouchers worth between Dollars 125 and
Dollars 200 a month to spend in Moscow's hard currency stores.
Many exchange the vouchers for dollars on the black market at a 20 per cent
discount. Tatyana Golikova, an assistant to the training manager at the
hotel, says that if she had continued in her old job as an English and
German teacher she would now be earning 3,000 roubles a month.
Even some in cleaning jobs see the hotel as a way to get ahead. As a trained
economist Natasha Kombarova is hopelessly over qualified for making beds and
cleaning baths. But she believes the Aerostar will eventually offer her the
chance to become a manager.
Not everyone is as enthusiastic. 'I was in shock for the first few days,'
says Yuri Kiselev, a cleaner and former research economist and computer
programmer. 'I'm looking for a new job somewhere else, or maybe I will be
able to rise here. I'm not satisfied with my status here. This is not
intelligent work.'
Alexandre Biryukov, the petroleum engineer who runs the storeroom, says the
quality of staff being hired now is not as high as when the hotel first
started.
There are other western hotels and joint ventures in Moscow and working at
the Aerostar is no longer such a novelty. 'The first people who were hired
were anxious about how they were doing,' he says. 'Now the attitude is: 'Why
shouldn't I have this salary?''
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3674</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYABVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Survey of Israel (11): Chocolates on parade - Profile, Elite
Foods
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HUGH CARNEGY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
IN an inner eastern suburb of Tel Aviv, just across a busy road junction
from the Israeli diamond exchange, the heavy aroma of chocolate hangs over
an otherwise unremarkable factory building, writes HUGH CARNEGY.
It is the headquarters of Elite, one of Israel's leading - and oldest - food
processors. In a small basement office Mr Nathan Nissani, the chief
executive, has plotted the transformation of the company from a
confectionery and coffee producer enjoying a virtual monopoly in the Israeli
market into an aggressive outfit fighting a tough domestic battle with local
competitors in a growing range of products, while at the same time seeking
to expand its exports.
The past two years have seen some bruising encounters in Israeli
supermarkets between Elite and its chief rival, Osem, another
long-established company now working hard to expand under the leadership of
Mr Dan Propper, a member of one of Osem's founding families.
Osem has attacked Elite's overwhelming dominance in coffee. Elite, winning
government approval to lower import tariffs, has hit back in Osem's
traditional strongholds of pasta and also savoury snacks.
The Elite-Osem rivalry is a sign of a slow but significant spreading of
competition in Israel's still heavily cartelised food market. Mr Nissani
says his steering of Elite into greater local diversity and into exports was
a 'deep strategic need' sparked by two factors: the liberalisation of
imports of US and European confectionery products and the limited size of
the local market.
Now he adopts a near military approach to his business. Calling himself a
'hired gun' for his shareholders, he says Israeli managers' army service
experience gives them a cutting edge in business.
As Elite expands into Europe - including eastern Europe - Mr Nissani sees
this combining successfully with Israel's rich pool of emigres. 'One of the
big advantages Israel has is the ability to apply the right people in the
right places. We also still have the ability to think small - we can adapt
quickly.'
Elite's direct exports have grown rapidly under Mr Nissani, from Dollars 7m
in 1989 to an anticipated Dollars 21m this year out of total sales of
Dollars 250m. The target is to achieve Dollars 35m in overseas sales next
year.
Meanwhile the company, which employs 2,400 people in Israel, has grown in
market value from less than Dollars 100m in late 1989 to approaching Dollars
300m today.
Apart from direct exports - mainly private confectionery brands for
supermarket outlets which Mr Nissani complains bitterly are hampered by EC
levies on agricultural ingredients such as milk and sugar - Elite has begun
to implement a strategic policy of acquisitions in Europe. It has bought a
company called SAF in the St Etienne area of France where Mr Nissani plans
to take on all comers.
Elite has also purchased the Union Kaffee Group in Germany, a company with
Dollars 250m annual turnover with outlets in France, Spain, Belgium and
Poland, and owns a company in Poland called Goman. The total sales of these
foreign acquisitions now outstrip Elite's Israeli turnover.
'We now have a base in Europe,' says Mr Nissani. 'This will give us
sufficient contact with those markets and the ability to understand those
markets. We are looking to Russia as well as to Poland. We are now one of
the only western companies with a distribution network in Poland.'
Elite, however, still has heavy excess capacity at home. One potential to
take this up lies in the prospect of Middle East peace. Open borders to Arab
countries could be a 'paradise', says Mr Nissani.
He says he has begun tentatively to prepare for such a day - as has his
rival at Osem. But as in any 'paradise', peace is elusive.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3675</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLFAYAEEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921205
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  05 DEC 92 / (CORRECTED) How To Spend It: Games for grown-ups - A look at
what's available for computer buffs
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANTHONY CURTIS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Correction (published 12th December 1992) appended to this article.
THE recreational possibilities of the personal computer continue to develop
in many directions. The kids have their Nintendo and their Sega video and
computer games galore - see the latter's Sonic the Hedgehog, a smash-hit
worldwide - but what about mum, who is a bridge addict, and dad, who fancies
himself as a wiz at backgammon?
Adult card and board game players now have a wide choice of programs that
provide entertaining, formidable opposition. One way of adding games to your
computer's repertory is to apply to a Shareware mail order outlet -
advertised widely in computer magazines - and to request a few games
programs, of which a great many are offered. These will be sent on a trial
basis for as little as Pounds 1-2 each. Then, if you find a program useful
and want to stay with it, you pay a fee to the author.
Another way is to buy one of the many entertainments packages on offer from
software manufacturers. Not only bridge but other traditional card games -
cribbage, gin rummy, poker, solo, and several varieties of patience - are
available as are most casino gambling games: blackjack, baccarat, roulette,
boule and keno. Programs for individual games or collections, in the form of
one or more diskettes with a user's manual, cost between Pounds 30-50.
Microsoft has just released its Entertainment Pack for Windows Volume 4 at
Pounds 34.95. This contains a nice assortment of pastimes old and new:
chess, Tic-Tac-Drop and Dr Black Jack alongside new games called JessBall,
Maxwell's Maniac (]) and Go Figure - a race to solve mathematical equations.
Solitaire (patience) players will appreciate another American program, Games
Master for Windows (Centron Software, Pounds 34.95): this contains two
favourite patience games, Pyramid and Yukon. It also has a series of puzzles
involving domino tiles, and the sliding and manipulation of shapes. In one,
the player has to re-assemble a picture by Picasso. This is a good package
for those who do not want anything over-complicated.
By contrast, Electronic Arts (90 Heron Drive, Langley, Berkshire SL3 8XP)
has a range that extends from outdoor sport - like the Team USA Basketball
program that has just come out - to popular fiction. You can go sleuthing in
an elaborate contest with The Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes (Pounds 39.99),
or you can become Tolkien's Frodo and explore Middle Earth in Interplay's
Lord of the Rings, Volume I and II (Pounds 29.99 and Pounds 34.99).
Great efforts are made by games programmers to simulate the authentic
ambience through colour graphics and sound bytes. The latest bridge program
from Oxford Software, Omar Sharif's Bridge (Pounds 39.99), includes - for
those with the requisite hardware - the voice of Omar himself to talk you
through the rubber in an on-disc tutorial. There are also, as in more
mundane bridge programs, a number of playing options including the use of
Acol and the Five Card Majors bidding conventions.
Oxford Software (198 The Hill, Burford, OX18 4HX) specialises in traditional
adult games. It also has Backgammon Royale (Pounds 24.99) and an all-in-one
package that includes five classical games under the overall title
Intelligent Strategy (Pounds 34.99). Unlike the Omar Sharif, these programs
are non-Windows; all are compatible with IBM PC, Atari ST(E) and Amiga.
Chess programs are still leaders in the board games' field and they continue
to develop playing skills at higher and higher levels, out-performing many
strong club players. The latest program, the Chess Machine, available from
the London Chess Centre - at a cool Pounds 549.95] - is the brain-child of a
Dutch programmer called Ed Schroeder and is making quite a stir in the
professional chess world.
It is a halfway house between a pure software program and a dedicated chess
computer. I sat in while an international master, Malcolm Pein, played three
five-minute blitz games against it. The final score was one win each and a
draw.
For the chess computer buff with limited funds - most of us, in fact - there
is the M-Chess program at Pounds 77 and also the versatile German Fritz
program at the bargain price of Pounds 34.95, the original version which
remains extremely good value. A new version, Fritz 2, has just been released
at Pounds 76.95 (or Pounds 44.95 for an up-grade).
I find the most convenient way to play chess on screen is with a
diagram-style board; but the 3-D option with Staunton or other solid-looking
chessmen graphics is also on offer in many programs - as it is for
backgammon, reversi and draughts.
The most ornate graphic display for chess is Interplay's Battlechess (Pounds
29.00) in which each piece is represented by a different military figure.
When moved, the piece walks to its new position and, when taken, engages in
an elaborate duel with the opposing piece. It is a fine spectacle even if it
does not have all that much to do with the game of chess.
When games programmers turn their attention from indoor to outdoor sports,
they really exert themselves in an attempt to reconstruct the playing
environment with maximum verisimilitude. Nowhere is this more so than in the
game of golf.
Microsoft's Golf for Windows has just come out at Pounds 49. Its graphics
waft you to the Torrey Pines course in San Diego, California, in full colour
through your VGA. You can add more courses later.
The PGA Golf Tour program for Windows (Pounds 34.99, from Electronic Arts)
gives you an initial choice of four different championship courses in the US
and - for those with sound facilities - the bird-song and other wildlife
noises likely to be encountered while playing on them.
You start in the pro shop where you sign on for the round with your playing
partners. These may be your friends or golf professionals whose strokes will
be played by the computer. You also choose the composition of your bag of
clubs.
Strokes in both versions are made by three pressings in quick succession on
the mouse button. The first controls your backswing, measured on a scale
from zero to 100 percent. The second pressing reverses the direction of the
swing, and the third represents the moment of contact with the ball.
Your ball is then shown hurtling through the air and landing. A message
flashes on screen giving the length of shot, the lie of the ball and its
relation to the flag. Then your invisible caddy will recommend you a club
for your next shot. When you reach the green, the putting surface is shown
in a 3-D model that can be revolved so that the ball may be studied from
different angles.
Both programs are wonderfully ingenious but, after a while when the novelty
has worn off, non-golfers may find them a shade repetitious. A much simpler
games program without any gimmickry - like a good backgammon - is, I find,
more addictive in the long run.
For those ambitious people who want to have a go at writing their own
programs or developing existing ones, Microsoft's Visual Basic for Windows
has a DIY book: Visual Basic - Game Programming for Windows by Michael J.
Young (from Grey Matter 0364-53449, and other Microsoft stockists). Its 500
pages contains histories of the games and hints on playing strategy, as well
as all the technical information about programming. The printed matter comes
with a disc that includes a dozen games that are ready to run: puzzles,
board games and gambling games.
Ludo is one. It represents an advanced animation technique that, in the
words of the author, 'lets you move a full-color, non-rectangular object
over any type of background without disturbing this background.' Good luck
with your games.
The Software Circus, 282 High Holborn, tel: 071-404-4492 (and branches at
other locations in central London), has a good selection of entertainment
software discs, arranged under systems with which they are compatible.
The London Chess Centre, 169 Euston Road, tel: 071-388-2404, will give
demonstrations by appointment of its chess programs and stocks other games
programs from Oxford Softworks.
WindowLine (123 Westmead Road, Sutton, SM1 4JH tel: 081-642-227), has a mail
order service for Windows' games software and publishes a regular catalogue
and newsletter.
The headquarters of Centron Software, strong on games for Macintosh
computers, is at 1500 NW 3rd Street, Number 101, Deerfield Beach, Florida
33442, United States.
CORRECTION
The Chess Centre, which Anthony Curtis mentioned in his piece on computer
games last week and which stocks many games, including a series of chess
programs from Oxford Softworks, is at 369 Euston Road, London and not 169 as
printed last week. Sorry.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XIV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3676</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLFAYAE8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921205
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  05 DEC 92 / How Lamont betrayed the thrifty pensioner: Fifteen per cent
loan rates were a glittering chance
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DOMINIC LAWSON
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   FOR MANY people
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
not least John Major and Norman Lamont - Wednesday, September 16, was indeed
Black. And the adjective has stuck, adhesive in its unoriginality. But, for
a large number of Britons, one moment on that day stood out as a briefly
glittering prospect of happiness and prosperity.
That moment was when Lamont, the chancellor of the exchequer, told the Bank
of England to increase base rates to 15 per cent. And the people to whom
this act held out such high hopes were those who lend more than they borrow.
Alas, their hopes were dashed. Lamont was not being serious. It was just a
stunt to impress currency dealers, and not a particularly cunning one, at
that. Since then, interest rates have scuttled down to half the level Lamont
pretended he was prepared to defend four months ago.
To read the newspapers, you would assume that this is a matter of pure
delight; that nothing could be better. But, for millions, it is a bitter
blow. Those people should be the object of our sympathy.
We are not talking here about professional bankers and affluent City types
(there are some left). We are talking about pensioners who supplement their
meagre state benefits with the income from a lifetime's hard-earned savings.
That income has been cut savagely, and through no fault of their own. They
were led to believe that the government would use whatever high rates were
necessary to defend the value of the pound ' their pound ' and now they have
seen their trust betrayed.
These poor old people have suffered in other ways through this abrupt policy
switch. Their state pension is linked to the retail price index. Into this
index, the government ' admittedly, with some lack of logic ' had included
the cost of mortgages.
As those rates have tumbled, there has been what learned economists call the
'double whammy': the pensioners have not just lost out on their interest
income but their indexed pension has been deflated, too. Gone are the days,
last seen under a Labour government, when pensioners' remittances were
linked to wages.
Now comes the triple whammy. What is it that old people spend their savings
on, above all other items? Foreign travel. Suddenly, these poor folk have
seen the effective cost of their one great pleasure in life increase by
about 25 per cent as the pound has slid against the tourist currencies.
Why is it that the press has not rushed to the defence of our prudent
pensioners? The newspapers usually are avid to do so. I guarantee that the
first hypothermia death of the winter will hit every front page in Britain.
And any Tory member of parliament who dares to suggest that the defunct old
dear in question should have been more sensible and worn a balaclava indoors
will be denounced ritually from the popular pulpit of the tabloids.
Why, I wonder, does this discrepancy exist. The reason could be simple.
Journalism is a young person's profession. Even the editors of our grandest
or most successful newspapers tend to be in their 40s, some even younger.
They ' and their leading pundits ' are at the stage in their lives when
borrowings mount: they have school fees to provide for, and a house which
must live up to their professional status. What their proprietor pays them
does not seem enough. They must borrow.
So, they see a tumbling in interest rates as a very good thing. They find it
difficult to understand that there is anyone who would disagree with that.
They long for the days when the cost of financing a mortgage was less than
the increase in the value of the house on which it was secured.
They, at least, are old enough to remember just how much fun could be had on
that particular gravy train although, naturally, none of them ever did the
smart thing and jumped off the property merry-go-round when it was moving
too fast for comfort. They might just be vaguely aware that the only people
likely to have done that on any scale were their parents, or those of that
generation. And, just possibly, they feel a teeny bit jealous of the
provident wrinklies, especially if they happen to be their own parents.
Whatever their reasons for not making a great song and dance about the
plight of the pensioners, the press is missing a populist trick, something
of which it can rarely be accused. Just because old people are less visible
than the gregarious and noisy young, it does not mean that they are few. I
recall my father telling me that, when he was chancellor, he got a lousy
press whenever he raised interest rates, but that he had many more genuine
letters of complaint when he cut them.
Dominic Lawson is editor of The Spectator
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XXIV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3677</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLFAYAE7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921205
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  05 DEC 92 / Private View: The daughter cast in her father's mould - Mary
Moore on her troubled dealings with the trust which guards her father's
legacy
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTIAN TYLER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
WHO best knows the mind of a dead man? His only child, or the friends and
advisers appointed to carry out his wishes?
It is painful conundrum, because love and money are involved, and a familiar
one. But when the dead man is an artist whose works are worth millions, it
is an important and very public one.
Nobody who has read of the battle between Henry Moore's daughter, Mary, and
the foundation she helped him create can remain quite neutral. Some will see
it as a contest between a loyal daughter and an overweening cabal of the art
Establishment (with Pounds 50m invested, the Henry Moore Foundation is the
largest art-funding body after the state). Others will think, what the
foundation's advisers have sought to convey, that Mary Moore is a
troublesome woman who, having fallen out with her father towards the end of
his life, is seeking requital after his death.
Verdicts of a sort will be delivered next year. The Environment Secretary
will have the report of a planning inspector before deciding whether the
foundation should be allowed to develop the artist's studios and land in the
Hertfordshire hamlet of Perry Green in order to show more of his work to a
bigger public.
The local authority says the scheme is too disruptive: their counsel called
it 'an upmarket industrial development down a substandard road in the heart
of a rural area.' Moore's daughter says it will look like a theme park and
is a betrayal of her father's wishes. A proper museum, she says, should be
built elsewhere.
Meanwhile the High Court will be asked to decide whether a large part of the
foundation's holding of 650 sculptures, especially the artist's copies,
rightly belongs to Moore's three grandchildren. In bringing this action as
her father's executor, it is clear Mary Moore hopes to limit the
foundation's control over exhibitions and disposals.
They will be verdicts, but they will not be answers. And even if the
daughter proves by means of letters and tape recordings that she is the true
and trusted interpreter of her father's wishes, the public may still ask
whether any artist - even a great one - can decree for ever how his Muse is
to be commemorated.
Judgment is often helped by coming face to face with the protagonist.
Although I had met Mary Moore, now Mrs Raymond Danowski, in my youth (and
was once shown round the studios and garden by Moore himself) I did not know
what to expect. Nor, it was obvious, did she.
She was enthusiastic in describing how as a child she sat in the studio with
her father 'mucking about with paint' or copying him as he modelled clay.
But then her answers became oddly detached. When I asked what kind of
obligation she felt to her father, she replied:
'If I see things which are blatantly wrong it seems to me an obligation to
point them out. In this case it was quite obvious that nobody was going to
stand up and protest (about the plans). I have just been involved in a
campaign to open people's eyes to the destruction I saw going on.'
Do you resent the time you have to spend looking after your father's legacy?
'I don't feel that's a burden. That seems to me the kind of obligation
anyone would feel towards anyone with whom they were particularly intimate.'
What about the other penalties, like the publicity?
'It would only be difficult for me if I felt I wasn't getting the right
message across. So far the only stressful situation has been the planning
inquiry and press coverage. The press coverage has been very hurtful: it's a
bit like taking a blow in the stomach because of the way it's been
conducted, certainly from the other side. It's as if they made a personal
attack on me so there was no need to discuss the merits of my arguments, no
need to take seriously the possibility that their ideas were not so good.'
Later when I asked again if she felt any resentment about the accident of
being born to a famous artist, she denied it. 'I do this because I have to,
out of regard for my father.'
Do you mean out of love?
'Yes, out of love. You have to translate for me.'
Some children rebel against their parents' world. Mary Moore, taught to see
through her father's eyes and taught to regard drawing as the true test of
any artist, seems entirely absorbed by it. 'I wasn't rebellious,' she said,
'because I got such enormous pleasure from what I'd been shown.'
At the age of 16 she studied life drawing at the Slade 'where I had a hell
of a time because I was Henry Moore's daughter' and she still draws at the
Royal College of Art once a week. Physically she resembles her father more
than her mother, the Russian-born Irina Radetsky (also an artist) and she
thinks she has also inherited his outgoing temperament. Certainly at the
planning inquiry she appeared confident and fluent under cross-examination.
Yet I felt there was something constraining her beyond the need to make a
good impression and to weigh her words ahead of the court case. What was
this need to be be 'translated'?
She explained it suddenly, while posing for the picture. 'I am very
left-handed', she said. 'So I talk like a negative.' Psychologists may
recognise the phenomenon: it seemed to mean that she speaks rather as a
painter paints, not going directly for the highlights but describing the
shadowy areas in order to let the highlights emerge.
I came to the point. Do you agree there was a break between you and your
father?
'On the emotional level on which we related to each other I don't believe
there was a break. There was a disagreement about the way the foundation was
going, and there was a break in the amount of time we spent together in that
I went to South Africa.'
Your father wasn't happy about that, was he?
'My father was a great anti-apartheid man but he never made a big deal about
me going there. Other people, the foundation's lawyers, made a big deal of
it when I started questioning ownership, hoping I would be undermined.'
She lived in South Africa for five years, returning in 1985 a year before
Moore's death. Before her departure she had resigned as a trustee of the
foundation, apparently over a disagreement about a sale. She says that on
her return her father wanted her reinstated but that the other trustees
refused. Her father was old and ill and, she implies, increasingly under the
thumb of his advisers.
Why should the foundation behave in the way you allege, I asked.
'I think the process began before my father died. if something goes off the
rails it diverges further and further . . .
'They're in a very powerful position. It's probably the richest arts funding
body in England, When you have that kind of influence you probably get quite
used to making it function in an unquestioned way.'
Mary Moore and her advisers clearly think the foundation is discharging its
duties towards Moore's work on the cheap and is preoccupied with its
sponsorship of contemporary art.
I asked her: having got the bit between your teeth do you quite enjoy this
struggle with the foundation?
'No. One just hopes that the right solution will eventually come about, that
the studio and grounds will be preserved.'
Mary Moore was well provided for at her mother's death, but I asked: are you
after the money?
'I don't need the money. I would hope that into whoever's ownership those
sculptures fell that they would be used as my father wanted, to contribute
to a comprehensive display of his work. The foundation could combine with
me.'
What have you learned from the whole experience?
'It's going to sound very crass. Probably that if you believe in something
you can do things that you never believed it was possible to do - if you
believe enough.
She added: 'It's as though there were two stories - the story of me having
to survive these fardels, these slings and arrows, and the real story of
underlying importance. I don't think it's an issue that relates to Henry
Moore particularly. It relates to our heritage, our attitude to all kinds of
things.'
One can hear the Henry Moore Foundation saying much the same thing.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XXIV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3678</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLFAYAE6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921205
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  05 DEC 92 / Hawks &amp; Handsaws: An easy mistake to make
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL THOMPSON-NOEL
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
IT IS astonishing how many people mistake me for Goran Ivanisevic. For
anyone who lives on Mars, Ivanisevic - lanky, imperious, a bit of a loose
cannon - is the fast-serving Croatian meteor who occupies the No 4 slot in
the men's tennis rankings on planet Earth.
'Hold on,' I say, whenever people mix us up. 'Hold on. Ivanisevic is 6ft
4in; I am 6ft 2 5/16 in. Ivanisevic is 160lb; I am 167lb. He is 21; I am . .
. more mature.
Sure, there are superficial similarities: slim legs and slim bodies
supporting not much weight - the perfect physique for modern tennis. We are
both known to be temperamental. And both can swear like boys. But we have
very different fans, and probably different philosophies. Goran is rich; I
am not especially. Goran flashes his eyes; I avoid cheap tricks.
'However, the key distinction between us,' I continue, 'is our serves.
Ivanisevic's low-toss hatchet-swing serve is the biggest anyone has seen. It
is cosmic. McEnroe says so, and nobody argues with him. At Wimbledon this
year, Ivanisevic boomed down 206 aces. His serve is so fast that opponents
sometimes cannot tell whether it has passed them on the forehand or the
backhand side.
'My serve is not like that. Coaches who have looked at it say it suffers
from mis-directed venom and is technically impure. Be that as it may, the
difference between our serves is the reason why Goran is No 4 in the world
and I am struggling to hold my position, in the middle -to-high-30's, in the
yuppie singles league at Paddington Sports Club.'
The more I protest, the more I am mistaken for Goran. It is pointed out that
both of us charmingly mispronounce many words. We are not diplomatic. And
each of us tends to exaggerate things, to explore the outer limits of
hyperbole. Sports Illustrated recently gave an example of Goran in full
flight. He had just been bounced out of the US Open in New York by an
unseeded rival.
'Here,' said Goran, 'food is not good. If you eat those McDonald
cheeseburgers, hamburgers, you go to the hospital forever . . . I don't hate
 -I like America, but I don't know. Last year I didn't felt like this.'
Of his racket-breaking habit he has said: 'It's nice feeling to break
rackets when upset. So I break many. I am professor in the school of how to
break the racket.'
Funnily enough, my own speech patterns are starting to resemble Goran's. The
more people mistake me for the lanky superstar, the more fractured and
aggressive becomes my speech, the wilder my flights of fancy. I am starting
to flash my eyes. This week, anxious to stiffen national morale and put a
few things right, I telephoned various people.
I called Queen Elizabeth II. 'Is bad news you paying taxes like all the rest
of us,' I said. 'Maybe you sell a few horses? The thing about taxes is you
have to watch your code. Always the code they lower it. Never is it raised.
Soon you pay them everything. Is one big stink and scandal.'
I called Michael Heseltine, president for life. I said: 'Seldom did people
of this country felt so demoralised and cackhanded. Is utterly lamontable.
What you going to do?' I called John Gummer, agriculture minister. 'Why you
not like women?' I demanded.
'What's wrong with women priests? You tell papers, radio, anyone who
listens, is not you leave Church of England, is Church of England leave you.
You say church splitting in sects. Then you bring in orthodoxy, saying it's
under siege. But orthodoxy change. These not the Middle Ages. Women are fine
by me, John. Many of them send me letters, want to fix up meeting. For me,
they not big problem.'
I called John Smith, leader of the Labour party. I said: 'Time to raise
game, John. Your serving all gone soggy and you not bending to your volleys.
'Politics just like tennis, John, you got to bend the knee. How many times I
tell you? Is many people cross. You suppose to be opposition, yet you agree
with governing Tories. You pass things on the nod, which is one big hell
mistake.'
I rang the French farmers. 'You pipe down,' I said. 'Nobody wants your rape.
Plates of Europe are shifting, just like in major earthquake. Everyone's got
problems, yours no bigger than our.'
Notice than none of these people attempted to get a word in edgeways. I do
not believe they dared.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XXIV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3679</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLFAYAE5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921205
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  05 DEC 92 / Arts: Fairy tales drawn in unexpected terms - The recent
work of Paula Rego
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By WILLIAM PACKER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
PAULA Rego's career is rather more than a simple matter of the personal
exploration and development in the work, rapid and remarkable though these
have been these past dozen years. Lately it has taken on an increasing
importance as one of reassertion, bringing back into the centre of interest
narrative art which has, for too long, been distrusted and neglected.
Narrative may have sustained the great tradition of western art, sacred and
profane, from the renaissance to the romantics of the 19th century, but to
set up as a narrative painter in the context of modernism was to invite, at
best, the charge of irrelevance, at worst that of the sentimental and the
illustrative.
Rising above all that, Paula Rego, since the early 1980s, has found the
proper subject of her art in the fairy stories told her long ago in her
native Portugal, and the darkly remembered, half-forgotten, ambiguous,
embroidered incidents of her own distant childhood. And having found it,
simply by getting on with it, she has turned herself into perhaps the most
powerful, certainly the most intriguing figurative painter of her generation
(she is now 57).
The drawing is bold and simple, the handling of the paint direct,
uncomplicated, effective, the space clearly established. The forms and
figure too are no less clearly described in conventional terms, and we can
see all too well, though perhaps not always quite make out, what is going
on, who is doing what to whom, and where and why. By degrees we recognise
the formal tricks and games that are being played, the iconographical
references, the signs and symbols. In whichever little scene or episode, the
scale and size of the protagonists shifts and changes, just as the
importance of a character is relative within the childish imagination, or
equally so in the narrative predellae of any early renaissance altar-piece.
Her work thus is illustrative in the old, true and honourable sense, telling
a story that we either know well, though stated in so much fresher or
perhaps unexpected terms, or may reinvent for ourselves. She is, therefore,
a natural and obvious artist to turn her attention to illustration as such.
Not surprisingly, the larger part of this exhibition is taken up with the
portfolio of etchings she has recently produced to illustrate the Folio
Society's new edition of Peter Pan in Barrie's original text, along with the
related ink and watercolour studies, and drawings, for other projects: The
Wide Sargasso Sea and The Ferry Girl. There is also a number of large
watercolour paintings made last summer on holiday at Estoril.
The formal strength and the wit and inventiveness of her imagination are all
clear enough. She relishes the play of light and dark, quite as much in
metaphorical as in practical terms: the hens on the open hillside, the more
sinister peacocks in the cooler undergrowth, the mass innocently at play,
the darker forces massing unseen. It is this quality she has, of recognising
and expressing the sinister and the macabre, and most especially the child's
horrified fascination with matters of sex and death, that makes her not
merely a brilliant and original exponent within the terms set by her own
work, but one of considerable, more general, importance.
For we live now in a timid and sentimental age, and are inclined to forget a
truth that was always recognised before: that the cautionary tale and fairy
story are among the devices whereby the child may begin to come to terms
imaginatively with the awful truths of life and death. The Brothers Grimm
were a far cry from Walt Disney, and Strewelpeter from the Pink Panther.
What Disney has made safe, he has also, like pasteurised milk, rendered
inert, and the delicious frisson of the old stories become almost a kind of
child abuse.
In rescuing Peter Pan from the vapid and the sentimental, and returning it
to us as the darker, infinitely more equivocal story that Barrie wrote, as
we now know, to exorcise his own demons, Miss Rego does us a service perhaps
greater than she realises or intended. The service remains for all that, and
done with a splendid geniality and malevolent glee, even as the Mermaid
pushes Wendy to drown beneath the waves, or Tiger Lily is tied up to die at
the Marooners' Rock, or the Lost Boys unwillingly succumb to the Pirates.
And always there is Captain Hook, with Wendy on his arm.
Paula Rego: Peter Pan &amp; Other Stories: Marlborough Fine Art &amp; Graphics, 6
Albemarle Street, W1, until January 30.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XXII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3680</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLFAYAE4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921205
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  05 DEC 92 / Arts: Frank talk - Radio
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By BA YOUNG
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
RELIABLE Radio 1 was sure to mark World AIDS Day, which fell on Tuesday. On
that day came bulletins about AIDS and the risks in normal as well as gay
sex; and on Wednesday came the first of three documentaries for young people
to discuss their sexual experiences.
There was little discussion, just short personal accounts of how the callers
first made contact, how they discovered what they were really after, how it
affected them. Rightly, no advice was given except to call the talkline (not
'helpline') if wanting expert talk. The callers were pretty frank, even the
lesbians and gays (who did not seem to consider themselves exceptional). I
rather wondered why any of them called the programme at all when so few
seemed to have any problems; but it may have helped others to have heard
them. This is just how Radio 1 should operate.
You would think Pam Gems's Deborah's Daughter, Radio 4's Monday play, was a
romance, and so it is, though an unusual one. Deborah Pederson visits an
imaginary Arab state, where her late husband made millions from oil, with a
gift of Dollars 20m. The party, that includes her mother, Lady Wiggins, and
her daughter Stephanie, arrives just as the ambitious Colonel Hassan
launches a successful uprising against his King. We hear little of the
conflict, and Hassan's social life continues apparently undisturbed. Romance
appears when he woos Deborah, in phrases like 'your soul is like a beautiful
flower'.
She finally falls for him, but only after a plethora of political talk on
familiar oil-state lines and a fear that Hassan is after her daughter. No
way - Stephanie is already pregnant by boy-friend David, who gets a job in
Hassan's government; she barely earns her place in the title. It all seemed
superficial, in spite of the committed playing of Prunella Scales as Deborah
and Elizabeth Spriggs as her mother. Hassan is played by Raad Rawi; Adam
Hussein, his ADC Ali, was also the adviser in Arabic, which Ms Scales
manages fluently. Sue Dunderdale directed.
Hogarth, who last week painted the pool of Bethesda in Radio 3's Sunday
play, surfaced again in this week's, a revival of last year's production of
Nick Dear's The Art of Success. As I wrote last time, I don't believe dirty
words should be used on radio as much as they are in this play. On the stage
you can take them for granted, but on radio they cause a momentary check.
Their acceptability is not for me to judge; myself, I accept them willingly.
But I feel they might mute the enjoyment of this enchanting play about
18th-century London's artistic low life, even if they didn't for me. Richard
Wortley directed; Michael Kitchen was a fine Cockney Hogarth, Linus Roache
was Fielding, Pennie Dowling was murderess Sarah Sprackling.
Big Bands in the Big Apple doesn't sound like a Radio 2 programme, though it
is properly faithful to Humphrey Lyttelton's The Best of Jazz. The Big Bands
feature on Saturday was the first of two, an hour each, about the sidemen in
the old-time big bands in New York's smart places, great for those who
recall jazz players the way young people today immortalise pop-singers. I
could fill the column with the names presenter Sheila Tracey brought up on
her tour, with their appropriate music. It was addicts' delight. Addicts had
George Shearing on Radio 2 on Monday, but 'The BBC Big Band' is not such a
magical-sounding name.
Thus week's castaway on Desert Island Discs was Lord Tebbit. Eminent
castaways bring out the best in Sue Lawley; she never allows respect to dim
her attack, and she was just as good as Tebbit - better, really, as she was
the one that brought up the subjects. Like the chosen Sinatra, she did it
her way.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XXII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3681</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLFAYAE3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921205
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  05 DEC 92 / Arts: Saxophonists par excellence - David Sanborn and Joe
Henderson live up to their reputations
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By GARRY BOOTH and LAURA CONNELLY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
WHAT WITH his coiffed hair, designer zoot suit and smoothy alto technique,
David Sanborn is every inch the beer commercial saxophonist. Since his early
days with fellow crossover jazzers, the Brecker Brothers, he has coolly
cultivated a saleable image based on almost conversational licks and
hummable tunes.
For the latest of many big selling albums, Upfront (Elektra 7559-61272-2),
however, he has struck a more aggressive pose. Like the Brecker Bros he now
deals in hard, no holds barred shrieking funk. (If I had been told a year
ago that Sanborn would soon be covering Ornette Coleman I would have replied
that, 'Yes and the Spontaneous Music Ensemble will do Christmas carols.')
Surprising as it is, the change of direction seems to have worked and on the
strength of Upfront, Sanborn fans have filled the cavernous North London
Town &amp; Country Club for three consecutive nights. The group here, on the
road for the best part of the year, is a more portable version of the
album's and as tight as they come. It features a genuine Hammond B3 organ
among the synth keyboards, knee knocking long haired guitarist, electric
bass, drums, plus a mountain of timbale and conga drums.
But if the first lazy tear of Sanborn's alto into the simple funky backbeat
recalls familiar ground, the material is harder and rougher. This is the
same user-friendly Sanborn but with an edge. A series of abrasively catchy
phrases is developed into a searing, crowd teasing crescendo before he hands
over to guitarist Dean Brown (who clearly divides his time between watching
Wayne's World and listening to Mike Stern records). The excitement is
sustained by feisty percussion from Don Alias and the stick twirling antics
of drummer, Sonny Emory and the whole circus is held together by Ricky
Peterson's swirling keyboards.
'Benny' and 'Alcazar', delicious cuts from the new album were beautifully
paced and then wrung for all they were worth by each of the personnel. 'Soul
Serenade', a blues as comfortable as an old shoe, was turned inside out by
Sanborn before being handed on to Brown for a sub-George Benson scat-along
and climax in a duet.
Mooching around the stage the while, appearing to be in complete control, a
sanguine Sanborn announced to roars of approval, 'I have officially lost
control.' He hadn't; sections of his audience had.
*****
It is a fitting that in a year when tenor saxophonist Joe Henderson produces
one of the finest interpretations of Duke Ellington's music with his album
Lush Life (Verve), he should stand alongside the great composer in being the
only other artist to ever receive three Downbeat awards in the same year -
in Henderson's case, 1992 Musician of the Year; Tenor Sax Player of the
Year; and Album of the Year. Starting his five day residency at Yoshi's Club
in Oakland, California, he celebrated his achievements with a customarily
daunting command of his instrument.
Henderson is a classic player and a reliable guardian of the traditional
jazz formula. In a short set of standards he explored every angle with a
mischievous skill - his warm, penetrating tone jack-knifing around the
musical alleyways with fragile screams, scurrying patterns and invigorating
unexpected low notes. He was in fine company - Al Foster chased his every
move with precise and inventive drumming, bassman Larry Grenadier offered
lovely, flowing basslines and pianist Larry Willis provided a solid harmonic
backdrop.
Unexpectedly presented with his trio of awards by vibes player Bobby
Hutcherson, Henderson ended the set with 'Take the A Train', taking a
captivating introductory duet with Foster and rounding it off with humorous
aplomb with the rest of the band. In turn his audience gave him a standing
ovation and Hutcherson pointed out: 'He should have got this back in the
Sixties.' Never a moment too late.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XXII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3682</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLFAYAE2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921205
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  05 DEC 92 / Arts: A tale of two Tempests - The ESC and the Ninagawa
productions
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE Tempest is the only Shakespeare play with only one woman in it. Timon of
Athens runs it numerically close, but Alcibiades has two mistresses. In The
Tempest Miranda is out on her own.
That thought occurred to me when watching two separate productions in London
this week. It is not the master key to such a magical piece, yet it must
have some significance. At the very least, it gives added point to Miranda's
famous line: 'Oh brave new world, that has such people in't'. The stress is
on the word 'people'. Miranda has not seen any people before, except for her
father and then Ferdinand, her first love. Suddenly, late in the play, to
see so many other 'goodly creatures' suggests that if there were a Tempest,
Part II, she might start to discriminate.
Here is one area where the Japanese and English Shakespeare Company's
versions of The Tempest overlap. Both draw attention to Miranda's awakening
to the real world. There is another similarity. A central scene in both
productions is when Trinculo, the jester, and Stephano, the drunken butler,
first come across Caliban: not very civilised human beings encountering the
sub-human.
Until this week I had not fully realised that this is among the best comic
scenes in Shakespeare - up to the level of the gravediggers' meeting with
Hamlet. In the ESC version Trinculo is played by Tony Haygarth and, on the
night I saw it, Stephano by an understudy, Andy Hough. Between them they
supply moments of brilliance to an otherwise uncertain production.
The ESC version scores again in that it has a marvellously agile
hermaphrodite Ariel played by Olwen Fouere. There is never the slightest
doubt that this Ariel is crucial to the play: not human, but not stupid
either, temporarily a servant to Prospero, but not, like Caliban, a slave.
Ms Fouere sings, speaks, dresses and walks the tightrope almost to the point
of dominance.
Curiously Ariel is the one part where the Japanese production, directed by
Yukio Ninagawa, falls down. It is possible that my lack of Japanese has
misled me, in which case I apologise in advance for missing the subtleties,
but Ariel here appears like a slightly crippled spirit dressed in a white
sheet who eventually flies off into the sunrise. The part is never central
to the scheme.
For the rest, Ninagawa's direction is as visually stunning as you would
expect. Every part of the Barbican stage is used to the full in a way that
the Royal Shakespeare Company never knows quite how to manage. The play is
set on the island of Sado in the Sea of Japan, which is where the Noh
Theatre was founded and was the place of Japanese exile. It is a natural
home for The Tempest, just as Macbeth has his place among the Japanese
warlords.
The use of music, colour and lighting is of a standard that we seldom
achieve in this country. Note that little patch of sea, always slightly
changing, in the background. When there is group movement, it really is
group movement, and when there is stillness, it is total.
Mariko Fuji is a rapturously attractive Miranda, a young woman waking up.
Where there may be a new interpretation is in Haruhiko Joh's Prospero. At
the start, he is full of Japanese authority (not at all like the more
detached scholar of John Woodvine in the ESC production). At the end, he is
a visibly sadder and wearier man, having launched his daughter on the world.
It is like the dignified abdication of the emperor.
There is a chance to see the Ninagawa at the Barbican this afternoon and
this evening. The ESC Tempest is alternating at the Royalty with Macbeth for
another week.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XXII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3683</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLFAYAE1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921205
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  05 DEC 92 / Arts: All about getting lost - Video
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NIGEL ANDREWS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
WHAT IS the most potent idea in all drama? Murder? Love? Jealousy? Ambition?
Revenge? No: being lost. It is what happens to the protagonists in The
Odyssey, King Lear and Gulliver's Travels. It is what happens to the
villains in The Tempest and to the title hero in ET. It is what happens when
surefooted men or women - or aliens - find solid ground pulled from under
them and familiar backcloths swapped for terrae incognitae.
We should point all this out to you in preparation for this month's videos.
The great thing about being lost, as biologist Lorraine Bracco finds in
Medicine Man and Anthony Andrews in Lost In Siberia, and the hero of
Murnau's vampire classic Nosferatu and the heroines (more metaphysically
'lost') of The Hand Thats Rocks The Cradle and Les Diaboliques, is that you
re-examine yourself and your values. 'Where am I?' is a natural prequel to
'Who am I?'
Pre-Christmas video releases always do raise these great questions of life
and death, just when we are expecting tinselly escapism. (For that see last
paragraph). The marketing psychology is as follows. Fifty million Britons
will be soon be zonked out beyond resuscitation, gorged on wine, turkey and
pud, unless they the video marketeers provide something to think about,
wrestle with and stay awake for.
So here are Miss Bracco's adventures with Dr Sean Connery, her familiar
urban world upheaved as she swings through the jungle with him seeking rare
cancer-curing bromeliads. (Verdict: silly, but fun). Here is Anthony Andrews
in an Anglo-Soviet cine-Siberia, teeth chattering over the gelid dialogue
and matching direction. (Silly, but less fun). And here, more formidably,
are the towering Gothic disorientations of that horror classic Nosferatu,
released in shrewd synchronicity with the soon-to-engulf-us wave of Dracula
films.
Has there ever been a better film about being lost? The great German
director FW Murnau took the Gothic conventions of his time (1922) and turned
them inside-out, upside-down. Instead of the crazed studio sets of German
Expressionism, he filmed outdoors and in a real castle. And instead of
confronting his young hero adrift in Carpathia with the expected smoothly
handsome vampire, he cast the hideously made-up Max Shreck as the
neck-biter, a bald bat-eared human rat in funerary frock coat.
No wonder the youngster has to readjust his world-view and grow into
premature adulthood. Likewise the young ladies of two delectable horror
films from different aeons. Annabella Sciorra's young housewife in the
recent The Hand That Rocks The Cradle is given a grow-up-fast course by
nanny Rebecca Mornay, a friendly blonde who kills and maims. (Horror films
about home invasion prove you can be lost in your very own dream domicile).
And in the 1954 French classic Les Diaboliques director Henri-Georges
Clouzot pushes his actress wife Vera into the screaming lead role of a
schoolmistress encouraged to murder by a colleague (Simone Signoret). Deadly
stabbings, horrid shadows, corpses rearing from bathwater.
But you are right. It is the festive season and before leaving we should
earmark some videos for the children. Disney's 1950 animated feature
Cinderella, though not quite vintage, has a scene-stealing Fairy Godmother
and several show-stopping songs. Alan Parker's The Commitments is a funny,
generous-spirited comedy about a Dublin soul band. And Laurel and Hardy are
available in a collector's rarity, The March Of The Wooden Soldiers.
As for Alastair Sim in Scrooge, he still presides over the best screen
version of A Christmas Carol, made in 1951. Mr Sim, all teeth, chuckles and
nervous sepulchral chuckles, even makes Scrooge a bit of a charmer. But that
is what Christmas is about. Peace and good will to all men, even to those
above-mentioned video distributors who have an odd idea of what we should
watch at Christmas.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XXII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3684</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLFAYAE0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921205
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  05 DEC 92 / Books: Tales old and new pop up with pictures - Children
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL GLOVER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   IN BOOKS
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
as in life - the best ideas are often the simplest ones, striking the reader
with the force of inevitability. The First Christmas (Frances Lincoln,
Pounds 9.99) falls into this category, a picture book for the very young
which brings together some of the great biblical paintings of the
Renaissance from London's National Gallery and carefully chosen texts from
the authorised version of the Old and New Testaments. It is a marvellous way
of introducing great art - and the Christmas story - to young children.
Other outstanding picture books of the autumn include The Story of the
Creation (Orchard Books, Pounds 8.99) by Jane Ray, which is full of this
exhilarating artist's luminous colour and primitive stylisations of birds
and animals; Puss in Boots (Little, Brown, Pounds 8.99), retold by Lincoln
Kirstein, one of the founders of the New York City Ballet, and illustrated
with great panache and theatricality by Alain Vaes, a set-and-costume
designer for that same company.
For slightly older children, though still published in lavish picture-book
format, there is an excellent re-telling by Vivian Werner of the story of
the ballet Petroushka (Victor Gollancz, Pounds 9.95), illustrated by John
Collier, one of America's most talented young illustrators. Cinderella and
the Hot Air Balloon (Frances Lincoln, Pounds 7.99) by Ann Jungman is a racy,
updated version of the Cinderella story illustrated with brio by Raymond
Eyto, a young artist who, having absorbed many influences, past and present,
is now beginning to look very visually distinctive indeed.
The majority of pop-up books scarcely fall into the category of books at
all, but there are a couple of outstanding examples this autumn that deserve
a mention. The ever-inventive publishers of Winnie-the-Pooh have produced an
excellent Winnie-the-Pooh Pop-up Theatre Book, (Methuen, Pounds 12.99) which
manages to provide a toy theatre on every spread (together with moving
characters) and a tantalising envelope at the back which opens to reveal
free-standing figures that can be deployed at will or whim. And, for those
parents who cannot resist the pressure from beneath to purchase Thomas the
Tank Engine titles, there is a splendidly inventive piece of cardboard
engineering entitled Thomas's Big Railway Pop-up Book (Heinemann, Pounds
9.99).
The best of the traditional story collections for children of four and above
is The Kingfisher Treasury of Stories for Children (Kingfisher, Pounds
12.99), edited by Edward and Nancy Blishen, which appeals by its excellent
selection of stories, many of them written by such well-known writers as
Arthur Ransome, James Reeves and Margaret Mahy, its generous format and
simple though very appealing colour illustrations throughout.
An intriguing variant upon old themes is provided in The Cloth of Dreams
(Little, Brown Pounds 12.99), a collection of new fairy tales for young
children. James Mayhew's lavish illustrations almost drown the text in
colour.
Children of five and above who are beginning to read on their own will enjoy
some of the new titles from Hamish Hamilton's Cartwheels series: Goodnight,
Monster by Carolyn Dinan, Mrs Simkin and the Groovy Old Gramophone by Linda
Allen and SOS for Rita by Hilda Offen, all at Pounds 4.99. The majority of
books published in series of this kind tend to be formulaic; Cartwheels
manage to rise above that sort of thing.
Children who are ready for the novel proper and who have moved beyond the
need to be seduced by illustrations ought to sample that veteran storyteller
Rumer Godden, whose new novel, Listen to the Nightingale (Macmillan Pounds
9.99) about a little girl who has twin yearnings to succeed at becoming a
ballerina and to own a King Charles Spaniel almost overwhelm her.
Other books highly recommended for the eight to 10 age group are The Puffin
Book of Funny Stories (Viking, Pounds 9.99), edited by Helen Cresswell; an
excellent (or 'thoroughbred' as the publisher describes it) anthology of
horsey stories called, with maximum inventiveness, Horse and Pony Stories
edited by Christine Pullein-Thompson (Kingfisher, Pounds 7.99); and Hands
Off Our School] by Joan Lingard (Hamish Hamilton, Pounds 8.99), a novel
which describes the fight to save a little Highlands school from closure.
Older readers with a sophisticated taste for England's largely mythical past
should read Merlin Dreams by Peter Dickinson (Gollancz, Pounds 7.99), a very
compelling rehash of the Merlin legend, interwoven with medieval fantasy and
much Celtic embroidery. Kids in pursuit of what it feels like to be an
American teenager will enjoy Bingo Brown's Guide to Romance by Betsy Byars
(Bodley Head, Pounds 7.99).
And finally, for all those adults who wish to cure an itch to know what the
great fairy tales were like in their first English versions - before, that
is, they were bowdlerised and sentimentalised by the Victorians - should buy
a copy a a great classic of children's literature that has just been
reissued, The Classic Fairy Tales, researched and presented by Iona and
Peter Opie (Oxford, Pounds 17.95). The pictures alone will give the browser
a potted history of English children's book illustration.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XXI
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3685</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLFAYAEZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921205
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  05 DEC 92 / Books: Last of the master storytellers - Biography
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NIGEL SPIVEY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
DREAMS OF EXILE: ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON by Ian Bell Mainstream Publishing
Pounds 14.99, 295 pages
GEORGE Steiner has saluted Robert Louis Stevenson as 'among the last of the
pure story-tellers.' This is an unnecessarily terminal judgment: there have
been good story-tellers since RLS, from John Buchan to Jeffrey Archer. But
it was as Tusitala, or 'teller of tales', that Stevenson was honoured on
Samoa, where he finally settled; and it as a story-teller that he commands
enduring affection.
He wrote a good many essays, which are largely typical of their time -
nicely-tuned, idling-over prose, with not much to say but yielding the
occasional apophthegm. But he himself recognised the cogency of a good yarn.
'To the devil with your philosophy. When we are well again, and have an easy
mind, we shall peruse your important work.'
Weak-chested from childhood, he wrote stories to alleviate the tedium of
being continuously prone to illness. So often he tells of a fever enough 'to
kill a horse', or a throat oozing blood. It is a cliche to point this out,
but the invalid commonly validates existence in this way, and seizes upon
events and sentiments with a relish worth communicating.
Illness did not inhibit his travelling (doctors then had the pleasant habit
of prescribing long sojourns in the South of France as a cure for all sorts
of maladies), and as this new biography shows, he would undertake
deliberately squalid journeys with the aim of collecting material, or even
as a test of his health.
Yet his best stories are the fantasies of a bedridden man. Treasure Island
came from studying an old map, and Long John Silver from that ebullient lame
hack, WE Henley, whose journals promoted Stevenson, Kipling and others.
Jekyll and Hyde was a straight nightmare, perhaps heightened by a medicinal
dose of laudanum. Add to Stevenson's Gothic sense of enthrallment the
diligent application of literary craftsmanship, and the result is a series
of stories whose success enabled their author's emigration to the South
Seas.
He affected bemusement at this success, gloomily suspicious that he was only
read by fellow- novelists, journalists and 'boys'. The truth was that men
(and women) became 'boys' in these romances: metaphorically, whoever reads
Stevenson is sat on his knee and mesmerised.
His best travel book, Travels with a Donkey in the Cevennes, works the same
wonder: as an adolescent I remember how much I loved the frontispiece of my
edition, with RLS reclining in his custom-made woollen sleeping-bag, relaxed
with a twilight smoke, and ready to tell you the tales of the day.
Ian Bell's account of Stevenson is good on his Scottish origins, and better
still on the nostalgia for Scotland which the emigrant never lost. He loved
his native air, but it treated him roughly. Of the patriarchal, benevolent
Stevenson of Vailima in the Pacific we are less well served. The
affectionate account of the esteemed and emaciated author presiding over his
plump Samoan tribe which was given long ago by Graham Balfour is not easily
improved; and in any case, Stevenson gave a detailed and leisurely picture
of his exile in his correspondence with Sidney Colvin (collected as Vailima
Letters). Most of his time was spent in weeding, it seems.
Bell is self-confessedly not a scholar, which permits him to quote without
giving sources, and leave us with a downright inadequate index. The verbless
sentences are too many, and RLS could teach this biographer a thing or two
about style. But Bell gets Stevenson right as an essentially artful
story-teller. 'He was a popular artist', writes Bell. And adds, wisely: 'The
conjunction has become rare'.
A handsome edition of 'Treasure Island' with illustrations by Mervyn Peake
has just appeared in the new Everyman's Children's Classics series at Pounds
5.99.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XXI
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3686</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLFAYAEYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921205
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  05 DEC 92 / Books: These are our songs - Music
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PAUL DRIVER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BIOGRAPHIES and reference books are the main musical fare that publishers
have been putting out for Christmas. True, a 'think book' has appeared in
the form of Anthony Arblaster's Viva la Liberta] (Verso, Pounds 18.95), a
study of politics in opera; and this is fluently written and wide-ranging,
though it is disconcerting to be twice told by the author that he has been
unable to see or hear Britten's Owen Wingrave, when I can see the 1971 Decca
recording on my shelf as I write.
Of serious substance but greatly entertaining is a portrait of Beethoven as
seen by his contemporaries. HC Robbins Landon's Beethoven, His Life, Work
and World, and one may add, his Eccentricities, is a handsome Thames and
Hudson hardback (Pounds 24.00) adapted by the author from his 1970 volume,
Beethoven: a Documentary Study, and makes a wonderful present. Currently
reissued in paperback is Eric Sams's definitive study from 1961, revised in
1982, The Songs of Hugo Wolf (Faber and Faber, Pounds 12.99).
Song-lovers will also be gratified by the publication of The Spanish Song
Companion (Gollancz, Pounds 25.00), which follows SS Prawer's Penguin Book
of Lieder in making available both in the original and in translation the
lyric texts of an entire tradition - this one extending from the 13th
century Alfonso X of Castile to the still living Xavier Montsalvatge. It is
chiefly an anthology, but the compiler-translators, Jacqueline Cockburn and
Richard Stokes, lucidly explain everything as the book and the tradition
unfold.
The tenor Nigel Douglas's Legendary Voices (Andre Deutsch, Pounds 19.99)
cheerfully reviews the careers of such as Caruso, Flagstad, Gobbi, Pinza,
Turner with close reference to what is available on CD. Voice-fanciers are
also served by yet another biography of Maria Callas (Quartet, Pounds
25.00), though the author Jurgen Kesting has done diligent research.
The crop of biographies includes Robert Baldock's life of the saintly
cellist Pablo Casals (Gollancz, Pounds 20.00), David Revill's enthusiastic
life of the late composer and maverick John Cage (Bloomsbury, Pounds 22-50),
and Harold C. Schonberg's life of the pianist and professional legend
Vladimir Horowitz (Simon &amp; Schuster, Pounds 20.00).
This last is written in a tabloid style favouring exclamatory
single-sentence paragraphs and prefers to take a gossipy interest in the
vicissitudes of the music business than probe too deeply into its subject's
personal unhappiness, admitted in asides. The sweeping ups and downs of
Horowitz's career, his collapses and comebacks, are recorded with a certain
vulgar air of suspense; but a profusion of pianistic insights, mostly
Horowitz's own, is scattered across these pages ('The moment you know how to
colour a phrase . . . excessive rubato disappears by itself. A rubato in
tone has replaced it'); and there is an impressively elaborate discography.
Not quite a biography, Klaus Lang's The Karajan Dossier (Faber, Pounds
20.00) traces the professional progress of that peculiarly unattractive
figure with a quiet but ultimately lethal indirection, using a medley of
interviews and speeches.
Two out of the three new dictionaries are likely to become standard. The
Oxford Dictionary of Opera, (Oxford, Pounds 25.00) by John Warrack and Ewan
West is far more comprehensive and useful than Warrack's and Harold
Rosenthal's Concise Oxford Dictionary of the same subject, from which it
draws some material, and failed my spot-tests only in the matter of saying
nothing about York Holler's Der Meister und Margarita (1989), the last opera
to be staged at Paris's Salle Garnier. But Robin Holloway and his Clarissa
are (just about) there.
Anthony Baines's The Oxford Companion to Musical Instruments (Oxford,Pounds
25.00) is ravishingly authoritative. And Norman Lebrecht's The Companion to
20th Century Music (Simon &amp; Schuster, Pounds 20.00) is remarkably thorough
(Holler's work suitably epitomised), though laced with inaccuracies, and
wickedly partisan.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XXI
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3687</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLFAYAEXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921205
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  05 DEC 92 / Books: Will the real Piero . . . - Art
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PATRICIA MORISON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MY BEST Old Master books of the year range geographically from Arezzo to
deeply obscure English parish-churches. First, then, three books, each
called Piero della Francesca, marking the quincentenary of that complex,
heavenly artist. Without being truly memorable, each has good points and
prices are nicely spread. Each comes up with amusingly certain views on the
most disputed identities of the 15th century; the three gentlemen on the
right in the Urbino 'Flagellation'.
Two gentleman and an archangel, according to Ronald Lightbown whose PDF
(Abbeville Press: Pounds 60, 308 pages) is a handsome book although the
colour reproduction is not wonderful. It gives a careful account of Piero's
hazy career, is notably strong on costume, but skimpy on Piero and
perspective. Partially recycling a century-old theory, Lightbown identifies
the three as a bearded Greek appealing to Francesco Sforza for a crusade
against the Turk, listened to by Byzantium's guardian angel.
For Carlo Bertelli, the barefoot, golden youth is he who, according to the
old legend, was restored to life by the touch of the True Cross unearthed by
Empress Helena - the self-same scene Piero painted in the Arezzo frescoes.
Despite a woeful translation, Bertelli's PDF (Yale University Press; Pounds
35, 240 pages) is stimulating and the catalogue is certainly worth having.
Differing from Lightbown, Bertelli rejects the Williamstown 'Madonna and
Child' - and gives a piquant run-down of Flagellation theories.
Marilyn Arenburg Lavin's PDF (Thames and Hudson; Pounds 12.95, 128 pages) is
good value, a short essay plus incomplete catalogue. Clever but at times way
off-beam, she identifies the problematic threesome as Ludovico Gonzaga and a
noble friend. Each had recently lost a beloved relative and so Piero
provided an 'image of consolation'; the blonde figure, astonishingly, is
said to represent the dear departed.
Hugely admired as Britain's great country-houses are, trying to find out in
any detail about their history and contents is a frustrating business.
Boughton House: The English Versailles (Faber &amp; Faber; Pounds 100, 240
pages), edited by Tessa Murdoch and published in association with
Christie's, points the way at its hefty price towards better treatment of
the intelligent country-house visitor.
There could be no better place to start such an enterprise than Boughton,
English home of the Dukes of Buccleuch whose collections are of legendary
beauty and importance. Boughton is open to the public, in a discreet fashion
on August afternoons, but such is its magnificence that it deserves to be
far better-known.
Essentially 17th century, the house and many of the contents are due to
Ralph Duke of Montagu, an ambitious, unscrupulous Francophile who dominates
the book. Well-written essays by experts describe exquisite French furniture
(some pieces given by Louis XIV to the eager Duke Ralph), paintings, 15th
century Oriental carpets, tapestries, armour, and more.
One of the year's more intriguing art-books is Crista Grossinger's
North-European Panel Paintings (Harvey Miller; Pounds 48, 302 pages). The
author has tracked down all the Northern Renaissance panel-paintings lurking
in English parish-churches, alms-houses, Catholic schools, and Oxbridge
colleges. More than 70 of them are described and reproduced in this
interesting book.
With few exceptions, these were made-for-export devotional images produced -
not to say churned out - by Brussels and Antwerp workshops, following
designs handed down by masters such as Pieter Coecke van Aelst. A mass of
such work was being shipped to England before the Reformation, barely a
single example of which has survived. The presence of these paintings
therefore testifies to the taste of 19th-century collectors, enthusiasts for
'Primitives' and, in many cases, for Roman Catholicism. Now that vicars
tremble if anything in their churches is worth more than a few pounds, it is
remarkable that so many consented to have their charming paintings put on
the map for art-lovers - always assuming you can find the church-key.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XXI
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3688</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLFAYAEWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921205
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  05 DEC 92 / Books: From King Tut with love - Archaeology
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By GERALD CADOGAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
HOWARD CARTER by T G H James Kegan Paul Pounds 24.95 443 pages
HOWARD CARTER BEFORE TUTANKHAMEN by Nicholas Reeves and John H Taylor
British Museum Pounds 12.95, 201 pages
AT LAST, 70 years after he found the tomb of Tutankhamen, Howard Carter is
receiving the acclaim he deserves - a major biography, a fascinating
exhibition at the British Museum and a lively book and television series to
accompany it. Why so long? Probably because he was difficult, litigious and
somewhat greedy - in short, 'a troublemaker'. Yet this archaeologist, who
never received an honour from British royalty and never went to university
but was an honorary doctor of Yale, resurrected the 14th century BC teenage
king of Egypt with a patience, determination and skill that still leave
professionals gasping.
How did Carter come to be the man who raised Tutankhamen from the dead? The
short answer is that he was well respected but out of work in 1909, when
Lord Carnarvon hired him to dig in the Valley of the Kings on the West Bank
of the Nile opposite Luxor. TGH James, retired Keeper of Egyptian
Antiquities at the BM, gives the long answer in his judicious, leisurely
biography, which fits many strange details in to their context (even if it
omits Almina Carnarvon's re-marriage within nine months of the Earl's
death.)
James's book will delight those eager to learn about archaeology abroad in
the days when Carnarvon ordered Jackson's of Piccadilly to send out curried
fowls and tabasco sauce to the Winter Palace in Luxor. And it will bring wry
smiles of recognition to any digger who has suffered prickly colleagues,
permit problems with host officials, and money disputes with committees in
London.
Carter came from a family of journeyman-artists. Aged only 17, his fine
watercolours of birds and wild animals gave him an extraordinary break when,
with a subvention from Lord Amherst, he went as a 'tracer' to record the
spirited paintings in the tombs at Beni Hasan in middle Egypt. The country
caught him. He lived in a tomb on a cliff overlooking the Nile and worked
from dawn to dusk.
His drawings and pictures, on view at the BM, show he was a prodigy with an
exceptional eye, a firm but lively line, and the humility and patience to
look at every little bit of what the ancient artist had created and
reproduce it. (He even includes the cracks and flaking.) As bland
photographs never can, his pictures take you straight back to how the world
saw itself 4000 years ago.
Two months later he had a dig of his own - for Amherst, but under the
direction of the great Flinders Petrie. Within three years (and still a
minor) he had changed for ever how draughtsmen drew Egyptian tombs. In the
meantime he started a lifelong career of part-time dealing in antiquities,
using his keen eye and knowledge of Arabic and the Egyptians which today
would be quite improper for a field archaeologist. It repaired his modest
circumstances, a constant nag to which patrons and grand friends did not
respond.
Later, he bought for Carnarvon and the American museums, and died in 1939,
comfortably off from commissions and lecture fees. He had come up in the
world, dressing with a touch of the rakish like Carnarvon, and had taken
elocution lessons.
At 25 he was chosen by the Director of Antiquities to be Inspector of Upper
Egypt at Luxor - an astonishing but perceptive testimonial to the excellence
of a self-taught man. Carter tackled the job practically, fitting gates and
installing electric light in the tombs in the Valley of the Kings so that
visitors at last could see them. He lived in 'Castle Carter' among the ruins
on the West Bank, where he kept a menagerie that included a pet gazelle.
Promotion to Lower Egypt was not so happy. In 1905 a fracas erupted with a
party of drunken French visitors at Saqqara. Carter's men used their sticks:
Carter he rushed off a telegram to Lord Cromer to explain. This revealing
incident strained the Entente Cordiale, a touchy thing in Egypt. The press
was fervid in both languages. Rights and wrongs are unclear. An apology from
Carter would have let it pass, everybody told him. He refused, and became
known as a difficult man. Soon after he resigned his job, thinking he would
make a living from his watercolours, dealing and high-class guiding.
A grim few years followed which Carnarvon, who had come to Egypt to recover
from a motor accident, broke by offering him a job to dig for him on the
West Bank (as well as buying antiquities). The two men became good friends.
In 1911 Carter built himself a second 'Castle Carter', with bricks from the
Earl's own brickworks stamped 'MADE AT BRETBY ENGLAND FOR HOWARD CARTER AD
THEBES 1910' - just as the Pharoahs used to do. In 1914 Carnarvon secured
the concession for the Valley of the Kings, where it seemed that only one
royal tomb had not been found. The First World war then interrupted the
proceedings, and Carter worked intermittently for Intelligence in Cairo.
In the Valley, Carter mapped everything that he - or anybody else - had
found. By autumn 1922 the only place left to look was under some huts. He
moved them and on November 4 found the entrance of the sealed royal tomb.
Carnarvon left Berkshire at once. On November 26 the two peered in through a
small hole. 'Can you see anything?' 'Yes, wonderful things.'
Troubles began forthwith - with the press, officials, visitors who thought
they deserved privileged access, and the scholars. 'Gold always maddens
people', Petrie wrote later. Nerves were at breaking point: was the tomb
really intact? Yes] and although there had been a break-in a very long time
ago, the tomb had been resealed. Carter faced the most difficult and most
spectacular task that archaeology has ever seen. The pressure was colossal.
Thank goodness for his cool determination. He assembled a first-rate team
and took ten years to clear the tomb. It was all worth the effort, the rows,
and suffering from ill health. If in doubt, go to the Egyptian Museum in
Cairo, and in the BM exhibition look at Carter's catalogue cards and records
to see with what superb professionalism this awkward and, I assume,
resentful man did the job.
From Earl's Court in London and Swaffham in Norfolk it is a long way to the
Valley of the Kings. It was his eye that carried him forward, both by what
he drew or bought and, figuratively, because he recognised what was really
important. To grasp fully his achievement, visit Howard Carter Before
Tutankhamen at the BM (till May 31), and look at his watercolours, his
plans, and the wonderful pieces he bought for his collectors. An entrancing
video, slowed down to cut out the jerky movements of 1920s film, shows him
at work. Tut brought blessings, not curses.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XXI
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3689</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLFAYAEVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921205
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  05 DEC 92 / Arts: The orient survives in Mayfair - Lean times for some
dealers are opportune for others
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By SUSAN MOORE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MOUNT Street and adjoining Davies Street in London's Mayfair boast the
highest concentration of top oriental art dealers in the world. The last
year, however, the royal warrant holder, John Sparks Ltd (established
1888)closed and Barling of Mount Street (established 1946), which dominated
the Chinese furniture market, ceased trading in June; Japanese ceramics
specialists Helen Buxton Ltd locked their doors for the last time last month
and other famous names are conspicuous for their lack of activity - and
stock.
Barling's proprietor Nicholas Grindley believed his most positive response
to a threatened 110 per cent rent increase was to call in the receiver. He
plans to return to business as a private dealer. Helen Buxton found that her
diminishing profits could no longer justify the expense of a shop. She
decided to sell most of her stock at auction, reinvest at new prices, and
deal from home.
Five former antique shops now sit empty on the south side of Mount Street.
Moreover, the arrival of Jacuzzi showrooms and hairdressers seems set to
change the character of one of the most elegant and exclusive shopping
parades in Europe. Of the oriental art dealers, only Speelman and Oriental
Bronzes Ltd remain. Landlords and financial backers are proving a far
greater threat to London's dealers during this recession than the auction
houses ever were.
However, lean times for some are also opportune times for others wishing to
make the move to Mayfair. In the last year, for instance, the asking rental
for the Sparks shop, arguably the best in Mount Street, has dropped over
Pounds 20,000 to Pounds 64,000 per annum for a full repairing lease. Last
month, Pelham Galleries, distinguished furniture dealers, left the Fulham
Road to re-open at Nos. 24 and 25 Mount Street, and a promising new venture,
The Oriental Art Gallery, opened its doors at No 4 Davies Street. Kensington
Church Street dealers are also rumoured to be off to Davies Street.
This week sees the inaugural exhibition of The Oriental Art Gallery Ltd. The
firm's directors - and proprietors - are Gerard Hawthorn, formerly of Sydney
L. Moss, and virtually the entire old oriental department of Spink: Roger
Keverne, Ben Janssens and Miranda Clarke. Some three years ago, Messers
Hawthorn and Keverne had attempted to take over the troubled John Sparks
Ltd. Its demise, they believe, has left a gaping hole in the marketplace for
a general oriental art dealer. In their new enterprise they aim to keep
their inventory as large and as diverse as possible.
The 127 pieces on show reflect this strategy. Objects range from an archaic
Chinese bronze food vessel or ding from the late Shang Dynasty (12th/11th
century BC) to porcelain, glass, silver, furniture, lacquer, ivory, jades
and other carved hardstones, cloisonne enamel, and textiles. There is even
the odd Indian or Khmer sculpture. Most of the pieces are fresh to the
market and among the finest of their type - however modest. Prices range
from Pounds 525 to Pounds 28,000. The exhibition opens on Wednesday.
Eskenazi, in contrast, opens a valedictory show, the last at its present
gallery. In the spring the firm moves to its own building, No. 10 Clifford
Street, off Bond Street. While The Oriental Art Gallery offers something for
everyone, this exhibition focuses on one of the most subtle and recherche
fields of collecting: early Chinese lacquer.
Almost all of the pieces on offer come from the collection of the late
Jean-Pierre Dubosc, a notable scholar-cum-dealer- cum-art adviser. It was in
Japan during the 1960s that he began to appreciate the quiet beauty of early
Chinese lacquer, then little appreciated. He encouraged museums to assemble
notable holdings; part of his own is already in the Asian Art Museum in San
Francisco.
Lacquer is a time-consuming, precise art. The 14th century Yuan period red
lacquer dish decorated with melons and heavily veined foliage, for instance,
was probably painstakingly built up and carved over a period of years. Each
thin layer of lacquer could only be applied when the previous one had dried
slowly to the correct consistency. The beguilingly simple Song period
(11th-12th century) dish in the form of a seven-petalled mallow flower is
the show's tour-de-force of exquisite understatement. It is as light as a
wafer, and far more agreeable to handle than chilly porcelain, a medium
lacquer greatly influenced.
Today, the tables have turned and lacquer is far less valuable than
porcelain, although - or perhaps because - it survives in far greater
quantities. Prices range from Pounds 12,000-Pounds 90,000. The show runs at
Foxglove House, 166 Piccadilly, W1, December 8-22.
Back at No. 96 Mount Street, Christian Deydier of Oriental Bronzes shows a
spectacular Han Dynasty (206BC-AD 220) bronze horse for one day only,
December 8. This noble beast, 1.27m high, was one of perhaps two or four
tomb horses made to accompany a chariot. He is for our delectation only; he
cost 'many millions' and has already been sold.
At Spink's, meanwhile, Michael Spink has returned to the family firm as
director in charge of the South East Asian, Himalayan, Indian and Islamic
departments. This month sees the firm branching out to offer Arts and Crafts
British jewellery for the first time. At 5-7 King Street, St James's, until
December 24, is jewellery by the likes of the Gaskins, George Hunt, Sybil
Dunlop, Mosheh Oved and Omar Ramsden - plus an entirely new discovery, Maud
Eastman.
Highly wearable are Sybil Dunlop's 'Carpet of Gems' jewels - richly coloured
semi-precious stones, boldly set and redolent of Indian jewellery. Her
rectangular brooch set with green and pink tourmalines, fire opals and
citrines in the form of a vine, of around 1925, is yours for Pounds 2,500.
Maud Eastman's necklace of faceted rock crystal, rose quartz and beads is a
delight - and a more reasonable Pounds 1,500. Prices start at Pounds 750.
Her necklaces are more feminine versions of those by the contemporary
sculptor-jeweller Breon O'Casey, hand-cut out of lapis lazuli, amber,
moonstone and carnelian. O'Casey's jewellery has a powerful, primitive
quality, and is on show at the Oxford Gallery (23 High Street, Oxford) until
January 6. Prices Pounds 280-Pounds 3,900.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XX
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3690</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLFAYAEUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921205
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  05 DEC 92 / Arts: Historic Van Gogh - Saleroom
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NICHOLAS POWELL
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ONE OF Van Gogh's very last paintings, 'Jardin a Auvers' which has not been
seen in public since the war, goes on display today in Paris's Drouot sale
rooms and tomorrow night becomes the first ever historic monument to be put
up for auction in France.
Auctioneer Jean-Claude Binoche has put an estimate of between Fr50-80m
(around Pounds 602,000 to Pounds 960,000) on the work which he thinks could
have fetched up to Fr300m (Pounds 3,610,000) if its peculiar status did not
prevent it leaving the country. Made an historic monument in 1988 because of
the scarcity of works by Van Gogh in France's public collections - there are
25 in all - 'Jardin a Auvers', even with its modest estimate, would easily
gobble up the entire annual purchasing budget of French Museums. Paris's
Musee d'Orsay, the keenest candidate for the canvas, is praying that
whichever French collector does buy the painting will make it into a
'dation' - a work of art offered to the state in lieu of death duties.
'Jardin a Auvers' was painted in July 1890 just days before Van Gogh killed
himself while staying at Auvers-sur-Oise near Paris with Dr Paul-Ferdinand
Gachet. It is the first major work by Van Gogh to come up for sale since his
painting of his host and physician 'Portrait du Dr Gachet', executed June
3-5, 1890, broke all auction house records by fetching Dollars 82,500,000
(Pounds 43,107,142) at Christie's New York in May 1990 - just before the art
market bubble burst.
Measuring 64 by 80cm 'Jardin a Auvers' was probably painted in two sessions.
It depicts a corner of a very formal French garden, without horizon or sky,
given dizzying bright movement by a variety of brush strokes with which Van
Gogh was experimenting at the time. Last exhibited in 1945 at the Stedelijk
Museum in Amsterdam, it was sold to its present owner, French collector
Jacques Walter in 1954 from the collection of Mrs Alice Kurtz.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XX
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3691</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLFAYAETFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921205
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  05 DEC 92 / Arts: Poles apart - Poetry in performance
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL GLOVER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
LIKE Manchester, the Polish city of Lodz was a prosperous place in the 19th
century thanks to its flourishing textile industries. By the time the
English poet Stephen Romer spent a year there in the immediate aftermath of
the upheavals of 1989, all that had changed. What Romer experienced during
that year has been recorded in a memorable sequence of poems that form the
last part of his new book, Plato's Ladder (Oxford, Pounds 6.99), this
autumn's choice of the Poetry Book Society, from which he read at the Voice
Box last week.
According to the Polish poet Adam Zagajewski, too many observers from
outside foolishly regard Poland as a kind of 'fairy tale, defenceless land'.
They transform it in their writing into a caricature of itself. Romer's
poems avoid that kind of wilful dishonesty by means of clear reportage.
Romer began by recording his obsession with the painful physical
circumstances of his life there - the terrible flat in which he lived,
'worse than Bleaney's', where each room seemed to be a wind tunnel and every
morning he would have to remove the film of black dirt from his windowsill.
He lived opposite a power station. Beneath the window, he could see a
grotesque socialist-realist sculpture group entitled 'The Titans', each one
'black from implementing the future'. And on Friday nights he watched
workers, drunk in the snow reeling about like 'bulky moonmen'.
Looking back at Lodz's history, there is a sense of shame in the poems about
the Ghetto. Lodz, unlike Warsaw, experienced no uprising. Its spiritual
elder, Mordecai Chaim Rumkowski, was a very accommodating man, ensuring that
his flock did exactly what the Nazis required of them, including satisfying
the deportation quotas. He caused his fellow Jews to die in pursuit of the
vain hope of a promised survival. Romer's poems are a vivid sequence of
sketches, lapidary, epigrammatic; moments, captured and recorded, from an
anguished period of his life.
Romer's poems, clearly expressed, were pungent in the choice of detail; and
he read them self-effacingly as if it were the poems that were important and
not the poet himself. Glyn Maxwell on the other hand, another young English
poet who read at the Voice Box recently, is seldom easy to listen to because
his brash personality gets in the way of the poetry. Maxwell was recently
described by America's former Poet Laureate, Joseph Brodsky, as 'the great
white hope of English poetry', and there is a great deal to admire in his
work. Like the young Auden, he is prolific and tirelessly experimental.
Although a new book had appeared only months ago (Out of the Rain, Bloodaxe
Books, Pounds 6.95), he had new poems in his hand that he was bursting to
share with us.
The best of these, 'Poets of the Compass', 'The Sarajevo Zoo', 'Ost', and
'The Devil at War' explore the themes of unrest in Europe, the situation of
Berlin; and more general ideas about westernness, easternness, northernness,
etc. 'The Sarajevo Zoo', which he wrote he had read of the plight of the
last bear remaining there, had a great poignancy: 'The nothing they had
between those hands was hope'. Maxwell soaks up everything, very quickly. He
feels vehemently. He writes compulsively. But occasionally, like Milton in
that great sonnet, he might serve his muse the better by merely standing and
waiting.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XX
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3692</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLFAYAESFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921205
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  05 DEC 92 / Arts: A mature achievers' gala - A multi-purpose arts centre
with a difference
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANTONY THORNCROFT
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
'THE FRIENDS of Raymond Kravis' sounds like the title of a Black Mask pulp
thriller. Actually they are responsible for a different kind of fantasy,
exposing the world to yet another multi-purpose arts centre, or rather
Center.
For the Kravis is in Palm Beach, Florida, which the Centre's managing
director, Paul Beard, describes as 'frontier country for the arts'. And not
smart Palm Beach, the narrow island where millionaires are vulgar and
billionaires common, but West Palm Beach, on the mainland and very much the
other side of the social tracks.
It is even worse than that. With such a venture as the Kravis, a Dollars 55m
investment, many deals needed to be made. One deal envisaged it as the
centrepiece for an urban regeneration programme, rubbing a little of Palm
Beach affluence into the West. A black shanty town was demolished. But then
the developer's money ran out and the Kravis stands, like a marooned,
cultural capsule stranded out of time, surrounded by scrub.
There is also something other-worldly about the building. Architect Eberhard
Zeidler has given it plenty of light and space, with vast public areas where
the locals can indulge their favourite pastime - appraising each other.
After too much reality, he lets them pass through to a traditional
red-plush, 2,100 seat auditorium, which is something like a 1930's Odeon
with Egyptian pretensions.
But the Kravis is up and running. The friends of Raymond Kravis, a 91 year
old retired Oklahoma oil man, put up Dollars 10m; the State of Florida and
the County of Palm Beach found Dollars 17m between them; and the rest of the
money just poured in from the locals, 15 of whom gave over Dollars 1m. It
was a weird exercise. Most of the money comes from those fleeing the snow,
who like to winter at Palm Beach during its short smart season.
They were wooed by a Massachusetts electronics tycoon, Alex Dreyfoos, who is
the driving force behind the project. His involvement was not totally
altruistic, however. He found it difficult to tempt bright Boston men to
work on his Florida interests because the place was a cultural desert.
Dreyfoos, an arts lover, formed a local Arts Council and then mooted the
idea of an arts centre. It was hard going. Then: 'I raised my sights. I said
we were building a world class venue and wanted much more money. The rich
responded to this larger budget. One man told me 'Alex, I know nothing about
the arts but I don't want my children to say that''.
Being Palm Beach the Kravis opened with a Dollars 1.5m gala, of which
Dollars 500,000 went to the blossoming endowment fund and Dollars 1m towards
recruiting a cast to match the audience - mature achievers. The star was
undoubtedly Ella Fitzgerald. She is almost blind now; she is lame; she is
wheeled to the centre of the stage where an audience, and almost 60 years of
experience, jolted her into life. She still hits more beautifully rounded
notes than any other popular singer; there is a poignancy to her performance
of 'My ship has sailed' that is unmatchable.
She was a brief interlude of grace amid the razzmatazz of Faith Prince,
whose Miss Adelaide from Guys and Dolls is the current Broadway smash; the
equally boisterous Isaac Stern, breezing his way through the Bruch violin
sonata; Lily Tomlin, who performed her infuriatingly twee telephone operator
party piece; and Leontyne Price, who can still belt out the Puccini. As
galas go it went quite quickly, shooed along by the local boy made good,
Burt Reynolds, who was laid back to the point of torpor.
Many of the artists reappeared during the week in full flow. The Alvin Ailey
Dance Theater may be in danger of severe stereotyping, as they wiggle and
pout their way through the blues routine, shimmy and salaam in the gospel
rousers and so on, but there remains a black intensity which holds the eyes.
Leontyne Price beautifully scores - and almost as beautifully misses - in
her well rounded recital of songs and arias, sounding better on the Handel
than with American songs set to poems by Emily Dickinson, when her diction
can be perverse.
The Kravis was given its first major sound test by the Atlanta Symphony
playing Beethoven under Yoel Levi. The acoustics were handled by Russell
Johnson's company Artec, on a high after its success with concert halls in
Dallas and Birmingham. The Kravis is rather dull in comparison. The sound
hardly engulfs the audience, with the strings sounding better than the
brass.
Not that too many international orchestras will be playing the Kravis in the
immediate future. The programming is sensible to the point of caution.
During the winter months the rich transients get what they like - big names
peddling memories: so welcome Frank Sinatra, Liza Minnelli, Julio Iglesias
and Victor Borge.
But in the summer things will be different. The Mayor of Palm Beach, Nancy
Graham, is a great supporter of the arts. The Kravis will be used to bring a
disparate community together. There have already been free performances for
children and minority groups. The deserted High School across the road,
Reynolds' Alma Mater, is planned to become Florida's School for the
Performing Arts, feeding off the Kravis.
Within five years the Kravis should be the nub of a new, mixed,
neighbourhood, which looks to it for mental, cultural, and indeed spiritual,
stimulation. At the very least the Kravis will anchor some of the local arts
organisations - the Palm Beach Opera, Ballet Florida, the Florida
Philharmonic - which will develop from this base. It will become an
attractive magnet, along with new arts centres at nearby Fort Lauderdale and
elsewhere in Florida, for touring international arts groups.
Artistic director Judith Shepherd is moving slowly. For two years she will
nurse her two suspicious audiences, the sceptical rich and the dubious poor,
with an undemanding mix of the popular and the light classical. Then she
will raise their cultural imaginations, adding more international orchestras
and opera companies, and a late spring arts festival, which will build up to
make the Kravis a force in the arts world. After the obstacles already
overcome, it looks like a cakewalk.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XX
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3693</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLFAYAERFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921205
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  05 DEC 92 / Gardening: Peat bogs get the bird - Country View
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL WOODS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
IF THE boom of the bittern is a sound which stirs your heart, or you thrill
to the long low glide of a marsh harrier floating above feathery reed heads
bending in the breeze, then the Somerset Levels will certainly be worth
visiting.
The Somerset Trust for Nature Conservation has secured Pounds 90,000 from
the EC towards a Pounds 180,000 pilot project to turn worked-out peat
diggings into areas for suitable wildlife.
Although it still needs to raise a large proportion of the remainder, it has
already put in hand the initial stages of the project work.
The final area, dubbed the Avalon Marshes, should exceed 3,500 acres
although the pilot scheme will look at less than 10 per cent of that.
Nevertheless, the announcement that the freehold of Fison's peat bogs will
be passing to English Nature - although the company intends to continue
working many of them - may help to increase this figure before the end of
the project.
As a result the trust has given a cautious welcome to Fisons' proposals
largely because, in that company's Somerset ownership, there is little
original peat bog left to destroy.
Conservationists are much more worried about the indirect effects of the
peat industry for the continued pumping, necessary to lower water levels for
peat extraction, is still damaging wildlife reserves of national importance.
Peat is funny stuff. When it is wet it can become so waterlogged it turn
almost to slurry, but if it ever dries out then it is difficult to
impregnate with water again. Rain runs off or slides into the surface cracks
and then trickles out of these into the ditches leaving the underlying peat
dry, friable and constantly shrinking.
Fisons has promised to take immediate measures to protect the water table
but one Somerset Trust reserve is so badly desiccated that Dr Christopher
Hancock, conservation officer, says it will be touch and go to save it.
Usually little peat is left once the extracting companies have finished and
most of the peat diggings have been stripped down to their clay beds.
By carefully using a mixture of clay and what little peat does remain, a
mosaic of islands, reed beds and deeper water can be created.
For five years the trust has worked wonders on a small reserve of 66 acres
within the pilot study area.
The list of birds to be seen from its hides is impressive and includes reed
warbler, Cetti's warbler, water rail, various species of duck, including
breeding gadwall and garganey and, yes, marsh harrier and bittern do call in
from time to time.
But while the Avalon Marshes may sound like a location from an Arthurian
legend, the area will not look as it did before peat was extracted to feed
the enormous appetites of garden centres nor will it have the same wildlife
interest.
Instead, it will appear very much as it did 6,000 years ago, before the peat
began to build up. Restoration is going to be a long-term project.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XIX
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3694</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLFAYAEQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921205
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  05 DEC 92 / Gardening: Dealing with a floating front lawn - Tackling the
ravages of wet weather
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBIN LANE FOX
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THERE HAS never been such a prelude to deep winter: rain, rain and more
rain, until even the authorities in Kent have had to lift their ban on
hosepipes. Before you paddle off Christmas shopping, there are urgent
problems in your floating garden: some of them are stored for the future,
others are oversights which we like to pretend do not exist.
Looking forward, I see problems from footprints and serious danger for
flower pots. We cannot give up weeding, cutting down and replanting just
because it is a wet year, but these jobs oblige us to walk on flower beds.
Wellingtons squash the ground between border plants and flatten it into wet
cake. Whenever you are walking on the soil, be sure to lay down short planks
of wood and use them as your pedestals and tractor-treads. By spreading your
weight they stop you packing the soil so that it becomes unworkable next
spring. Fork over the ground beneath the planks as you remove them and beat
your retreat.
Flower pots need more urgent attention. The soil inside them is sopping wet
and gallons of rainwater have now drained through ornamental terracotta
urns. The first heavy frost will ice the pots on to any hard surface on
which they are standing: iced bottoms are a major reason why expensive pots
from Spain or the Far East disintegrate outdoors.
Instead, stand them on two upturned bricks or stones so that their drainage
holes are raised above the ground. The water will then run through without
freezing the pot on to its supporting surface. This protection needs action
now, before nature compounds her hostility and freezes up before Christmas.
Inside urns and large pots, remember that flower bulbs are having a
prolonged baptism. Usually, I leave them uncovered and merely hope that
winter will not freeze them and turn them to a soft mush. This year, I am
considering the example of some of our biggest public gardens where pots are
surfaced with thick plastic, lashed into place until late winter.
These defences cannot remain in place much later than the end of January
because hyacinths, daffodils and so forth will then be nosing their way
through the ground. This year, however, the soil begins from such a wet
point that a fall of snow on top of it will multiply the muddiness and the
mess from thawing frost. It may be wise to cover up potted bulbs for safety,
at least for the next six weeks or so.
As for the oversights, they concern tulips, spring bedding and the other
Dutch bulbs which you bought forwards in August, fearing chaos in the
currency markets. The fall in the pound has already pushed their prices up
by 15 per cent and nobody wants to be losing stock for next year. After a
call auction on tulips, I am still struggling to plant the delivered bulbs
in all the drizzle. What can you do if you still have tulips, wallflowers,
forget-me-nots and even some crocuses with young shoots like yellow tusks
sitting unplanted in brown paper bags?
Despite the books' advice, all is not lost. Tulips, certainly, will not fail
to flower if you plant them as deep as you can during the next fortnight. In
wet ground, accurate planting is more difficult, but you must be sure that
the bulb is sitting firmly on earth underneath it, not sideways on a pocket
of air. Indoors, some of the bulbs may have lost their outer brown tunics,
but even if you plant them looking white and naked, most of them will still
survive. They are merely more prone to diseases, especially to mould in wet
soil. If any of them are already showing tell-tale spots of
greenish-blue,throw them out before planting.
Unplanted crocuses are all shoots, no roots, but they will settle, flower
and survive even if you plant them as late as the next 10 days. Th effects
may show in 1994 when fewer corms will have grown on and made up for lost
progress. However, I still have some satisfactory plants which were planted
as late as December 18: human delay is not as dangerous to them as the
deadly attention of mice.
Forget-me-nots and wallflowers are much more obliging. Plants can still be
moved around whenever the ground is workable: those which I planted in early
October have made little more progress and those still waiting on the
sidelines. This year, the main difficulty is that wallflowers have made such
wretchedly small plants. Do not blame your carelessness: professional
growers have fared no better and tell me that they blame a dry start, a cold
spell in summer and the rain from July onwards which flattened the soil and
prevented plants from forming proper roots.
Throughout the autumn, I have been grappling with wallflowers in my two
chosen colours, Primrose Bedder and Scarlet Bedder, thinking vague thoughts
about which I would choose if they were females, not wallflowers. As plants,
nobody could have picked them for choice, because they are under-developed.
Meanwhile, I am making the best of my trump card for spring gardening: it
involves the scattering of bedding plants in the gaps down herbaceous
borders. Six years ago, we started to revive this old unorthodoxy in the
long borders in my Oxford college. Wallflowers are much the best bet,
because their roots do not run hungrily and drain too much goodness from the
soil. The art is to pack in separate clumps of wallflowers in civilised
colours wherever border plants have retreated ot their main root stocks and
left gaps in the soil. Wallflowers fill in and can be ripped out and thrown
away when the border begins to fill out in late May.
Even now, it is not too late for this easy task. If you have a choice, avoid
the mixed colours which are most widely available because they include a
high proportion of the vigorous orange varieties. Their colour is rather
beastly, a poor mix for the deeper reds and pale yellows. The job is so
rewarding because it doubles a border's season in the simplest way.
These spring bedding plants do not require their own special bed, let alone
a personal space on a roundabout by courtesy of your local council. They are
plants like any others: walk the plank on wet soil between your borders and
even at this late date, you can strike a blow for a brighter spring.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XIX
</PAGE>
</DOC>
