<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1492</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAF6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Survey of Zambia (13): Key Facts
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                              KEY FACTS
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Area                                                     752,614 sq km
Population                                                8.15 million
Head of State                              President Frederick Chiluba
Currency                                            Zambian Kwacha (K)
Average Exchange Rate                          Dec 1990 Dollars 1=42.7
                                                Dec 1992 Dollars 1=315
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
ECONOMY                                                 1990       1991
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Total GDP (Dollars bn)                                 3.910      3.293
Real GDP growth (%)                                     -0.5       -1.8
Components of GDP (%)
Private consumption                                     54.1       na
Total investment                                        27.0       na
Government consumption                                  19.7       na
Exports                                                 21.4       na
Imports                                                 -4.5       na
Inflation (%)*                                         111.0       93.4
Copper output (000's tons)                               422        396
Total external debt (Dollars bn)                        7.22       7.60
 Debt service ratio (%)**                               12.8       13.5
Reserves minus gold (Dollars m)                        193.1      184.6
Current account balance (Dollars m)                     -105       -448
Exports (Dollars m)                                    1,350      1,125
Imports (Dollars m)                                    1,298        950
Trade balance (Dollars m)                                 52        175
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Main trading partners (%)***                         Exports    Imports
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Australia                                               28.7        0.0
Industrial countries                                    63.4       41.7
Developing countries                                    36.6       58.0
Africa                                                   5.0       47.0
EC                                                      29.6       25.2
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
*   Annual average;
**  Total debt service as a percentage of exports;
*** Percentage share by value in 1991
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: IMF, World Bank, Datastream, Economist Intelligence Unit
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page VI
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1493</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAF5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Survey of Zambia (12): Fiscal restraint needed - The success
of deregulation depends on curbing borrowing
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TONY HAWKINS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
'OUR main preoccupation' says Mr Dominic Mulaisho, the new governor of the
Bank of Zambia 'is to free the system'. He has been as good as his word. The
financial markets have been the target of sweeping reforms culminating in
the unification of the official and free market exchange rates a fortnight
ago.
Before Christmas too, the Bank of Zambia plans to launch a Treasury bill
auction system - the final step in interest rate deregulation.
The previous administration was forced by the IMF and World Bank to accept
financial sector reform in 1989 but after dipping its toe in the water, it
beat a hasty retreat. The Kaunda government's final year in office (1991)
was a monetary disaster, with money supply increasing 100 per cent and
inflation running at 400 per cent.
As a result of this and the drought, the mid-1992 public sector wage awards,
devaluation and increased export earnings, inflation has remained out of
control. Money supply over 1992 is likely to double, while inflation is
estimated at 120 per cent.
The central bank has done everything possible to regain control over the
monetary aggregates, abandoning interest rate capping, retaining control
over the Treasury bill rate - a key component - which is pegged at 54 per
cent. It raised the statutory reserve and 'inner reserve' ratios to about 67
per cent, which means banks are able to lend only K33 for every K100 of
deposits.
The paradoxical result is a market with money supply growing at 100 per
cent, primarily the result of government borrowing and export receipts,
while a banking system strapped for cash is lending to prime customers at 70
to 75 per cent.
The explanation is simple. As fast as the government pumps liquidity into
the system - in the year to August, government borrowing from the banks,
including the Bank of Zambia, rose 300 per cent - the central bank is
sterilising it with its high reserve ratios.
But sterilisation, especially of the 'excess' earnings of the copper mines -
earnings over and above the agreed price - was not effective in the third
quarter and this, combined with the budget deficit pushed money supply
growth above the IMF target ceilings.
Solving the problem will mean stopping government borrowing from the banks,
which in turn means eliminating the budget deficit or funding that deficit
in a non-inflationary way by borrowing from the non-bank private sector.
The central bank's courageous reforms will work only if the 1993 budget
bites the bullet of fiscal restraint, opening the door to reduced money
supply growth and inflation and relative exchange rate stability.
The new auction system for Treasury bills means the authorities will replace
control over the cost of government's short-term borrowings with control
over the quantity of funds raised.
This is likely to mean a further rise in interest rates which are expected
to become positive in real terms during 1993 as inflation falls. Money
supply growth and inflation should average less than 50 per cent next year,
while on a year-on-year basis they should fall below 20 per cent towards the
end of 1993.
The foreign exchange market has been progressively liberalised with export
retentions increased in March from 50 per cent to 100 per cent for
'non-traditional exporters'.
From the end of April, individuals were allowed to tap the more favourable
rate in the retentions market to convert foreign currency into Kwacha.
The two big reforms came more recently. In mid-October, the bureau de change
system opened allowing Zambians and foreigners to buy and sell foreign
currency on a 'no questions asked' basis. This system has largely replaced
the parallel market, although some black market transactions continue. Its
importance, according to Mr Mulaisho, is that Zambians themselves, not the
government or central bank, now decide at what rate they wish to buy foreign
exchange.
Two weeks ago, the official rate - at the time K247 to the dollar - was
merged with the bureau and retentions market rate of K323. The government is
now out of the exchange rate market although it retains influence on the
supply of foreign exchange earned by the copper mines.
The merging of the two exchange rate markets will spawn another inflationary
blip.
But if the ministry of finance delivers the promised balanced budget in
January, government borrowing will fall, as will the rate of money supply
growth and the yield on Treasury bills. As this happens the authorities will
be able to reduce the banks' liquidity ratios enabling them to lend more to
private enterprise.
The banks - while victims of some of these reforms and complaining that
policy changes have been implemented too quickly - are delighted with the
general thrust of government policy.
Their worries include having sufficient resources to finance the
agriculture-led recovery which, weather permitting, Zambia hopes to achieve
in 1993 as well as being able to provide medium and even longer-term funds
in a country which has no capital market infrastructure.
This is a gaping hole which urgently needs to be tackled. There are plans to
set up a Stock Exchange and some of the banks talk of launching equity funds
or venture capital arms to finance private sector investment.
The success of monetarism, Zambian-style depends on conquering inflation,
which will be a long haul, and on shifting the focus of banking activities
away from funding the government to financing the movers and shakers in the
private sector on whom the ultimate fate of the economic reform programme
depends.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page VI
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1494</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAF4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Survey of Zambia (11): A secret too well kept - While its
minister is optimistic for the future, tourism lacks lustre
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PHILIP GAWITH and MICHAEL HOLMAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
WITH attractions that range from the sandy beaches of Lake Tanganyika to the
Luangwa game parks, the Victoria Falls, Lake Kariba and the magnificent
Zambezi River, tourism in Zambia should be booming.
In fact, the potential has barely been tapped. Private sector initiative was
stifled during the Kaunda era, state-run hotels were inefficient, the
infrastucture deteriorated as the economy declined and many would-be
visitors were put off by the wars in the region. Meanwhile poaching
flourished, often with the assistance of senior government officials.
Overcoming this legacy will be a demanding task. The sector needs
substantial investment at a time when government resources are scarce. The
expansion of hotel capacity and allocation of new hunting concessions and
sites for new game lodges needs careful planning. The expected growth in the
numbers of private safari operators needs supervision.
So far, there is little evidence that the country's tourist authorities have
come to grips with the challenge. One pressing problem is that of Zambia
Airways, the unreliable state-owned airline now facing privatisation, which
is a heavily subsidised national liability.
Nor does the National Tourist Board inspire confidence: its drab office off
Lusaka's Cairo Road, display windows bare but for fading posters, offers a
useful glossy brochure but no more.
Visitors are directed to travel agents, many of whom seem better informed
about holiday packages in London than expeditions to the Luangwa Valley,
which offers some of the best game viewing in Africa.
The poor local presentation of what Zambia has to offer may not affect the
visitor arriving on a package trip sold to them by their local agents but it
is a striking contrast with the energetic way in which Kenya, Zimbabwe and
South Africa are competing in the tourist market.
Since the Victoria Falls, Kariba and the Zambezi river are shared with
Zimbabwe, the competition is especially tough.
But if optimism is the main ingredient of a successful revamp of the sector,
Mr Christian Tembo, the former army general who holds the tourism portfolio,
is the man for the job.
Visitors will double by the end of 1995 to from current levels to just under
400,000, forecasts Mr Tembo, and foreign exchange earnings will top Dollars
115m.
The devaluation of the kwacha, Zambia's more favourable international image
as a multi-party democracy, vigorous marketing abroad and lifting
restrictions on South African passport holders will all help to meet this
target, says the minister.
Existing hotels operate well below capacity - the national average for room
occupation is around 50 per cent.
Meanwhile Mr Tembo anticipates that both quality and capacity will rise:
there have been over 80 applications from abroad (over half from South
Africa) to take over and upgrade existing hotels or build new ones.
Incentives for investors are generous, notes the minister, and include a tax
free period of up to seven years. Business travel guide
Few countries in Africa can match the warmth of Zambia's welcome to the
visitor. But be prepared for frustrations - years of economic decline have
taken a heavy toll: hotels need refurbishing, car hire fleets need
replacing, taxis are on their last set of bald tyres, the telephone service
can be erratic.
Lusaka is the capital and seat of government, but the industrial hub is the
Copperbelt towns of Ndola and Kitwe. Zambia Airways has daily flights to the
Copperbelt but many businessmen prefer a private operator, Roan Air.
For a short break from Lusaka, try Lilayi Lodge (Lusaka 228682/3), a cluster
of thatched rondavels with swimming pool and situated at the heart of a
private game reserve, 30 minutes' drive from Lusaka. An hour away is Lechwe
Lodge (Lusaka 222083/4), on the banks of the Kafue River, set in 2,000 acres
of private game ranch. Zintu, at the Ridgeway Hotel, has an excellent range
of traditional and modern Zambian handicrafts and the Mpapa gallery art
gallery is worth visiting.
Where to stay:
Lusaka
Pamodzi:
tel: 227975; telex: 44720;
fax: 254005/250995
Intercontinental:
tel: 227911/15; telex 4144 Ridgeway/229222; Ndola
Mukuba Hotel:
tel: 655545/9; telex 30077;
fax 655729
Savoy Hotel:
tel: 611097; telex 30020
Livingstone
Musi-Oa-Tunya
Intercontinental Hotel:
tel: 3201121/9
Visas:
Visas are issued on arrival at the airport. The fee is Dollars 9 and two
passport photos are required.
Health:
Take malaria precautions; Aids is widespread.
Leaving:
There is an airport departure tax of Dollars 20.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page VI
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1495</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAF3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Survey of Zambia (8): Turning point for farming - Severe
drought and radical reforms have transformed the sector
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL HOLMAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
IT HAS been the year of the drought in Zambia. But it has also been a year
which has seen the most fundamental agricultural reforms since independence.
Provided government implements the overall economic reform programme,
farmers may well look back on 1992 as a turning point in agriculture's
fortunes.
Given normal weather, says Mr Guy Scott, the energetic minister of
agriculture, 1993 could be the year when Zambia started to realise the
potential of what Mr Scott, a former farmer, describes as the country's most
valuable resource - 9m hectares of good arable land, of which only a fifth
is utilised.
The impact of the region's worst drought in living memory makes conventional
assessment of Zambia's agricultural sector almost impossible, the minister
acknowledges. But the statistics of a disaster which has brought about a 10
per cent fall in GDP this year are ready to hand. The country's staple food
 -the maize crop - has been devastated and many farmers are fighting for
survival.
Yet Zambia has emerged remarkably well from what could have become a
catastrophe, Mr Scott points out. The government and non-government
organisations (NGOs) have joined forces to run a widely acclaimed relief
operation which may provide lessons for the rest of Africa.
Rains for the 1991-2 season were 60 per cent below normal, and the
marketable surplus of maize normally around 1.2m tons, fell to 250,000 tons.
At the end of February the government declared a national disaster and set
in train efforts to find and distribute 950,000 tons of feed grains.
By May 245,000 tons of maize had been bought by government from its own
resources. Donor assistance in cash and kind ensured that the food supply
target was met.
However, ensuring the food reaches those in greatest need and that food aid
is not manipulated by government and politicians for profit or patronage
proved more difficult.
The Zambian solution was 'to remove the temptation and to cut the red tape',
as one official put it. An NGO was created with government's blessing to
help handle the disaster. Overseeing the exercise is the Programme to
Prevent Malnutrition - a committee chaired by the minister of health and
including representatives of the ministries of agriculture, finance, water
affairs and community development.
Working with government officials are representatives of the World Food
Programme, Unicef and a wide range of NGOs, churches and community
organisations.
But crucial to the success of the relief operation has been an NGO created
for the operation, the Programme against Malnutrition, whose staff backs up
the aid organisations, reports on the use of donated food to the World Food
Programme and accounts for aid funds to the ministry of finance and donors.
Committees covering the drought-affected areas include community leaders
drawn from churches, hospitals and schools. The PPM provides money to NGOs
to subsidise transport costs of taking food to remote areas. Families unable
to pay for maize participate in food-for-work schemes, ranging from mending
rural roads to repairing schools desk. The old and the sick receive free
food.
It is, say donors, one of Africa's most efficient food relief projects. But
equally important, says Mr Scott, are the radical changes being made in
agricultural policy.
According to a recent editorial in Productive Farming, the journal of the
National Farmers' Union, since independence 'one of the main obstacles to
farming progress was the gross inefficiency of the state marketing system.
It was illegal to sell maize and other scheduled crops except to authorised
government bodies'.
It goes on: 'Bureaucracy, inefficiency, theft, painfully slow handling of
crops, wasteful distribution and storage, failure to provide farming inputs,
long delays between crop delivery and payment, all contributed to a dismal
performance, costly to the tax payer and infuriating to the farmer'.
To the delight of farmers - including some 400 white farmers - the
government has drastically reduced state intervention since taking office.
Subsidies on maize meal have been eliminated and producer prices have risen.
Market forces will determine the price for the coming season. Should it
prove necessary to import maize, government has undertaken not to sell it
below Dollars 14 per 90kg bag.
Marketing of fertiliser has also been decontrolled. Subsidies have ended, as
has the state monopoly on fertiliser imports. Although the Nitrogen
Chemicals of Zambia is likely to stay the market leader, it has lost its
monopoly.
But the success of reforms will depend on how government handles credit
facilities for cash-strapped farmers.
All financing for 1993 domestic maize purchases will be handled by private
sector. But tight credit restrictions and high interest rates, make
government intervention likely, says Mr John Hudson, editor of Productive
Farming. Mr Scott acknowledges that credit facilities for agriculture will
be a crucial issue in the months to come. But he knows it will be no easy
task to strike the right balance between helping the farmers and persisting
with tough economic reforms.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page IV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1496</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAF2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Survey of Zambia (10): Tackling new competitors - Profile of
Dunlop
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TONY HAWKINS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MR BOB MAY, managing director of Dunlop Zambia is the kind of industrialist
Zambia needs. A blunt, straight-talking Scot, his task is to bring Dunlop's
Ndola tyre factory up to speed to face the new competition from direct
imports sourced in South Africa and the Far East.
His approach is a refreshing blend of optimism, hard-headed realism and
entrepreneurial flair. He has to convince his London shareholder, BTR, with
its reputation for running a tight ship, that Zambia is a country worthy of
a Dollars 7m investment in the modernisation of the tyre factory, giving
foreign competitors a run for their money while convincing BTR an acceptable
hard-currency will be earned, remittable return on its investment.
In a country with three-digit inflation and a tumbling exchange rate this is
no easy task. Dunlop is able to beat the imported competition partly because
it can undercut suppliers burdened with the amalgam of transport costs,
devaluation, import duties and massive importer margins.
But earning an adequate hard-currency return when the exchange rate has
fallen is a formidable task, the more so since 'existing' investors, of
which Dunlop is one, may remit only 15 per cent of their paid-up capital or
half after-tax profits, whichever is the lesser.
Dunlop plans a modest investment - Dollars 7m over four years - in
modernising its plant, drawing on technology from Dunlop International
Technology in Birmingham. By mid-1993, Dunlop Zambia will introduce a new
generation of tyres, capable of double the mileage of existing products.
The Dunlop story is a familiar one for those with experience of structural
adjustment elsewhere in Africa. After 15 years or more of a de facto
monopoly, Dunlop is now faced with competition from half a dozen direct
importers.
An industry where marketing used to mean rationing supplies to desperate
buyers has changed beyond all recognition. 'We have to change the marketing
mindset,' says Mr May, who is sending his sales staff to work with Dunlop
Nigeria to learn how to market in a competitive environment.
Skills are a problem. The expatriate count is down to six from 17 in 1985.
'We would like to get it down to three,' says Mr May because expatriate
staff are 'savagely expensive'. One way out is networking within the region,
sharing skills with the larger, more modern factory at Bulawayo in
neighbouring Zimbabwe.
If Dunlop's three main investor groups - BTR has a controlling 57 per cent
stake, the government 26 per cent and Anglo American Corporation 16 per cent
 -agree, the modernisation project will go ahead and qualify for the new
investment incentives introduced towards the end of 1991.
Mr May is optimistic about Zambia's industrial potential arguing that
existing firms alone have the scope to expand operations by 30 per cent to
40 per cent although this will have to await the strong farm-led economic
recovery forecast for 1993.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page IV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1497</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAF1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Survey of Zambia (9): Foreign interest mounts - While
investments are as yet only intentions, figures look good
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TONY HAWKINS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A NEW investment code and a new government is doing wonders for Zambia's
foreign investment performance. The country's one-stop investment centre,
set up little more than a year ago when the 1991 Investment Act became law,
approved more than 440 projects worth Dollars 650m in the first nine months
of 1992.
The new investment act targets five main areas - agriculture,
non-traditional exports, import substitution, tourism and 'rural projects'.
The value of investment figures look extremely high, but officials are quick
to point out that this represents intentions rather than 'investment on the
ground', and that approved projects might never be implemented.
Furthermore, the numbers relate both to domestic and foreign investment. A
more conservative figure is that for investment licences actually issued,
which lag behind projects approved. But even here the figures are impressive
 -300 licences issued during the first 10 months of 1992 for projects valued
at Dollars 300m.
Figures for the first half of the year, in which 130 licences were issued,
show foreign exchange 'pledges', as one investment centre official calls
them, of Dollars 128m or 95 per cent of the total value of licences,
implying that the domestic component is only small.
Investments in these five categories, including expansion projects by
existing firms, qualify for a range of investment incentives, including a
three-year tax holiday (followed by two years of 75 per cent tax exemption),
a seven-year tax-holiday on dividends and selective employment tax,
exemption from import and sales taxes and generous export retention
allowances.
The investment code also provides guarantees against expropriation and
allows investors to remit up to 75 per cent of after-tax profits, along with
the principal and interest on foreign loans, management fees and royalties
and the proceeds of asset sales.
The Investment Centre chairman, Mr Evans Chibiliti, makes no secret of the
fact that his organisation has some way to go before he will be satisfied
that it is fully effective.
No structures were in place, he says, until early this year, and initially a
backlog of project approvals built up, although this has now been cleared to
the point where the centre is able to respond within 30 days of an
application being received, as stipulated in the act.
Investors are not required to submit projects through the centre, nor does
it claim to be a fully one-stop operation. Even after acquiring his licence,
the investor still has to do the rounds of the Ministry of Lands, the Bank
of Zambia and the immigration authorities.
The bulk of the inquiries come from medium and small-scale operators and not
the big multinationals. South Africa has shown considerable interest,
although much of it through the note-book rather than the cheque-book.
White farmers from Zimbabwe have been taking a look at maize, tobacco and
horticultural projects, while many existing Zambian firms are expanding and
refurbishing manufacturing operations.
Critics say existing investors are unhappy at an incentive package favouring
the newcomers, arguing that Zambia would do better to cut its corporate tax,
provide guarantees of remittability and abandon the idea of targeted tax
holidays and other incentives.
Centre officials reject this 'level playing field' argument on the grounds
that changes to an investment code, launched less than 18 months ago, would
send the wrong signals. 'What investors want is policy consistency,' says Mr
Chibiliti, although he favours broadening the range of priority sectors to
include healthcare, education and finance.
In spite of this, the government will come forward with important changes to
the code in the budget next month, with businessmen hoping for a lower rate
of company tax and more generous remittability conditions, rather than
targeted incentives.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page IV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1498</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAF0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Survey of Zambia (5): The mood changes - Recovery is in
sight but hard evidence is lacking
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TONY HAWKINS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
AFTER more than a decade during which Zambian economic management was the
butt of cruel jokes, many of them justified, the Zambian economy is on the
mend. But for now, recovery is more a matter of a radical change of mood
since the new administration took office, with little concrete evidence,
other than sweeping deregulation, that the corner has been turned.
'We are pointing in the right direction,' says Mr David Frost, chairman of
the Zambia Confederation of Industries and Chambers of Commerce 'but the
vehicle is stationery, if not still slipping backwards'.
Figures bear this out. Inflation still running at 100 per cent - but down
from 400 per cent in the dying days of the Kaunda administration - money
supply is still out of control, GDP is forecast to fall 10 per cent in 1992
and a pre-rescheduling debt-service ratio of stands at 65 per cent of
exports.
But there are some chinks of light. The 1992 budget deficit, excluding
external debt-service, is down to 2.5 per cent of GDP from 7.5 per cent a
year ago. If drought relief is taken from the numbers, the deficit is only
0.9 per cent - a remarkable achievement.
The Chiluba government has had its share of bad luck. Early forecasts of
marginal economic growth in 1992 were torpedoed by the drought. The Kaunda
administration's desperate final spending spree, designed to buy votes,
translated into surging inflation during 1992. This is turn sparked massive
devaluation with the Kwacha tumbling from K85 to the dollar a year ago to
K325 in early December.
All agree that slaying the inflationary dragon is Zambia's top economic, and
social, priority. The central bank, under the leadership of its new
governor, Mr Dominic Mulaisho, has bravely liberalised financial and foreign
exchange markets, pushing lending rates up to historic highs of 75 per cent
or more for prime borrowers, and forcing the banks to hold two-thirds of
their liabilities to the public in statutory or inner reserves.
With the impending introduction of a Treasury Bill auction system, the
central bank will have abandoned direct controls over interest rates as well
as the exchange rate, leaving the markets to call the tune. 'We are
democratising the economy,' says Mr Mulaisho.
But there is only so much monetary policy can achieve when government
borrowing is out of control. In the year to August, government borrowing
from the banking system rose 300 per cent. Restoring monetary discipline now
requires fiscal restraint.
This is promised for 1993 when the government says it will present a
balanced budget, based on cash limits. This means the government will borrow
only from the market - not the Bank of Zambia - and solely to bridge the gap
between expenditure outgoings and revenue inflows.
At the same time, the cabinet is working on a 'constitutional formula' to
prevent overspending by the line ministries.
Cynics point out that budget balance was the target for 1992 and that one
reason it was breached was because the planned 70 per cent public sector pay
award escalated into one of 120 per cent. The drought added fuel to the
flames as did Zambia Airways, reportedly losing Dollars 3m a month.
Indeed, after meeting the IMF's benchmarks in the second quarter of the
year, in the September quarter the targets were missed and Zambia failed to
accumulate any 'rights' as part of the programme for repaying IMF arrears.
Officials say the programme is now back on track and December benchmarks
will be met, but all agree that the fate of the programme hangs on the
budget to be presented by finance minister Emmanuel Kasonde at the end of
January.
In Paris last week, the government told a sympathetic donor community it
would bring money supply down from its estimate of more than 70 per cent in
1992 to 17 per cent by the end of next year, while inflation would drop to
55 per cent and would be an annualised 20 per cent rate by the final quarter
of 1993. These targets, the government says courageously, are minimum, not
maximum, goals.
Much can, and almost certainly will, go wrong. Few believe that Zambia has
either the managerial skills or the institutional capacity to push through
so challenging a reform programme without mishaps along the way.
The debt overhang and the dependence on copper are further complications as
is the deterioration of the infrastructure and a worsening AIDS epidemic. To
these must be added two human problems: government recognition that the man
in the street desperately needs to see some improvement in his living
standards. 'The political honeymoon is not going to last much longer,' warns
one international banker.
Above all there is the problem of culture change. Zambia has long been a
paternalist society. This mindset has to change. The experience of the past
28 years demonstrates that a government, even with the most laudable
motives, cannot be a fairy godmother.
Formidable though this task may be the transformation of the business mood
is a reminder of the facts of economic life. Change at the top is a
prerequisite for successful recovery and in its first year in office, the
Chiluba administration has breathed new life into an economy which, 18
months ago, seemed in terminal decline.
Investment is a contentious area. Zambia's investment code is 'the best in
the region', according to Mr Bob May, managing director of Dunlop Zambia.
But powerful voices in the business community believe it should be improved.
Officials say the government will introduce further improvements in the
investment code in the January budget.
At the end of its first year in office, Mr Chiluba's government earns high
marks for transparency, for its undisputed commitment to reform and for its
courage.
What remains in doubt is its ability to translate intentions into
performance. Achievements made so far will count for little if, next year,
the government fails the stiff fiscal test of stern budget discipline.
With the local government elections behind it and no need to go the polls
until 1996, now is the time to administer the fiscal dose without which
economic decline will continue.
But there can be no quick fix. Mr Nick Brentall, managing director of
Barclays Bank, Zambia, puts it into context. 'It took us 27 years to get
where we are. We are not going to get out of it in 27 months.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page III
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1499</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Survey of Zambia (6): Donor assistance essential - A
four-pronged strategy is relieving the burden of Dollars 7bn of debt
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TONY HAWKINS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
WITH an external debt at the end of 1991 in excess of Dollars 7bn, Zambia is
one of Africa's most debt-stressed economies. It has more debt per head of
population than any other country in the region.
It has since qualified for what are called 'enhanced Toronto' debt-relief
terms, offering a menu of options to creditors, including 50 per cent debt
forgiveness.
But Zambia's position is unique to the extent that not only does debt owed
to the multilaterals - the IMF, the World Bank and the African Development
Bank - (which technically cannot be rescheduled) make up 44 per cent of
long-term obligations, but it is also in arrears to the IMF to the tune of
Dollars 1.2bn. This makes it the IMF's second-largest arrears debtor after
Sudan.
The debt burden is less intimidating than the numbers (including a 65 per
cent debt-service ratio in 1992) imply. Zambia has - technically -
rescheduled the Dollars 1.2bn it owes the Fund through a Rights Accumulation
Programme whereby, as long as it meets IMF benchmarks, it accumulates
'rights' of SDR83.7m (Dollars 114.5m) a quarter, which go towards paying off
the arrears.
By March 1995 Zambia should have accumulated sufficient rights to clear its
IMF arrears thereby regaining access to Fund facilities. Once the arrears
are paid off, Zambia will become eligible for the highly concessional
Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility giving it up to 10 years to repay
fresh IMF borrowings.
This is just one strand of a four-pronged external debt strategy. The others
include the July 1992 agreement with the Paris Club of official creditors at
which Lusaka obtained Dollars 927m of debt relief. Some Dollars 585m of this
took the form of 'enhanced concessions' while the balance of Dollars 343m
was 'extra-ordinary relief', by which is meant a deferment of payments.
Seven donor countries, including the UK, US and Germany, have so far agreed
to write off all, or some, of their development loans.
A third element is a proposed private and commercial debt buyback, although
this scheme is still in its infancy. The World Bank is offering Dollars 20m
and Zambia hopes to attract support from other donors giving it a cash chest
of Dollars 100m to buyback the Dollars 120m owed to the commercial banks and
other private debt.
The fourth leg of the strategy - new donor disbursements for project
financing - has proved disappointing. These are estimated at Dollars 200m in
1992, lower than in 1991 and well short of expectations. The problem is the
failure of line ministries to put together the bankable projects that donors
can support.
Before rescheduling, Zambia's 1992 debt-service bill was estimated at
Dollars 835m of which Dollars 269m was owned to the multilaterals, more than
half of it to the Fund and almost Dollars 500m to bilateral donors. Its
'enhanced Toronto' terms have reduced its Paris Club debt-service from more
than Dollars 450m to Dollars 45m this year and Dollars 55m in 1993.
Next year, Zambia is hoping for donor assistance of Dollars 1.4bn of which
Dollars 400m will take the form of debt relief, while the balance will be
Dollars 500m in balance of payments support, Dollars 200m in commodity aid
and Dollars 300m in project finance.
Without donor assistance, the balance of payments would be unmanageable with
an overall payments deficit averaging almost Dollars 650m in 1992/3. This is
largely a product of the debt situation, with pre-rescheduling interest
payments of over Dollars 300m in 1993 and capital repayments of a further
Dollars 365m.
Substantial donor help is crucial - to ease the debt burden and help build a
platform for the growth of non-traditional exports in the mid-1990s, without
which Zambia will remain at the mercy of the fortunes of the copper
industry.
 ------------------------------------------------------------
          BALANCE OF PAYMENTS 1991-93 (DOLLARS M)
 ------------------------------------------------------------
                         1991       1992     1993
Exports                 1,082      1,050    1,000
Copper exports            895        750      710
Imports                   950      1,080    1,070
Trade balance             132        -30      -70
Net invisibles           -548       -535     -490
Transfers                 480        230      220
Current account            64       -335     -340
Net capital              -259       -275     -340
Overall balance          -230       -610     -680
 ------------------------------------------------------------
Source: IMF
 ------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page III
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1500</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Survey of Zambia (7): Committed approach - Privatisation
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TONY HAWKINS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
NO AFRICAN government is tackling privatisation with the enthusiasm
demonstrated by the MMD administration. As a government of businessmen it
has a strong ideological commitment to the programme underpinned by the more
pragmatic consideration that subsidising inefficient parastatals is no
longer viable.
Within five years, the government plans to sell more than 150 state-owned
enterprises, accounting for 80 per cent of economic activity.
'Almost everything you touch in this country is government-owned,' says one
businessman. There are no sacred cows, although the minister responsible for
privatisation, Mr Ronald Penza, attracted considerable flak, especially from
the unions, when he announced that government would not retain a majority
stake in either the copper mines or the public utilities.
This stance may have to be revised since it might be impossible to sell the
railways or Zesco, the Zambia Electricity Supply Co. Should it prove
impossible to find buyers, on satisfactory terms, the Zambia Privatisation
Agency, set up in August, will have to fall back on commercialisation. But
its remit is clear: to get the government out of business and its board and
officials are determined to do that.
Nineteen small parastatals are currently under the hammer - with a combined
turnover of K1.8bn - with competitive bids for 17 enterprises opened this
month while the ZPA is negotiating the sale of the other two with minority
shareholders.
The initial 17 have a combined turnover of K1.8bn, although three are
dormant operations and one, Prime Marble Products, is in the development
stage. They include a dry cleaning business, a travel agency, vehicle spares
and tyre firms and manufacturers of hardware, tin cans, plastics and
pharmaceuticals.
ZPA officials describe the response as 'overwhelming'. Over 180 tender
packages were sold for the 15 companies about 15 per cent of them to
foreign-owned firms. A total of 37 bids was received for the first six
companies offered, including bids from Botswana, South Africa and a
Swiss-French firm. In all six cases, management and employees submitted bids
to buy-out the firms.
While some would have preferred a bolder strategy, ZPA officials say the
decision to launch the programme with small, easily saleable enterprises was
not a 'soft option' strategy. 'We wanted to demonstrate beyond any possible
doubt that we really are serious about privatisation,' says one official.
This is in marked contrast to the previous administration's on-off approach.
In any event, it was necessary to push ahead with relatively simple sales in
order to satisfy donor pressure and comply with World Bank conditions.
The July 1992 legislation to set up an independent privatisation agency to
implement the programme - replacing the Technical Committee on Privatisation
created by the Kaunda administration - has shifted it out of the political
arena and into the hands of the technocrats. The agency will need to refer
major policy issues - such as the timing and method of privatising ZCCM - to
the cabinet, but operationally it is on its own.
The parastatals will be sold as they stand. The government has no intention
of investing in any restructuring programme arguing instead that this should
be left to the new owners. This is a sensible counter to 'selling the family
silver' critics, since buyers will be forced to inject new capital into the
enterprises to turn them around.
A number of grey areas are still to be cleared such as whether and how the
government will retain control over strategic enterprises, such as the oil
refineries. This could be done on a 'golden share' basis or by retaining
enough equity to guarantee effective control.
One thing is clear. The government wants to see ownership spread among
ordinary Zambians through public share issues and employment share ownership
schemes. Although no stock exchange is in place yet, the ZPA is determined
to float at least one of the 32 firms scheduled during 1993.
The prime candidate is almost certainly Zambia Breweries, in which Anglo
American is the largest private sector shareholder, although others, such as
Zambia Sugar Refineries, Chilanga Cement and the milling companies, could
also qualify.
Under the new banking act, the banks will able to operate as stockbrokers,
trading shares for their customers.
But commitment is not everything. The ZPA, whose top managers have been in
place less than two months, is short of skilled personnel.
It will not find it easy to market some 50 companies within the next year,
especially since Zambia has no domestic capital market while bank liquidity
is under pressure as part of the anti-inflation programme. A worry is
whether enough buyers will materialise to keep privatisation on track.
'It will be interesting to see how the 37 who submitted their bids plan to
finance the takeovers,' says a banker, warning that 'they don't qualify as
bankable prospects'.
Lurking in the background are familiar political worries. Drought, recession
and the restructuring of the economy has led to large scale retrenchment in
a country in which only 360,000 people are employed in the formal economy.
The parastatal sector employs 95,000 of these and as many as 40 per cent
could lose their jobs once the new owners take control. This has the
hallmark of political dynamite which is why a the ZPA will next year be
marketing not just the companies but also the concept of privatisation.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page III
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1501</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Survey of Zambia (2): A delicate balance - Interview with
President Frederick Chiluba
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
In an interview with Michael Holman, President Frederick Chiluba calls for
further external debt relief, promises tough measures to tackle inflation
and extends a welcome to foreign investors.
Holman: After a year of reform, what is your assessment of the economy?
Chiluba: We need more external support, especially debt relief. If we have
to service the debt from our meagre resources, there will be nothing for our
recovery. We appreciated getting the Trinidad terms (partial debt write-off)
but more of our debt should be written off. It is a way of recognising the
difference between this democratic government and its predecessor.
If we are to make democracy work, we need a sound economic base, and that we
are unable to provide without more help. If we lose this opportunity, I see
no way out of the quagmire.
What has been the effect of the drought?
It's the worst in living memory and has been a very big set-back. We have
lost 70 per cent of our maize crop. It's not only hitting agriculture.
Energy supplies have been cut, so factory production falls. We expect more
than a 12 per cent decline in per capita GDP this year.
But government responded promptly to the drought and acted more efficiently
than surrounding states, while the international community rallied
magnificently and magnanimously.
More cuts in government spending lie ahead, including reducing the civil
service: how much punishment can Zambians take?
It's a very thin line between what is perceived as structural adjustment and
what is perceived as punishment. But the civil service must be reorganised.
We inherited a civil service and a political service, both employed by the
state. We have got to trim it, otherwise you are accepting the rot.
We have also cut subsidies, which is painful - but now peasant farmers can
sell maize at higher prices, and not only to the state but to private
buyers. Socialist propaganda made people believe that the state should be
the provider. I want to get government off peoples' shoulders and make them
more self sufficient. But you have to carry people along while pursuing
reform . . . it's a very delicate balance.
How serious a threat is inflation?
It's public enemy number one. It means no savings, no investment, purchasing
power wiped out. We have already cut government spending and cut the size of
government itself. We are not going to print money. We're determined to
bring inflation down.
Will the second year be as tough as the first?
In the early stages, yes. But by the second half, with inflation tackled,
there should be slight changes for the better.
What role is there for foreign investors?
We need them - the economy needs their capital, their technology, their
skills and expertise. The privatisation programme provides opportunities,
the business environment has been radically improved. If we do not get
foreign investment, the reform programme will be jeopardised to a large
extent.
Will ZCCM (the state-owned copper mining company) be privatised?
Yes - but the government should hold on to some of its shares, because we
have to create investor confidence. They will know we still care if we hold
on to some shares.
Would you accept a bid for shares by Anglo American conditional on their
taking over management of the mines?
That can be worked out when discussions take place.
But would you object in principle?
Anglo might want to bring in some staff from outside, but they would be
working with the local staff. There are many qualified Zambians.
Are you concerned by corruption in Zambia?
It is part of the legacy of the old system, which we are still fighting. One
way to do this is to ensure greater transparency in government and more
accountability.
What principles will be most important when Zambia draws up a new
constitution?
Entrenching the rights of the individual at the expense of the executive.
The most striking thing about the past year is the way people have rallied
under the new freedom. Zambia is enjoying a breath of fresh air - people are
free to take initiatives.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page II
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1502</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Survey of Zambia (3): Reversal of fortunes - Copper
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PHILIP GAWITH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
AT THE bottom of the Nchanga Open Pit, the initials MMD are emblazoned on
the cockpit of one of the giant shovels shifting ore in the pit which is the
largest single source of copper at Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines (ZCCM),
the company which dominates the Zambian economic landscape.
It is an appropriate symbol because it is a reminder that the Movement for
Multi-Party Democracy came to power in November 1991 on the back of
organised labour, particularly the miners on the Copper Belt. The MMD's
accession to power is the single factor accounting for the enormous
turnaround in fortunes of ZCCM over the past year.
Copper is the fly-wheel of the Zambian economy. It accounts for more than 90
per cent of the country's foreign exchange earnings and much of Zambia's
manufacturing industry supplies the industry.
Although the past 20 years have seen a steady decline in the Zambian
industry's fortunes, historically the government derived more than 50 per
cent of its revenues from taxes on copper sales.
The 1992 financial year, to March, was a nadir for ZCCM. Repeated equipment
failures - the result of government interference starving the company of
necessary funds - saw ZCCM's copper production at an all-time low of 387,000
tonnes, 63,000 tonnes below the budgeted target of 450,000 tonnes. The
company made a net profit of only K4.1bn.
A turnaround commenced, however, when the MMD government installed a new
management team in November 1991. Average monthly production in the last
four months of the 1991/2 financial year was 37,500 tonnes - 27 per cent
higher than the average 29,600 tonnes during the first eight months.
The first eight months of the 1992/3 financial year have seen further
progress. According to Mr Ed Shamutete, ZCCM's chief executive, production
to the end of November was 4 per cent ahead of the target of 431,000 tonnes
for the full year.
If this is maintained for the full year, as Mr Shamutete believes it will
be, the company should achieve production of close to 450,000 tonnes - a 16
per cent improvement over 1991/2.
The company has also made progress in cutting costs. Mr Shamutete notes that
the cost at mine (excluding interest, depreciation and capital expenditure,
tax) has fallen from 73.5 cents per pound of copper produced in 1991/2 to
60.3 cents per pound in the seven months of the current year. By June 1993
the labour force will have been cut by about 10,000 to 46,000.
All of this translates to considerable progress on the profit front. For the
seven months to the end of October, ZCCM made net profits of K19.7bn,
compared to budgeted figures for the period of K11.5bn. 'The results are
very encouraging,' says Mr Shamutete. 'Things are going extremely well'.
The improved cost, production and cost performances can be traced, in the
first instance, to the access to power of the Chiluba government, committed
to sound economic management. In ZCCM's case this involved installing new
management with a mandate to return the company to its core business of
mining metals.
Assurances were also given, which the government has upheld, that it would
not interfere in the running of the company. Crucially, the government has
also given ZCCM the necessary foreign exchange allocation to allow for
rational operational planning.
Mr Shamutete confirms that the persistent shortage of foreign exchange
through the Kaunda years has taken its toll on the company's infrastructure.
In the short-medium term, Mr Shamutete says the company needs to spend about
Dollars 150m in hard currency terms and Dollars 119m in local money
equivalent annually for normal reinvestment.
For the next five years the company can meet these commitments from its own
resources and with recourse to short-term loan facilities already in place.
What happens beyond this, however, is the question facing ZCCM's managers.
During the next decade the massive Nchanga Open Pit will become uneconomic.
Production from a replacement ore body must be in place in about seven
years.
The source of this production will be the Konkola deep project, in the North
of the copper belt. A recent feasibility study revealed that a new mine,
with ore reserves of about 355m tonnes and a mill head-grade of 3.5 to 3.6
per cent copper, could be developed within six years.
Mr Shamutete says this mine should guarantee ZCCM maintaining an annual
production level of 450,000 tonnes - possibly up to 500,000 tonnes - well
into the future. He is hopeful the project will soon get the go-ahead.
Konkola has a price tag of about Dollars 550m, 70 per cent of which will be
in hard currency. Mr Shamutete says that over the next 14 years, ZCCM will
have to spend about Dollars 1.3bn in foreign exchange and Dollars 700m in
local currency, both in 1991 terms, to ensure sustained production at the
450,000 tonnes per annum level. The bulk of this will be spent on Konkola.
Most likely is that ZCCM will develop Konkola itself, the required equity
injection probably offering Anglo American the chance to increase its stake
in the company. However the finance question is resolved, the improvement of
ZCCM's balance sheet is a priority.
Currently the company owes Dollars 722m to various lenders and has paltry
share capital of K893m, against annual revenues of about Dollars 1.2bn - a
testimony to neglect and abuse by the previous government, the majority
shareholder, matched by an understandable unwillingness on the part of
minorities to invest further in a poorly run company.
Apart from a necessary capital injection, Mr Shamutete believes the debt can
be restructured while assets, which have not kept pace with the devaluation
of the Kwacha, need to be revalued.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page II
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1503</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Survey of Zambia (4): Grasping the nettle - The
privatisation of ZCCM
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PHILIP GAWITH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
QUESTIONS hang over whether, when and how the Zambian government will
privatise Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines, the giant copper producer.
Although the new government has shown a commendable willingness to take
unpopular decisions, it is doubtful whether there is a larger nettle to
grasp than the privatisation of ZCCM.
Not only does the company remain the single dominant economic entity in the
country - it has often in the past been referred to as a 'state within a
state' - but it is also the repository for much emotional and ideological
baggage.
Within the miserable economic legacy of President Kaunda, the
nationalisation of the copper industry probably ranks as the greatest act of
folly. It took place in two stages:
In January 1970, the industry was reorganised with the government taking 51
per cent of the two companies running the industry - Nchanga Consolidated
Copper Mines and Roan Consolidated Mines (merged into ZCCM in 1982).
In late 1974, the government also took over the management of the mines,
hitherto provided by companies associated with the Anglo American
Corporation of South Africa and AMAX.
Nationalisation was disastrous. Strapped for cash, the government placed
ever greater burdens on ZCCM forcing it into all sorts of peripheral
activities at the expense of investment in the core business of mining
metals. The result was a steady decline in production, slumping to a nadir
of 387,000 tonnes of copper in the 1991/2 financial year from an average
annual 600,000 tonnes combined production of Nchanga and Roan before they
were merged into ZCCM.
The Chiluba government came to power in November 1991 on a platform which
included privatisation as a vital component of its economic programme.
However, scepticism has persisted about its strength of conviction - fuelled
a few months ago when vice-president Levy Mwanawasa said he favoured taking
'20 to 30 years' over ZCCM's privatisation.
Supporting this view, is the fact that the company's restored profitability
gives the government less incentive to proceed with a sell-off.
Second, many senior figures in government are intimately connected with the
initial decision to nationalise the mines. Indeed, Mr Humphrey Mulemba, the
incumbent minister of mines, presided over the nationalisation in 1970 in
the same capacity as minister of mines. No matter what such men say in
public, privatisation would involve a considerable humiliation.
Furthermore, the government has already been accused of seeking to make a
quick buck and may be anxious to dispel such accusations.
However, the government will not want to compromise its hard-won economic
reform credentials by bending to the wind over ZCCM. Baulking over the
sell-off could also prompt the World Bank to make this a necessary condition
for the provision of further aid.
Ministers also appear committed, albeit for different reasons. Although Mr
Mulemba cautions that the government must be 'very, very careful not to move
carelessly', he adds that the privatisation of ZCCM is 'one of those things
we would like to push as quickly as possible'. His reasoning is simple:
maximising government spending options depends on putting ZCCM on a path of
sustained profitability. This requires new private sector investment, which
is most likely assured by withdrawing the spectre of government interference
and control.
Dr Mathias Mpande, deputy minister of mines is unequivocal that his priority
as a minister is to achieve the turnaround of ZCCM through privatisation.
'If you're an economic nationalist, you're just a lost economic dinosaur in
the world,' he says.
Dr Mpande argues that whereas he originally envisaged a protracted debate of
about a year, things are now going 'very quickly. All parties want to get it
over'.
The World Bank will be conducting a study, during the first quarter of 1993,
which will come up with an action plan for ZCCM's privatisation.
The other issue is what shape a sell-off would take. Mr Mulemba believes the
government should maintain a minority stake, but says he is flexible
depending on what will best foster investor confidence. Dr Mpande favours
breaking up ZCCM into smaller units to attract as many foreign investors as
possible, allowing the government to profit from competition between them.
Although many of South Africa and the world's main resource groups have
shown interest in the Zambian mining sector - RTZ, BHP, Phelps Dodge, Gencor
and JCI among them - Anglo American, holder of a 27.3 per cent minority
stake in ZCCM, is in pole position.
Anglo has not disguised its interest in lifting its stake, and Dr Mpande
says he takes it for granted this will be the case. 'When they come back
they will be in charge of management, but there will be very little change.
The people they need are already there. The human resource is there, but
they can enrich it.'
The chances of a total sell-off appear unlikely. The government will not
want to forsake all influence over what is seen as the jewel in Zambia's
crown. Any controlling shareholder is also likely to deem it prudent to have
the government on board, if only to share responsibility for difficult
decisions such as retrenchment.
Although the government is unlikely to commit itself until after the World
Bank study is completed, the chances of the privatisation being resolved
within the next year must be good. The interim is likely to see a good deal
of horse trading as private investors jockey for a piece of the action.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page II
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1504</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Survey of Zambia (1): Fresh start for Africa's newest
democracy - While the government is bravely implementing radical reforms,
more help is needed to combat a severe drought and to overcome the legacy of
the Kaunda years
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL HOLMAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
AFTER more than 25 debilitating years of mismanagement and regional wars,
Zambia is making a fresh start.
Peaceful elections in October 1991 marked the collapse of one party rule. A
country once synonymous with African socialism has embarked on a reform
programme as radical as any undertaken in Africa, which is being implemented
at an unprecedented pace.
Fourteen months after his overwhelming victory in Zambia's first multi-party
elections in two decades, President Frederick Chiluba has won plaudits from
donors and endorsements from the IMF and World Bank.
Yet although aid and debt relief have been substantial Africa's newest
democracy is under strain. The worst drought in living memory has
contributed to a 10 per cent fall in gross domestic product fall. Government
and private sector management is weak and daily depleted by Aids. Inflation
is running at more than 100 per cent, on a year-on-year basis.
Infrastructure is frail, social services are impoverished and industry needs
re-equipping.
Export receipts and aid flows may be enough for bare survival, but fall far
short of what is needed for sustained recovery. Further painful reforms lie
ahead and the impact on Zambia's social and political fabric will be severe.
'To make democracy work we need a sound economic base, and that we are
unable to provide without more help,' said President Frederick Chiluba.
Last October Mr Chiluba, a former trade unionist, led the Movement for a
Multi-party Democracy to a sweeping victory. The MMD won 125 of the 150
National Assembly seats and Mr Chiluba secured 81 per cent of the
presidential poll. For the first time since 1972, when Zambia became a one
party state, the country had a choice. The electorate could hardly have been
more emphatic in its rejection of the country's founding president, Mr
Kenneth Kaunda and the United National Independence Party, in power since
independence in 1964.
In the weeks that followed the new government began tackling the legacy of
Mr Kaunda. Executives of state owned corporations created under a late 1960s
nationalisation programme were sacked. Subsidies were cut, the kwacha was
soon to be further devalued, the agricultural marketing system liberalised.
Fresh impetus was given to the privatisation of 130 state-owned companies
including Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines, responsible for more than 90 per
cent of export earnings.
It was as rude a shock as any African economy has experienced, but shock
therapy was necessary, argued Mr Emmanuel Kasonde, the finance minister,
when he delivered the MMD's first budget address in January. 'Our bitter
experiences of the past have shown that piece-meal or half-hearted
implementation of reform will get us no-where,' he told the National
Assembly.
The MMD inherited a disaster with roots that go back many years. When Zambia
won independence from Britain in 1964 it had one of the highest per capita
incomes of any black African state. By the time Mr Kaunda ceded power,
Zambia had become - in per capita terms - one of the world's most indebted
nations, its 8m people owing external creditors more than Dollars 7bn.
Mr Kaunda's own inheritance was not easy. Zambia's colonial era ended with
about 100 university graduates. From the start of independence, landlocked
Zambia was in the front line of southern Africa's battles, at considerable
cost: transport routes were disrupted, defence spending soared.
To Mr Kaunda's credit, Zambia remained stable in a region at war, but far
from resolving the problems he inherited, he compounded them, nationalising
the country's two copper mines in the late 1960s, along with much of the
rest of the economy. Agriculture suffered from too much state regulation and
too little investment. Millions of kwacha were spent on white elephants,
such as the Tika steel project.
In 1975 came a blow from which Zambia has yet to recover. The price of
copper, accounting for over 90 per cent of export earnings, plummeted for
the second time in five years. By 1977 ZCCM's contribution to government
revenue had fallen from nearly 55 per cent of the total to nil, while nearly
two thirds of the foreign exchange earnings were taken up by the cost of
production.
The next 14 years saw a succession of failed recovery plans. The most
serious obstacle to reform proved to be Mr Kaunda himself, reluctant to
relinquish his socialist vision, presiding over a corrupt and authoritarian
party.
By 1990, when he buckled under domestic and international pressure and
reluctantly accepted multiparty elections, Zambia's fortunes had reached
their nadir. Most donors had frozen aid, arrears in repayment to the IMF had
reached Dollars 1.2bn and the outgoing government had spent millions of
kwachas of state money in an attempt to buy victory.
The MMD, a broad coalition bringing together labour leaders, Unip defectors,
prominent businessmen and a new generation of politicians and technocrats,
has achieved much.
Its efficient response to the drought has been widely praised. ZCCM output
has risen under the new management, a markedly improved business environment
is more conducive to foreign investment and the privatisation programme is
proceeding apace.
But long-suffering Zambians face more pain. The price of the staple food,
maize, which has soared 500 per cent in real terms, rose again this month.
Turning overstaffed state owned companies - notably Zambia Airways - into
commercially viable organisations means more job losses. Cutting inflation -
the aim is an annualised rate of 20 per cent by end-93 - requires further
spending cuts and reductions in the civil service.
In last month's local government elections the MMD won a comfortable victory
but the percentage turn-out barely reached double figures, reflecting the
weakness of the opposition rather than a mandate for the MMD, whose
honeymoon with the electorate is over.
A flawed constitution inherited from Mr Kaunda, now under review, encourages
an authoritarian streak in some ministers. It allows bans on freedom of
assembly and fails to guarantee press freedom. Nor has the MMD's status been
enhanced by national assembly members' decision to award themselves tax-free
salaries of Dollars 1,000 a month.
All this not only angers Zambians, it also undermines Mr Chiluba's plea for
further assistance to help democracy take root. Yet for all the
shortcomings, Mr Chiluba leads what is 'probably one of the most modern,
open and forward-looking governments on the continent,' says Mr Mike Hall,
editor of the Weekly Post.
This new dimension to Zambia's leadership offers hope for the country's
future, tempered by the conclusion of a 1989 World Bank paper analysing
Zambia's record: 'When reform efforts finally got into high gear, the
initial position was one of acute disequilibrium. The economy had no cushion
and no safety net. Successful reform under these circumstances required
nearly perfect foresight, technically valid policy packages, strong
political commitment, uninterrupted implementation and good luck.'
This might yet serve as warning that unless Zambia can rely on donors for
further expertise and additional resources. President Chiluba warns: 'If we
lose this opportunity, I see no way out of the quagmire.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page I
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1505</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFTFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / London Stock Exchange: Hillsdown sees heavy trading
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER JOHN, JOEL KIBAZO, CHRISTOPHER PRICE and STEVE THOMPSON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SHARES in Hillsdown Holdings were the most heavily traded in the London
market yesterday as the company announced a boardroom shuffle which included
the replacement of Sir Harry Solomon, the chairman. A maintained dividend
was also pledged. The shares, which have surged in recent days, rose 8 to
130p in heavy turnover of 23m.
Analysts heralded the board changes as a possible turning point in the
company's fortunes, with the new chairman expected to hasten Hillsdown's
restructuring programme andconcentrate on its core food manufacturing. Among
the disposals already being hinted at in the market yesterday was the sale
of Hillsdown's furniture business, with Silentnight rumoured as a potential
buyer.
However, in the short term many observers see Hillsdown continuing to
struggle to improve earnings. Mr Carl Short at Nomura commented: 'Hillsdown
needs pruning back, but it will be a long and difficult task. There is
unlikely to be any impact on the business from the new management until
1994.' He predicted a 26 per cent drop in earnings per share this year,
following falls of some 15 per cent in both 1990 and 1991.
GEC in demand
Aggressive buying by Credit Lyonnais Laing (CLL), the French-owned
stockbroker, was said to have been res-ponsible for the strong performance
by GEC late on Tuesday and throughout yesterday.
CLL moved into the market after what was described as a 'very positive'
meeting on Tuesday with Lord Weinstock, GEC's managing director, Mr David
Newlands, the group's finance director, and CLL's institutional clients.
Mr Mike Styles, an electronics specialist at CLL, said the GEC directors had
detailed the company's strengths, highlighting the success of the Alsthom
joint venture, the group's dividend growth policy, strong cash position and
the impressive balance sheet. 'If you do not believe the UK recovery story,
then look no further than GEC,' said Mr Styles. GEC shares moved up 7 to
269p on volume of 5.6m.
RMC flurry
Suggestions that Cazenove, RMC's stockbroker, had hoisted its current year
profits forecast for the aggregates group and promoted some keen buying
interest in the stock was the prime motivation behind a strong performance
for RMC shares, finally 15 ahead at 542p.
Dealers said the initial flurry of buying had uncovered 'a horrible shortage
of stock', and led dealers to mark the shares sharply higher. Building
specialists said Cazenove had increased its earnings estimate from Pounds
140m to Pounds 152m, although this was not confirmed by Cazenove, which
never discusses its market operations with the press.
The general consensus for RMC's 1992 earnings ranges from around Pounds 140m
to Pounds 155m. RMC shares have substantially outperformed the Footsie index
in recent months. Since early October, the shares have risen more than 40
per cent while the Footsie has moved up around 10 per cent.
Owners applause
Tour operator Owners Abroad won applause for the deal struck with LTU, the
German holiday group which earlier this year bought the Thomas Cook travel
agent chain. Analysts said the agreement, in which Owners and Thomas Cook
took a 10 per cent cross-holding, would benefit the UK operator financially
and strategically.
Among the many upgrades, Smith New Court raised this year's forecast by
Pounds 4m to Pounds 38m. Paribas moved to a buy, arguing the deal would not
only ensure Owners' dominant presence as the UK's second largest tour group,
but also that it still did not rule out a bid from rival Airtours.
However, others in the market, who had climbed aboard in the hope of an
Airtours bid, felt otherwise and baled out. After dropping sharply, the
shares recovered to close a penny down at 87p in turnover of 4m. Airtours
was ahead by the same amount at 264p.
Stocks with a perceived international exposure were helped by the steady
flow of encouraging economic pointers from the US. ICI improved 11 to 1033p
and BOC saw good two-way business and was bought up to 762p to leave a net
advance of 14 on good turnover of 1.1m. Reuters improved 13 to 1346p. A unit
of Reuters announced that it had bought new securities lending software from
two UK-based companies for an undisclosed sum.
The recent oil/gas discovery off the coast of Burmah made by Premier
Consolidated continued to drive the latter's shares higher; they closed 3
firmer at 21p on keen turnover of 6.9m.
At least three of the leading UK building materials companies, Blue Circle,
Tarmac and Pilkington were being touted as potential bid targets by market
operators yesterday. A late bout of bid speculation saw all three share
prices move ahead.
The heaviest trading was in Pilkington, the troubled glass manufacturer,
which last week raided its reserves to pay a maintained interim dividend.
Pilkington settled 5 up at 90p on turnover of 5.9m. Tarmac, also among the
market's bid favourites in recent months, moved up 6 1/2 to 106p with 5.4m
shares traded. Blue Circle put on 3 at 178p on 1.8m.
Tate &amp; Lyle improved as the market dwelt further on the impact of the new
sweetener deal being negotiated with PepsiCo. However, observers pointed out
that Tate had been optimistic on the subject for several weeks and most of
the upside was already in the shares. They moved 1 1/2 higher to 399p.
Some media stocks took heart from research on advertising prospects.
Analysts said one survey, emanating from the US PaineWebber media
conference, was predicting US advertising growth next year of between 0.2
per cent and 3.7 per cent.
Pearson, which has significant exposure to the US, rose 10 to 391p as
marketmakers found themselves short of stock. However, Reed International,
seen as overvalued, eased a penny to 632p.
Media-buying company Aegis fell 3 to 17p after the group announced more
restructuring and Pounds 20m in exceptional costs. The company said trading
conditions were expected to remain difficult in the main European markets.
The Daily Telegraph exceeded its issue price for the first time yesterday.
The shares were floated at 325p in June but began trading around the 290p
level. Yesterday, the stock climbed 8 to 330p.
Mirror Group remained firm, closing 3 1/2 stronger at 89 1/2 p, helped by
some talk that the administrators were considering placing part of their
stake at 125p.
Specialist chemicals manufacturer MTM was the principal casualty in the
London stock market yesterday. The shares halved in value after the group
announced the need for further provisions because of poor trading.
MTM said: 'The continuing high level of debt and associated interest
payable, as well as the exceptional fees being incurred has negated any
short term financial progress being made. The decline in the pound/dollar
exchange rate has increased the group's sterling obligations. MTM shares
closed 16 lower at 15p.
A stock overhang was responsible for the decline in Associated British
Ports. The stock gave up 7 to 341p.
Shares in Alvis jumped 5 to 19p after the results.
Among aerospace stocks, the news that the Airbus consortium had won an order
for 28 aircraft from ILFC led to strong demand for British Aerospace. The
shares jumped 7 to 147p in heavy trade of 8.3m.
Strong demand for Rolls-Royce after it said it would supply Dollars 160m of
engines to power ILFC aircraft was tempered by dividend worries The shares
closed 5 1/2 higher at 109 1/2 p. Optimism in the sector also boosted Smiths
Industries and the stock firmed 4 to 352p. Smith New Court, however, remains
cautious.
Two trades totalling 15.4m shares in BET were executed at 75p, apparently an
overnight tax-related deal. BET closed unchanged at 83p.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1992
NEW HIGHS (56).
AMERICANS (1) Lowe's, BANKS (1) Bank Ireland, BREWERS &amp; DISTILLERS (1)
Bulmer (HP), BUSINESS SERVICES (1) Serco, CHEMICALS (2) Halstead (J),
Wolstenholme Rink, CONTRACTING &amp; CONSTRUCTION (2) Barratt Devlpt., Sheriff,
ELECTRICALS (1) Jones Stroud, ELECTRONICS (5) Cray, Lexicon, Macro 4, Micro
Focus, Misys, ENGINEERING GENERAL (3) Carclo, Halma, Siebe, FOOD RETAILING
(1) Iceland Frozen, HEALTH &amp; HOUSEHOLD (2) Mayborn, UniChem, HOTELS &amp;
LEISURE (3) City Site Restaurants, Manchester Utd., Vardon, INSURANCE
COMPOSITE (1) American Intl., INSURANCE LIFE (1) Utd. Friendly B, INVESTMENT
TRUSTS (7) Flmg. Emrg. Mkts., For. &amp; Colonial, For. &amp; Col. Enterprise, For.
&amp; Col. high Inc., Group Devlpt. Cap., Murray Enterprise, SPRAIT 6.3pc-13.3pc
Prtg., MEDIA (5) CIA, EMAP, Independent, Telegraph, Watmoughs, MISCELLANEOUS
(3) Airsprung Furniture, Birkby, Danka, OTHER FINANCIAL (3) Caledonia,
Cattle's, Prov. Financial, OTHER INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS (3) BTR, Do Wts.
'92-93, Charter Consld., PACKAGING, PAPER &amp; PRINTING (3) Ferguson Intl.,
Macfarlane (C), Printech, PROPERTY (1) Waterglade Intl., STORES (1) MFI,
TEXTILES (2) Claremont Garments, Courtaulds, TRANSPORT (1) Tibbett &amp;
Britten, WATER (2) East Surrey, Northumbrian.
NEW LOWS (23).
BREWERS &amp; DISTILLERS (1) Matthew Clark, BUILDING MATERIALS (2) Darby,
Needler, BUSINESS SERVICES (1) BNB Res., CHEMICALS (2) Caird, MTM,
CONGLOMERATES (2) Porter Chadburn, Reece, CONTRACTING &amp; CONSTRUCTION (1)
McCarthy &amp; Stone, ELECTRICALS (2) Clarke (T), Lec, ENGINEERING GENERAL (1)
GEI, INVESTMENT TRUSTS (3) Contl. Assets Wts., German Smllr. Wts., TR
European Growth Prtg. Subs., MEDIA (1) Chiltern Radio, MISCELLANEOUS (2)
Dudley Jenkins, Holders Technology, TEXTILES (1) Campari, TRANSPORT (2)
Fisher (J), TIP Europe, MINES (2) Aztec Explrn, Hartebeest.
Other market statistics, Page 27
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 38
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1506</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFSFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / London Stock Exchange: Good advance as confidence returns
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
RENEWED demand for UK equities reversed the traditional pattern yesterday by
spreading from the second line stocks and boosting the FT-SE listed blue
chips. Disappointing November statistics on domestic retail sales and Public
Sector Borrowing Requirement failed to restrain investors' optimism and
London responded favourably to the latest data on the US economy.
Trading volume increased briskly and a scattering of bid stories, albeit
featuring many old favourities, underscored the note of optimism. Two
trading programmes were identified, spread across the full range of the
market. Activity in stock index futures ahead of Friday's expiry deadline
again buttressed the underlying equity market, although there was less
arbitraging between futures and equities than in the previous session.
After drifting lower at first to touch 2,713.1, the Footsie turned higher,
attracting some genuine buying interest rather than the merely
futures-related demand seen earlier this week. The market climbed steadily
throughout the session, closing just below the day's best to record a final
reading on the FT-SE Index of 2,732.8, a net gain of 14.9.
The FT-SE Mid 250 Index remained very positive, ending with a further
advance of 18.4 on the day. Volume in second line stocks well outpaced that
of the Footsie-listed issues and the day's total of Seaq-reported business
rose to 676.3m shares from the 551.6m of the previous day. Retail business
on Tuesday was worth Pounds 1.15bn, regaining the higher levels briefly lost
on Monday.
Equity strategists at County NatWest drew attention to the substantial
recovery in share trading which, they claim, has brought the most active
year since 1987, the annus horribilis of the stock market. County comments
that average daily turnover of more than Pounds 1bn this year compares with
Pounds 912m in 1991.
The news that UK retail sales dipped by 0.1 per cent last month was slightly
disappointing for the stores sector, where a rise of about the same
proportions had been expected. But the reaction in share prices was calm,
with most of the store leaders closing a shade higher. Analysts are focusing
on the prospects for the Christmas selling season.
With the bad news from IBM offset by better reports yesterday on US housing
starts and industrial production, London continued to look for an early
improvement in the economy across the Atlantic. UK investors were unabashed
by a slow start to the new session on Wall Street, which was a shade off in
London trading hours.
In spite of the upturn in equities, traders remained cautious ahead of the
year-end, for which many securities analysts are still predicting a Footsie
close of 2,700. Yesterday's buyers appeared to be focusing on stocks which
have been under downward pressure recently. Some drinks shares staged a
recovery from the upset prompted last week by downgradings on Guinness.
Banking issues found support.
Goldman Sachs, the US investment bank, predicted a good rally in UK equities
next month, when it believes that attention may return to the cyclical
sectors, such as building materials, chemicals, metals, packaging and paper.
January rallies, said Goldman, often reflect window-dressing by fund
managers, or just investor psychology.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 38
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1507</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / London Stock Exchange: Futures and options trading
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOEL KIBAZO
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ROLLING forward of positions from the December contract into March was the
main feature in stock index futures, although buying from a large US house
helped to boost turnover, writes Joel Kibazo.
After opening at 2,720, selling of the December contract on the FT-SE by
independent traders led it to fall to 2,715 within the first hour of
trading. Dealers, however, appeared to have been caught short, and together
with good buying said to have come from one US house, December recovered to
move forward for the rest of the session.
The release of disappointing retail sales figures for November had little
effect and instead led to some renewed speculation of a cut in interest
rates. With only two full days to go before the expiry of the December
contract, trading was again featured by extensive switching into the March
version.
December finished at 2,740, up 20 from the previous close and at a 9-point
premium to the underlying cash market. Turnover in the December contract was
7,746 lots, while that in March reached 4,793.
Volume in the traded options returned to more modest levels. Total turnover
came to 29,456 lots, of which 9,339 contracts were dealt in the FT-SE 100
option.
Asda was the busiest stock option with turnover of 6,252 contracts. It was
followed by Rolls-Royce on 1,470 and Ladbroke on 1,346.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 38
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1508</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / World Stock Markets (Asia Pacific): Nikkei declines in line
with futures market
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By EMIKO TERAZONO
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
A LOWER futures market prompted profit-taking by dealers and investment
trusts, wiping out share price gains from a morning rally, writes Emiko
Terazono in Tokyo.
The Nikkei average was finally down 212.03 at 17,268.71 after a day's high
of 17,601.20 and low of 17,266.40. The index was bolstered in the morning by
reports of tax measures to reinvigorate the real estate sector, and
depressed by selling in the late afternoon.
Volume rose to 250m shares from 213m. Declines led advances by 639 to 351,
with 149 issues unchanged, while the Topix index of all first section stocks
lost 8.57 to 1,317.33. In London the ISE/Nikkei 50 index firmed 2.99 to
1,069.91.
Most of the activity was futures led yesterday, hence the predominance in
trading of investment trusts and dealers. Reports that the ruling Liberal
Democratic Party had prepared a final proposal on reviving tax breaks for
those who renew housing, and that it had reviewed the possible abolition of
the land tax system, excited some traders, but most investors remained on
the sidelines.
Brokers actively traded issues with large latent assets on rumours that
financial authorities are minded to allow banks and companies to revalue
assets and count any surplus as capital.
Most analysts were sceptical over the implementation of such book-keeping
measures. Mr Alex Kinmont, an analyst at Morgan Stanley, said: 'They would
only be exchanging one fictional value for another,' referring to the lack
of qualified land surveyors.
Nippon Express, which was initially bought on the asset revaluation theme,
lost Y4 on balance at Y760, and Nippon Telegraph and Telephone declined
Y5,000 to Y549,000. Keisei Electric Railway appreciated Y7 to Y827.
Real estate companies rose on news of possible land tax reforms. Mitsui
Fudosan put on Y30 to Y1,030 and Mitsubishi Estate Y30 to Y935.
Further rumours of a takeover by Harrods pushed Yokohama Matsuzakaya up Y99
to Y639, the largest percentage gain of the day. Nagase, a trading company,
advanced Y40 to Y745 on hopes of brisk sales of its antibacterial cloth.
High-technology issues lost ground on profit-taking by investment trusts.
Hitachi slipped Y2 to Y743 and Fujitsu retreated Y17 to Y557. However,
Hitachi Electronics climbed Y40 to Y1,420 on firm earnings projections.
In Osaka, the OSE average receded 54.78 to 18,839.62. Large lot
cross-trading, or realising profits on long-term holdings without changing
underlying portfolios, boosted volume to 117.9m shares, against 21.1m.
Nintendo, the video game maker, fell Y100 to Y11,000 on profit-taking.
Roundup
PACIFIC Rim markets continued to be mixed, with domestic issues predominant.
HONG KONG strengthened in the afternoon session as some confidence returned
to the market following recent nervousness over political relations with
China. The Hang Seng index rose 100.15, or 1.9 per cent, to 5,415.96 in
turnover of HKDollars 2.4bn.
Hang Seng Bank and Bank of East Asia gained as some investors switched out
of HSBC Holdings on reports that it might have to make new debt provisions.
Hang Seng Bank was up HKDollars 2.25 to HKDollars 51.50 while Bank of East
Asia gained HKDollars 1.50 to HKDollars 33. HSBC closed unchanged at
HKDollars 55.50, after a day's low of HKDollars 54.50.
SEOUL advanced slightly with interest in Daewoo group stocks on news that
Daewoo Corp had won a Dollars 280m construction order from Malaysia. The
composite index rose 3.88 to 654.09 and Daewoo Corp added Won500 at
Won11,700.
TAIWAN remained weak in cautious trading ahead of Saturday's parliamentary
elections. The weighted index closed 13.34 lower at 3,674.92 in turnover
down to TDollars 6.6bn from TDollars 7.2bn.
MANILA was helped higher by the recovery of Philippine Long Distance
Telephone in New York. The composite index improved 39.42 to 1,222.91 in
combined turnover of 679.5m pesos.
PLDT rallied 30 pesos to 840 pesos, while Philippine National Bank advanced
14 pesos to 220 pesos
SINGAPORE's Straits Times Industrial index moved ahead 14.52 to 1,456.62 in
turnover of some SDollars 252m.
Cycle and Carriage, up 10 cents at SDollars 6.50, led the market: Jardine
Strategic Holdings, of Hong Kong, said it had bought a 16 per cent stake in
the car distributor. In KUALA LUMPUR the composite index ended 4.01 up at
632.89 with Multi-Purpose gaining 2 cents at MDollars 2.21.
AUSTRALIA weakened on profit-taking, the All Ordinaries index closing 12.6
off at 1,497.0 in turnover of ADollars 260.15m.
News Corp was among the day's biggest losers, following a downgrading by a
US broker, and the shares ended 82 cents cheaper at ADollars 29.
Banks remained under pressure, with National Australia falling 17 cents to
ADollars 7.53, ANZ 5 cents to ADollars 2.68 and Westpac 3 cents to ADollars
3.03.
NEW ZEALAND was steady as Fletcher Challenge regained support after falling
steeply on Tuesday. The NZSE-40 index closed 0.79 firmer at 1,521.18 with
FCL up 5 cents at NZDollars 2.31. Among other leading stocks, Carter Holt
Harvey was down 2 cents at NZDollars 2.78, Goodman Fielder eased 2 cents to
NZDollars 2.13 and Telecom lost a cent to NZDollars 2.29.
BANGKOK recovered in the last minutes of trading to finish the day with
small gains. The SET index was a net 1.10 ahead at 840.40 and rises led
declines by 111 to 86. Turnover was thin at Bt1.2bn.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 35
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1509</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / World Stock Markets (America): Late program trading sharply
weakens Dow
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KAREN ZAGOR
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Wall Street
US SHARE prices fell sharply yesterday afternoon as program trading combined
with a second day of strong selling of IBM stock, and also the erosion of
Goodyear's share price, to drive the market lower, writes Karen Zagor in New
York.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average blue chip indicator dropped 29.18 to
3,255.18 after spending most of the day only modestly lower. New York SE
volume was heavy with 244m shares changing hands. Falls outscored rises by
1,041 to 726.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500, however, eased only 1.05 to 431.52 and the Nasdaq
composite dipped 1.12 to 649.63.
There was little reaction to the day's economic news, that housing starts
were 1.5 per cent higher in November. Although the gain was stronger than
expected it was consistent with a picture of a gradually improving US
economy.
The October report was revised to show a gain of 0.2 per cent from a
previously reported decline of 1.1 per cent.
IBM continued its downward spiral, tumbling Dollars 4 1/4 to Dollars 51 7/8
after dropping Dollars 6 3/4 a day earlier. Investors started to flee from
IBM, one of the market's biggest stocks, after the company said on Tuesday
that it was cutting 25,000 jobs and taking a Dollars 6bn restructuring
charge.
In the technology sector, Compaq improved Dollars  3/4 to Dollars 43,
regaining its previous day's loss. Motorola added Dollars 1 1/4 at Dollars
101 1/2 , but Digital Equipment shed Dollars  1/2 to Dollars 32 1/2 .
Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber fell Dollars 3 1/4 to Dollars 66 1/2 after the stock
was downgraded by Merrill Lynch, reflecting concern that European and Latin
American currency fluctuations would hurt the company's fourth-quarter
earnings.
American Cyanamid lost Dollars 2 to Dollars 56 on news that it had agreed to
buy a 53.5 per cent stake in Immunex by contributing Dollars 350m towards
the creation of a new biopharmaceutical company. Immunex put on Dollars 1 at
Dollars 46 1/4 on the Nasdaq.
Safety-Kleen, a hazardous waste recycler, plunged Dollars 6 1/4 to Dollars
24 3/4 in heavy trading on disappointing fourth-quarter earnings
projections. The company said that it expects to post profits of Dollars
12.5m in the quarter after a charge of Dollars 1.3m. In the 1991 fourth
quarter Safety-Kleen earned Dollars 13.9m.
In contrast, Intel soared Dollars 6 1/8 to Dollars 83 1/2 , above its
previous 52-week high of Dollars 80 1/2 , on strong fourth-quarter earnings
predictions. The integrated-circuit maker expects the quarter's earnings to
be well above analysts' expectations, thanks to high demand for its Intel
486 microprocessors.
Canada
THE Toronto market ended sharply firmer after a round of prime lending rate
cuts of a quarter-point, a rise in bullion prices and a positive report by
the OECD fuelled a rally, which came in spite of the setback on Wall Street.
The TSE 300 Index advanced 31.5 to 3,296.1 and rises led declines by 360 to
310. Volume was again heavy, totalling 43.5m shares, after Tuesday's 52.7m.
The gold and silver index climbed 146.3 to 5,293.4, led by American Barrick,
CDollars  7/8 higher at CDollars 38 5/8 . Comex gold futures ended USDollars
3.40 up at USDollars 338.70.
South Africa was closed for a public holiday.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 35
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1510</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / World Stock Markets: Bombay suffers as violence hits the
city - Political problems weigh on the equity markets
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By R C MURTHY and STEFAN WAGSTYL
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Bombay has this week slowly limped back to commercial life, following the
violence which hit the city after the destruction of the mosque in Ayodhya.
But it will take much longer to restore confidence in the nervous financial
markets.
Shares on the Bombay Stock Exchange, which was closed for three days after
the mosque's demolition unleashed a nationwide wave of unrest, have fallen
since trading resumed to 8.8 per cent below pre-crisis levels. Yesterday the
exchange's index of 30 leading stocks dropped 102 points to 2,374.72, pushed
down by news of the imposition of central government rule in three states.
The stock exchange authorities have tried to slow the decline by tightening
limits on trading volumes, but with little effect on sentiment.
Brokers said yesterday that the uncertainty would persist until Prime
Minister P V Narasimha Rao restored political stability. Doubts about the
future course of the economy are expected to cloud the financial outlook
until the government announces the next phase of its economic reform
programme in the budget due in February.
Financial companies are also still suffering from the effect of the Rs35bn
(Dollars 1.35bn) securities market scandal, which has depressed activity in
almost all markets, including stocks.
Mr Hemendra Kothari, chairman of DSP Financial and Investment Services, a
leading broker, said: 'I personally feel the political situation will clear
sooner rather than later, though how long it will take is anybody's guess.'
Mr Kothari, a former stock exchange president, added that stocks could fall
further as investors were waiting for the budget to get a correct picture of
economic reforms, although mid-January might be a good time for bargain
hunting.
The crisis has severely dampened activity in the burgeoning market in
primary issues. Hindustan Aluminium Company, a leading aluminium maker, last
week postponed the pricing of a planned Dollars 100m euro-equity issue.
Investment bankers in Bombay said the issue would probably now be postponed
until after the budget is published on February 28. Other proposed issues,
including Essar Gujarat, which is raising funds for a sponge iron plant,
could also be delayed, they said.
Indian brokers have also become wary of marketing local share issues for
fear that the decline in share prices is squeezing investors' resources. Yet
the market is not entirely dead: private individuals have, for example,
flocked to buy stock in Wockhardt, a Bombay pharmaceutical maker.
The political upheaval over Ayodhya will delay investments by foreign fund
managers. Foreigners this autumn won permission to invest directly in
India's equity market, albeit on strict conditions. But so far only eight
out of 19 applicants have been approved. Many of the remaining 11
institutions are fund management groups linked to security broking
companies, and have been held up by delays over deciding the terms of entry
for foreign securities companies.
One foreign banker in Delhi said that even before the Ayodhya crisis
foreigners had been in no hurry to invest in India.
Apart from the Ayodhya crisis and the financial scandal, foreigners are
concerned about the relatively high valuation of Indian stocks. The top 30
shares trade on price/earnings multiples of about 32.
As a result, Indian brokers believe that the country will see an inflow of
portfolio investment funds of a bare Dollars 100m in the financial year to
March, compared with an original unofficial target of Dollars 1bn.
Similarly, Indian companies are now expected to raise only about Dollars
500m to Dollars 600m in Euro-equity issues, just over half the Dollars 1bn
originally expected.
Meanwhile, the stock exchange authorities are concerned that the political
crisis may yet bring further trouble on the broking community by driving
some broking firms into financial collapse. The industry, which enjoyed an
unprecedented boom until April, has since seen prices and trading volumes
fall sharply, causing financial problems at many small broking concerns.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 35
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1511</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / World Stock Markets (Europe): Frankfurt falls back as VW
warns of big losses
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By Our Markets Staff
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Individual stocks featured in senior bourses yesterday, writes Our Markets
Staff.
FRANKFURT continued its painful revision of carmakers' prospective earnings
and dividends, and current market ratings. Volkswagen fell DM9 to DM235.50,
and Daimler DM6.40 to DM506.60 as the DAX index closed a relatively modest
9.17 lower at 1,472.07.
Turnover eased to DM3.5bn from DM3.7m, VW trading in DM225m after DM125m as
it talked of substantial fourth quarter losses, effectively confirmed that
it will cut this year's dividend and indicated that 1993 could be a good
deal worse.
Mr Bob Barber, who heads the automotive and capital goods team at James
Capel, said that he now expected earnings per share from VW of only DM9
against DM36 in 1991, and forecast a DM400m loss for 1993, with the dividend
falling from DM11, through DM6 for this year to DM4.
PARIS weakened late in the session on news that Societe Generale was to
increase its base rate to 10 per cent from 9.45 per cent from today. The
bank said that the increase followed the recent rise in money market rates
because of the franc's weakness in the last few weeks.
The CAC-40 index closed down 8.10 at 1,736.69, off the day's high of
1,757.45, in turnover of some FFr2.7bn.
Societe Generale rose FFr5 on the news to FFr578 while Paribas recovered
some of its losses to end down 80 centimes at FFr333. Suez closed down
FFr2.50 at FFr231.50.
Peugeot dipped FFr5 to FFr555 after the group forecast a 4 per cent fall in
European car sales, and Volkswagen warned of larger-than-expected fourth
quarter losses.
MILAN reversed weakness earlier this week in privatisation stocks, BCI
recovering L145 to L4,179, Credito Italiano L224 to L2,735 and Nuovo Pignone
L250 to L4,520, the last two strengthening further to L2,875 and L4,620
respectively on the kerb.
The Comit index, however, rose only 2.07 to 406.32 amid political
nervousness generated by the Craxi affair and the ruling parties' rebuff in
local elections.
Rinascente soared, closing with a session gain of L685 or 11 per cent to
L7,025, and to L7,200 after hours. The Fiat group retailer has been at
centre of speculation about a possible sale for some time.
ZURICH's SMI index rose nearly 1 per cent, closing 18.8 higher at 2,023.9 in
moderate volume. Dealers said that window-dressing of year-end accounts by
some brokers was behind some of the day's late buying.
BRUSSELS saw some gains in the financial sector with SGB putting on BFr15 to
BFr1,810. The Bel-20 index gained 5.22 to 1,106.35. Petrofina, which
suffered a 6 per cent fall on Tuesday after announcing that it would cut its
dividend 50 per cent, fell a further BFr50 to BFr7,440. Solvay bucked the
trend with a gain of BFr150 to BFr11,200.
STOCKHOLM saw Astra weakening further following a disappointing analysts'
meeting earlier in the week. The Affarsvarlden index shed 14.35 to 864.75
with Astra free shares slipping SKr21 to SKr711.
OSLO continued to weaken as high interest rates depressed sentiment. The all
share index fell 4.57 to 372.08 in turnover of NKr202m. Among actives
Kvaerner A shares lost NKr1 to NKr147, Bergesen A fell NKr3 to NKr98, and
Elkem slid NKr3 to NKr28.
AMSTERDAM's CBS Tendency Index closed 0.4 lower at 103.1. ING put on 50
cents to Fl 53.50 with overseas interest being seen. Elsewhere in the
financial sector Aegon fell 80 cents to Fl 72.70 and Amev lost 50 cents to
Fl 58.30.
VIENNA lost ground after Creditanstalt announced that it planned to cut its
1992 dividend to 6 per cent from 15 per cent in 1991. The ATX index closed
down 13.04 or 1.7 per cent at 738.77 while Creditanstalt preferred shares
fell Sch14 to Sch421.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                    FT-SE ACTUARIES SHARE INDICES
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
December 16                                         THE EUROPEAN SERIES
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Hourly changes           Open         10.30        11.00       12.00
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
FT-SE Eurotrack 100   1032.57       1033.48      1033.41     1035.18
FT-SE Eurotrack 200   1111.83       1111.37      1112.53     1113.25
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Hourly changes          13.00         14.00        15.00       Close
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
FT-SE Eurotrack 100   1035.66       1036.52      1038.11     1036.62
FT-SE Eurotrack 200   1114.79       1114.78      1118.33     1117.67
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                       Dec 15    Dec 14    Dec 11    Dec 10     Dec 9
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
FT-SE Eurotrack 100   1038.14   1041.18   1044.03   1049.63   1054.06
FT-SE Eurotrack 200   1115.23   1116.33   1117.72   1123.58   1133.46
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Base value  1000 (26/10/90)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
High/day: 100 - 1038.94; 200 - 1118.33
Low/day: 100 - 1032.47 200 - 1110.58
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 35
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1512</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Money Markets: French rate rise
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JAMES BLITZ
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
FRANCE'S national banks raised their main lending rates yesterday, amid
worsening sentiment towards the French franc on financial markets, writes
James Blitz.
The leading state-owned banks said they were increasing French base lending
rates to 10 per cent from 9.45 per cent. The move is effective from today,
and came in the wake of the recent sharp rises in money market rates.
In the German cash market, call money eased slightly to around 8.95 per cent
as market activity normalised in the wake of the Bundesbank's securities
repurchase tender.
However, sentiment persists that the Bundesbank is unlikely to reduce its
official rates until well into the spring, a factor which will continue to
keep pressure on the French franc high.
The rise in French base rates followed this week's rise in cash market
rates, which commercial banks have found incompatible with the rate
structure in the retail sector. French three-month money climbed again
yesterday, to 11 1/2 per cent from a previous close of 11 3/8 per cent.
French franc futures fell back again: the March contract was down 15 basis
points at a close of 90.40.
Miss Joanne Perez, an economist at Banque Indosuez in Paris, said the
decision to lift base rates reflected general disappointment in France's
banking sector that there was no reduction in German official rates last
week.
Miss Alison Cottrell, an economist at Midland Global Markets in London,
suggested that French monetary policy may have to be tightened even further
today. She believes that the Bank of France will be forced to raise the rate
in the 5 to 10-day lending window today in order to support the franc.
One reason for this is that French call money, which closed yesterday at
around 9 15/16 per cent, is virtually touching the current 5 to 10-day
lending rate of 10 per cent.
Miss Cottrell also said that the Bundesbank has sent strong signals in
recent weeks that it will be prepared to defend the franc only if the French
central bank plays by the rules of the European exchange rate mechanism.
'The message being sent to the French is that if they want the Bundesbank to
come into the market and intervene to support the franc, they must first
show a willingness to raise rates,' she said.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 29
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1513</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Foreign Exchanges: Prospects for franc deteriorate
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JAMES BLITZ
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE FRENCH franc remained under considerable pressure against the D-Mark
yesterday, as foreign exchange dealers took a more pessimistic view of the
prospects of the currency avoiding devaluation, writes James Blitz.
The currency markets were again the scene of the thin trading associated
with the Christmas period. The dollar, for example, lost more than a pfennig
against the D-Mark, finishing at DM1.5550, as a handful of players had a big
impact on the leading exchange rates. The US unit improved a little in New
York to end at DM1.5570.
Trading in the D-Mark cross rates remained jittery. The yen, French franc
and Italian lira were all sold at one time or another against the German
currency, and dealers continued to take the view that the Bundesbank will
not lower interest rates in a hurry.
By far the biggest problems confronted the franc. Although trading was quiet
in the European morning, the French currency came under renewed pressure
after France's leading state-owned banks responded to recent rises in money
market rates by lifting their base rates by 25 basis points.
The currency was also besieged by rumours that the news conference to be
held today by Mr Pierre Beregovoy, the French prime minister, will be the
stage for a dramatic announcement.
Among the subjects rumoured to be on the agenda were the resignation of Mr
Beregovoy, the resignation of Mr Michel Sapin, the French finance minister,
and a rise in French official rates. None of these rumours could be
confirmed.
The franc was unchanged at FFr3.4170 against the D-Mark at the end of
European trading. But in US trading it fell further, to below FFr3.42.
Another factor worrying dealers was that the franc fell to 77 percentage
points on the ERM divergence indicator. Under the Basle-Nyborg agreement, it
is presumed that a central bank must defend its currency either by
inter-vention or by increasing int-erest rates if it falls below the 75
percentage-point level.
Mr Gerard Lyons, chief economist at DKB International in London, believes
there has been a striking deterioration in sentiment over the French
currency in recent days. He thinks that the currency remains strong on
fundamental economic grounds. 'But it will be very difficult for the franc
to survive without a devaluation, either in this calendar year or the next,'
he said.
Mr Christian Dunis, an economist at Chemical Bank in London, believes France
must now tighten monetary policy to show its willingness to defend the
currency. 'The lesson of sterling's devaluation is that if a central bank
does not defend its currency promptly, devaluation is unavoidable,' he said.
Yesterday's dollar fall was due to technical factors alone. US industrial
production in November rose by 0.4 per cent, exactly in line with forecasts.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 29
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1514</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Smelters feel 'green' squeeze
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ENVIRONMENTAL pressures are causing a structural change in the metals
smelting industry - particularly in copper and zinc smelting - that will
force smelters to raise prices charged to the mining industry by 20 to 25
per cent, according to Mr Thomas Baack, chief economist at
Metallgesellschaft, the German metals and mining group.
He suggests that in the short term copper miners can afford to absorb the
increase in smelter treatment charges but this is not the case for the zinc
miners. And, 'in the medium to longer term, the higher processing costs will
have to be reflected in (metal) prices,' warns Mr Baack.
He says, in MG's latest metals markets survey, that smelters are suffering
'irreversible' changes to their revenues and costs, changes directly or
indirectly related to pollution control measures.
To comply with present standards, smelters need to spend up to a third of
their capital investment and operating costs on control measures, he points
out.
At the same time, some revenue-producing by-products of the smelting
process, such as sulphuric acid and cadmium, are threatened by present
environmental trends. Smelters, forced to capture more sulphur from ores,
are producing much more sulphuric acid, yet demand for the acid has fallen -
also because of environmental factors.
Mr Baack says it is possible that before long smelters will have to pay
heavily to dispose of sulphuric acid.
He points out that the price of cadmium has also fallen so low that it is
hardly worth recovering during zinc smelting. 'Since the use of cadmium is
being further restricted because of its toxicity, it is unlikely that the
market will recover,' Mr Baack adds.
'As a consequence of this development, higher smelting charges are
unavoidable. . . Surcharges of between 20 and 25 per cent can be reckoned
on.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 28
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1515</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: EC ministers strive to tie up
farm reform package
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID GARDNER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BRUSSELS
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
EUROPEAN COMMUNITY agriculture ministers were striving last night to tie up
a package of 'loose-ends' from this year's reform of the common agricultural
policy, combined with a series of measures which have to be in place for the
internal market starting on January 1.
The complex, end-of-year compromise package - which in parts reads like a
letter to Santa Claus from ministers seeking presents for farmers unhappy
about CAP reform and cuts being agreed under the Uruguay Round world trade
reform - was last night the subject of intense bilateral negotiations
between the member states, and the European Commission and current UK
presidency of the EC.
Decisions looked unlikely until today at the earliest, but two developments
may inject some urgency into the farm ministers' habitually drawn-out
horse-trading.
According to senior commission officials, proposals on banana tariffs, the
'green currency' regime, and compensation to Spain and Portugal for giving
up transitional protection they won for their farmers when they joined the
EC in 1986, could be put to other ministers for decision if the farm council
procrastinates further. The 12 meet today to finalise Single Market rules,
and on Monday EC foreign ministers are due to meet.
In this extreme case, the extensive list of unsettled national demands -
seen by some agriculture ministers as a vital sop to farmers for accepting
internal and internationally agreed cutbacks on price, output and exports -
would be put aside and lose purchase on future negotiations.
Second, the undertakings the EC agreed last month with the US within the
farm trade chapter of the Uruguay Round were yesterday handed in to the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in Geneva. France had on Tuesday made
a further attempt to hold up the Geneva negotiations to conclude the Uruguay
Round, and its failure was underlined by delivery of these 'schedules'.
The Uruguay Round talks in the 14 other trade sectors earmarked for
liberalisation are now expected to gather momentum, locking in the farm
deal. Moreover, senior EC officials say there is an emerging majority behind
the EC-US farm trade deal. They say that more than half the 12 are willing
to defend it, lest the EC be forced into further concessions by the other 95
signatories to the Gatt.
Among the most problematic issues in dispute last night was bananas. A
common regime on bananas is required to complete the single market. But Gatt
also requires that the EC replaces blanket protection for banana growers in
outlying community territories and former European colonies by tariffs.
The commission originally wanted to put a quota on far cheaper Central
American, or 'dollar' bananas, to protect these growers. The 'dollar' zone
already supplies 60 per cent of the 3.4m tonnes of the fruit consumed in the
EC, and too free a market would wipe out high-cost EC suppliers from the
Canary Islands to the Caribbean.
The compromise fixes a 1.9m tonnes annual quota for the Latin suppliers,
with a 20 per cent tariff of Ecu100 per tonne. Above this quota - part of
which they would have to share with EC suppliers - they would have to pay an
Ecu700 (Pounds 560) tariff per tonne.
The 12 were polarised last night between France, which wants the low tariff
quota limited to 1.4m tonnes with an Ecu800 surcharge on each extra tonne,
and Germany, the EC's main banana consumer, almost entirely from the dollar
area, which was holding out for a 2.4m tonnes annual quota, with a maximum
tariff of Ecu250 on additional imports.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 28
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1516</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Guemassa mine to double
Morocco's non-ferrous metals output
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By FRANCIS GHILES
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MOROCCO'S OUTPUT of non-ferrous metals is being doubled with the opening of
the Guemassa zinc-lead-copper mine, 35 km (22 miles) due south of Marrakesh.
Guemassa, Morocco's largest mine, is a joint venture between the
privately-owned Omnium Nord Africain and the state-controlled Bureau de
Recherches et de Participation Miniere.
The mine has reserves estimated at 12m tonnes and production is forecast to
run at a rate of 750,000 tonnes of ore a year, giving a 16-year mine life.
It is scheduled to produce annually concentrate (an intermediate product)
containing about 67,600 tonnes of zinc, 19,200 tonnes of lead and 3,000
tonnes of copper. Most of the output will be exported to Europe,
particularly to Spain.
The Guemassa mine ranks as one of the ten largest zinc mines in the world
and the second largest in the European and Mediterranean region after the
Tara mine in Ireland. ONA has invested Dirhams 850m (Pounds 70m) in the
project, Dh520m from its own reserves. The annual turnover of ONA, whose
activities include tourism, food processing, distribution, banking and real
estate, amounted to Dh14.2bn last year, Dh600m coming from mining, which is
concentrated in three areas. They include mining precious metals and copper
oxide in the Anti- Atlas, polymetallic ores and precious metals in the
Maroc-Central region, as well as Guemassa.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 28
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1517</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Rains promise bumper oilseeds
crop
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KUNAL BOSE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE SEPTEMBER rains had left enough moisture in the subsoil to allow India
to produce up to 11m tonnes of oilseeds during the winter, according to
government figures. With the summer harvest estimated to have reached 10.9m
tonnes that means total production for the 1992-93 season is likely to be
nearly 3m tonnes above target at a record 21.9m tonnes, compared with 19.5m
tonnes last year.
The summer crop estimate comprises 5.7m tonnes of groundnuts, and 2.9m of
soyabeans, as well as 700,000 tonnes of sunflowerseed, 700,000 tonnes of
castor seed and 200,000 tonnes of niger.
The technology mission on oilseeds, set up by the federal government six
years ago to reduce the country's dependence on vegeteable oil imports, has
been making efforts to promote oilseeds cultivation on scientific lines and
the country has succeeded in bringing more and more land under oilseeds by
giving good returns to the farmers. But productivity of about 800 kg a
hectare is among the lowest in the world.
According to government officials, the main reason for the low productivity
is the limited use of hybrid seeds.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 28
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1518</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / World Commodities Prices: Wool
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Prices for wool in Australia continued to drift lower this week, but
yesterday the decline was checked, and the market indicator rose 3 cents to
505 cents a kg. This recovery was only achieved after quite large
withdrawals by growers of wool before the auctions being held, due to
dissatisfaction with prices likely to be realised. The quantity passed in
was also large, about 17% at Melbourne and Sydney, 12% at Fremantle. Even
the appearance of a firmer close before the Christmas recess, which starts
at the end of this week, will help the market tone.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 28
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1519</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Indian cotton prices languish
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KUNAL BOSE
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   CALCUTTA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
INDIAN COTTON prices are much lower than last year's, in spite of the
federal government raising support prices and sanctioning an export quota of
500,000 bales (170 kg each) of cotton, plus 85,100 bales of yellow pickings
and soft and hard cotton waste, ahead of the arrival of the new season crop.
The delayed monsoon has ensured that this year's cotton crop will be late
and crop arrivals are just begining to pick up momentum. Last year, however,
cotton prices were too high, which restricted mill offtake to 10.3m bales.
So the 1992-93 season opened in September with very comfortable stocks of
nearly 3.3m bales.
The behaviour of cotton prices has once again proved that India cannot
depend entirely upon value-added exports of yarn and fabrics. The interest
of farmers in cotton cultivation is unlikely to be sustained unless India
remains a regular exporter of cotton. In fact, the government may allow
further exports of cotton in the current season to maintain domestic prices.
Mill offtake is also likely to rise to 11m bales.
Estimates of this year's cotton crop vary between the ministry of
agriculture's 11.51m bales and the East India Cotton Association's
12.8m-13.6m bales. The Cotton Corporation of India puts the figure at 13m
bales. Based on these projections, the Cotton Advisory Board has settled on
a range of 12m to 12.5m bales, up from 11.9m bales last year. As the season
progresses, however, the crop estimate may be revised, as had always been
the case in the past.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 28
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1520</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / World Commodities Prices: Market Report
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE GOLD price moved up sharply in London yesterday, aided by a rise in New
York that traders attributed to technical buying. The London bullion market
price closed at Dollars 337.05 a troy ounce, up Dollars 2 on the day. 'A
couple of people bought some gold and the market is so thin that it moved,'
one dealer commented, adding that there was no fundamental news to stir up
prices. At the London Metal Exchange attention was focussed on ALUMINIUM
prices, which rose to the highest level since September. Traders said the
rise, which left the three months delivery position Dollars 16 higher on the
day at Dollars 1,240.50 a tonne, was instigated by an early burst of
commission house buying, possibly against options. US buyers joined in after
lunch they added. The ZINC market took heart from the firmer aluminium price
and mixed buying and short covering lifted the three months price by Dollars
11.50 to Dollars 1,078 a tonne. Crude OIL prices moved higher after the
president of the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries said he
thought the recent slide was bottoming out.
Compiled from Reuters
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 28
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1521</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Capital Markets: Progress seen in world
settlement systems says G30
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD WATERS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE settlement systems of stock markets around the world have come a long
way since the 1987 crash first provoked concern about their effectiveness,
according to a report issued yesterday by the Group of 30, the
Washington-based think tank.
However, ambitious targets for the standardisation of settlement
arrangements, set by G30 and due to be completed by the end of this year,
have still not been met by many leading financial centres.
It was in March 1989 that a G30 steering committee, led by Mr John Reed,
chairman of Citicorp, set its far-reaching targets. These included
recommendations that all trades should be settled three days after they have
taken place (known in the jargon as T+3), that each country should have a
central securities depositary and that settlement systems should achieve
delivery-versus-payment (DVP) - that is, stocks and cash should be
transferred simultaneously.
A target date of the end of 1992 was set for all three of these
recommendations. So far, though, they have been met in full by only a
handful of investment centres. Of 34 countries reporting in G30's latest
annual survey of international settlement arrangements, for example, 10 have
achieved T+3 or are in the process of changing to such a system, while nine
are on shorter settlement cycles.
Attainment of other targets is more difficult to establish. Most countries
claim to have achieved DVP, though this may not mean that cash and shares
are transferred free of any claim or recourse. 'Against that stern test,
quite a lot will fail,' says Mr David Holland, consultant to the G30
settlement initiative.
The group's latest status reports on settlement systems reveal both the
advances that have been made in a number of countries this year, as well as
some of the weaknesses that still exist. France and Sweden, for example,
have both made the move to T+3, while Hong Kong has launched a centralised
securities depositary based on book-entry transfer.
The UK remains among those that are further behind, though its planned
paperless settlement system, Taurus, is tipped to be completed next year.
The London stock exchange said yesterday that 100 listed companies had
passed the amendments to their articles of association to transfer to
Taurus. This signals growing acceptance of the system in the corporate
world.
Others to lag on some aspects of the G30 recommendations include the US,
which has yet to make the switch to T+3. Concern in some quarters of the
securities industry about whether such a short settlement period is suited
to retail investment has helped to stall the move.
In spite of this, the G30 can claim credit for focusing attention on the
inadequacy of settlement arrangements and giving momentum to developments in
a number of financial centres. Its involvement came after the 1987 crash,
which brought home to the securities markets the extra risks involved with
the slowness and inefficiency of settlement systems.
'The accounts of recent developments . . . make it quite clear that the
momentum of reform is being maintained,' say Lord Richardson of
Duntisbourne, former governor of the Bank of England, and Mr Paul Volcker,
former chairman of the Federal Reserve, in an introduction to the G30
report. 'The general direction is unmistakable. Rolling settlement is
replacing account settlement; settlement periods are shortening; securities
are being immobilised or dematerialised in central securities depositories
to facilitate transfers by book entry; and there is a particularly welcome
emphasis on improving DVP procedures.'
Clearance and Settlement Systems, Status Reports: Autumn 1992, G30, London
or Washington DC. Pounds 40 or Dollars 70
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 27
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1522</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Government Bonds: French notes weakened by pressure on franc
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By SARA WEBB and KAREN ZAGOR
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   LONDON, NEW YORK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
FRENCH government bonds closed lower yesterday as the French currency came
under pressure and speculation increased that the Bank of France may be
forced to raise its key interest rates shortly.
Money market rates continued to edge higher, with three-month money quoted
at around 11.5 per cent yesterday. The rise in money market rates forced
several French banks to raise their base lending rates from 9.45 per cent to
10.00 per cent yesterday afternoon, and led to more speculation over whether
the Bank of France would be forced to raise its 5-to-10 day interest rate
shortly to help support the franc.
Dealers said there was further speculation over whether the French currency
would be devalued or allowed to float outside the European Exchange Rate
Mechanism.
Short-dated bonds dropped during the day with the yield on the 8 per cent
bond due 1994 moving from 8.40 per cent to 8.60 per cent. Longer-dated
issues were less seriously hit, with the yield on the 8 1/2 per cent bond
due 2003 moving from 8.27 per cent to 8.29 per cent.
News that the prime minister, Mr Pierre Beregovoy, was holding a press
conference this morning led to speculation that an important announcement
would be made concerning the franc.
However, dealers said the prime minister's office was later understood to
have denied that there would be a statement on a devaluation, claiming that
the press conference would simply provide an opportunity for the press to
put questions to the prime minister.
'The worst possible scenario for the bond market is if we have no
devaluation but higher interest rates', said Mr Julian Jessop, economist
with Midland Montagu, referring to the possibility that the Bank of France
may raise its 5-to-10 day rate.
Mr Dominique Barbet, economist at Paribas, said the decision by the
commercial banks to raise their lending rates yesterday would 'increase the
political pressure in France to either devalue the franc or float the
currency'.
Today's planned auction of FFr14bn to FFr16bn of two and five-year notes may
further depress prices at the short end of the yield curve, dealers said.
ITALIAN government bonds tumbled again at the opening following Tuesday's
announcement that Mr Bettino Craxi, leader of Italy's Socialist Party, was
under investigation for involvement in a political corruption scandal.
However, after an initial fall of about a point, the bond market recovered
some of its losses.
The March futures contract, which opened at 92.93 and fell to a low of
92.00, ended the day at 93.20.
Elsewhere in Europe, German government bonds traded in a narrow range with
the Liffe bund future contract edging up from 91.57 at the opening to a high
of 91.60.
UK government bonds closed higher in thin trade helped by
weaker-than-expected retail sales figures for November. Retail sales fell
0.1 per cent between October and November, after a 0.2 per cent increase the
previous month.
In the cash market, the 10 1/2 per cent gilt due 1997 edged up from 110
17/32 to 110 19/32 , while the 9 3/4 per cent gilt due 2002 improved from
108 9/16 to 108 23/32 .
A drop in the Tokyo stock market rekindled hopes of an easing in interest
rates and helped to lift Japanese government bond prices yesterday, dealers
said.
The Nikkei average index fell 212.03 to 17,268.71 and dealers said further
falls in the stock market would revive hopes of a cut in the Official
Discount Rate soon.
The yield on the benchmark No 145 issue opened at 4.62 per cent, the low of
the day, and ended at 4.615 per cent.
US Treasury prices firmed yesterday on the back of economic news suggesting
that the US economy is growing gradually.
In late trading, the Treasury's bellwether 30-year bond was  7/32 higher at
102 5/16 , yielding 7.425 per cent, while the two-year note was up  3/16 to
yield 4.624 per cent.
The market moved slightly on the release of housing starts for November,
which rose 1.5 per cent. In addition, industrial production rose 0.4 per
cent in November.
In the afternoon, the Treasury said it would auction Dollars 11.25bn in
five-year notes and Dollars 15.5bn in two-year notes.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 27
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1523</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Capital Markets: FT-SE Actuaries Indices
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The FT-SE 100, FT-SE Mid 250 and FT-SE Actuaries 350 indices and the FT-SE
Actuaries Industry Baskets are calculated by The International Stock
Exchange of the United Kingdom and Republic of Ireland Limited. The
International Stock Exchange of the United Kingdom and Republic of Ireland
Limited 1992. All rights reserved.
The FT-Actuaries All-Share Index is calculated by The Financial Times
Limited in conjunction with the Institute of Actuaries and the Faculty of
Actuaries. The Financial Times Limited 1992. All rights reserved.
The FT-SE 100, FT-SE Mid 250 and FT-SE Actuaries 350 indices, the FT-SE
Actuaries Industry Baskets and the FT-Actuaries All-Share Index are members
of the FT-SE Actuaries Share Indices series which are calculated in
accordance with a standard set of ground rules established by The Financial
Times Limited and London Stock Exchange in conjunction with the Institute of
Actuaries and the Faculty of Actuaries.
'FT-SE' and 'Footsie' are joint trade marks and service marks of the London
Stock Exchange and The Financial Times Limited.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 27
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1524</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAE9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Capital Markets: Japan withholding tax
expected to continue
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By EMIKO TERAZONO
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE Japanese government is likely to approve the continuation of withholding
tax exemption for Japanese corporate bonds issued overseas.
The decision, expected to be finalised today by the ruling Liberal
Democratic Party's Tax Research Commission, comes after strong lobbying from
Japanese companies and securities houses, which feel the introduction of
withholding tax would deter overseas investors.
The Keidanren, the federation of leading business organisations, the
Federation of Electric Power Companies, and the International Primary
Markets Association, lobbied against the abolition of the withholding tax
exemption rule for non-resident investors, or Article 6 under the Special
Taxation Measures Law. The special law is reviewed every two years, and will
expire next March.
Japanese companies face a wave of equity-linked bond redemptions over the
next two years, with maturities next year estimated at some Y10,000bn
(Dollars 80.4bn). Most companies are expected to refinance these bonds
through straight bonds.
Underwriting of foreign bonds has become an important source of income for
Japanese securities houses, which face a sharp drop in profits due to the
sluggish volumes on the Tokyo stock market. However, the main beneficiaries
of the move will be Japanese institutional investors, who are the leading
buyers of Japanese corporate bonds issued overseas.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 27
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1525</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAE8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Bonds: Swiss issue coupons fall below 6%
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By BRIAN BOLLEN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
COUPONS on Swiss franc straight bonds fell below 6 per cent yesterday, with
a SFr300m 10-year issue for Osterreichische Kontrollbank, a regular borrower
in the sector.
Lead-manager Swiss Bank Corp admitted that the terms of the deal, with a
coupon of 5.5 per cent, looked aggressive. The last time rates were at this
level was nearly four years ago, when they were on the way up, it said.
The market is convinced that rates have further to fall, it said, as the
Swiss franc benefits from a shift of sentiment caused by the currency
turmoil in the European Exchange Rate Mechanism and other European
countries.
The previous issue from Osterreichische Kontrollbank, in early October, for
SFr300m over 10 years through SBC, had a coupon of 6.25 per cent.
In addition to the Austrian state guarantee, this latest issue could be
helped by the general shortage of new paper at this time of the year, agreed
bankers.
SBC surprisingly led a second deal on a day when most other houses reported
little or no new issue activity.
Credit Local de France is raising SFr125m over seven years through a private
placement, which SBC said was greeted less enthusiastically than the OKB
bonds.
It carries a coupon of 5 3/4 per cent.
Elsewhere, the market expects the two separate Y10bn Euroyen issues for
Daicel Chemical Industries to find their way back to Japan fairly quickly.
One issue is for four years, the other is for seven years.
Moody's, the rating agency, has lowered the long-term ratings of Banque
Nationale de Paris and Credit Lyonnais.
BNP's senior debt was cut to Aa1 from Aaa while Moody's cut the Credit
Lyonnais rating to Aa3 from Aa2.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 27
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1526</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAE6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: Volkswagen plans further
cutbacks
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   FRANKFURT
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
VOLKSWAGEN, Europe's biggest carmaker, is expected shortly to announce
another round of restructuring, including heavy job cuts, following
yesterday's announcement of a slide into loss in the last quarter of this
year.
The plans are expected to be agreed at an extraordinary meeting of the
supervisory board on January 13, which will also approve sharp cuts in the
new year's investment programme.
According to Mr Dieter Ullsperger, finance director, heavy fourth-quarter
losses would make a considerable dent in the full-year earnings, and he
repeated an earlier warning that the dividend might be cut. The group made
just over DM1bn (Dollars 637m) profit in 1991, and paid out DM11 on ordinary
and DM12 on preference shares.
He also forecast further trouble in the new year, when, he said, the German
car market would shrink by 20 per cent and deliveries to Europe would fall
10 per cent.
The motor trade had deteriorated 'suddenly and dramatically' since
September, he said. Other factors included the recent appreciation of the
D-Mark, which would cost the company DM200m. Extraordinary pension
provisions during the quarter had drained a further DM485m, compared with
DM85m in the comparable part of 1991.
Mr Ullsperger, who gave no details of expected losses, said the group had
also lost DM250m because of the forced closure of its Sarajevo plant in the
former Yugoslavia. An illegal strike in Mexico had cost DM100m.
Economies already made this year included a reduction of almost DM3bn in
planned capital spending.
Cost-cutting action already taken this year included cuts of DM1bn in
spending plans for the Seat subsidiary in Spain, DM1.2bn at the German
parent company - including DM250m in its plant in Mosel, eastern Germany -
and DM400m in other overseas operations.
In the spring, before the extent of the current downturn was suspected, VW
announced plans to reduce its German workforce through natural wastage by
12,500 over five years. Around 6,800 domestic jobs have already gone this
year and short-time working has been introduced in all its plants.
Analysts said the company was now preparing its employees for even more
dramatic action. They suspected the extra pensions provisions, necessary for
the early retirement component of the payroll reductions, had been loaded
into the fourth-quarter result to underline the need for greater economies.
Mr Ferdinand Piech, who formally takes over as group chairman on January 1,
is already having a profound influence on management thinking, according to
analysts. He is an eng-ineer, known as a hard man to please, and dedicated
to increasing productivity.
VW produces 12 cars per employee each year compared with more than 17 at its
rival Opel, owned by General Motors.
Despite its problems, the group claimed to have increased its European
market share from 16.4 per cent to 17.5 per cent this year. Group turnover
was likely to rise 13 per cent to DM86bn and unit sales were expected to be
up about 6 per cent at 3.5m vehicles.
Volkswagen shares, which peaked at DM410 in May, dropped a further DM9 to
DM235.50 on the news. Daimler-Benz, parent of Mercedes-Benz, also lost
DM6.40, falling to DM506.60 after the group further reduced its production
forecasts for 1992.
Short-time working at the turn of the year would cut total output of cars to
529,000, compared with 578,000 in 1991. Mr Edzard Reuter, group chairman,
said on Tuesday night that 1992 had been 'an annus horribilus although our
house has not burnt down'.
The group, which is currently reducing its workforce by almost 50,000, had
made an early start on dealing with its difficulties, he said. Daimler
expects full year profits to fall to around DM1.5bn after DM1.9bn last time.
See Lex
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 26
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1527</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAE5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: Hostile W. A. Deutsher bid for
Siddons Ramset fits ITW's Asian ambitions
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN BROWN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   SYDNEY
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
W. A. DEUTSHER, an Australian subsidiary of Illinois Tool Works (ITW), the
US engineering group, yesterday said it would review all the operations of
Siddons Ramset, the hardware and fasteners group, if its ADollars 94m
(USDollars 64.8m) hostile takeover bid was successful.
Deutsher said in its formal takeover document that the offer would enable
ITW to expand in south-east Asia and extend its Ramset businesses to
Australia, New Zealand and the UK.
However, Siddons said both the ITW offer and a rival ADollars 86m bid by
Pacific BBA, a subsidiary of BBA, the UK motor components maker,
significantly undervalued the company.
Siddons said it expected to publish an independent valuation of its assets
before the end of the year.
Deutsher's offer document said ITW would try to optimise Siddons' Asian
distribution network and expand its product range and technology skills.
Deutsher said no decision had been made about the future of Siddons'
businesses or future employment levels.
The offer said the bid would be funded by drawing on an unused USDollars
300m revolving credit facility with 13 US and international banks led by the
First International Bank of Chicago.
Pacific BBA has not matched ITW's offer, but has reserved its right to
increase its bid.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 26
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1528</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAE4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: ANZ Bank predicts profitability
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MELBOURNE
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
AUSTRALIA and New Zealand Banking Group expects a reasonable profit recovery
in the current year after posting a loss of ADollars 579m (USDollars 399m)
for the year ended September, Reuter reports from Melbourne.
'We expect a reasonable profit recovery in the current year and progressive
improvement in ANZ's performance over the next two to three years,' the bank
said.
'The principal factor in the return to profitability will be a major
reduction in the provisioning charge from the abnormally levels of recent
years,' it added in its annual report.
The bank charged ADollars 1.6bn towards bad and doubtful debts in 1991-92.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 26
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1529</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAE3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: Switzerland goes to the market
on stock indices - The introduction of SILO and MILO
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By IAN RODGER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE Swiss stock market is dominated by the shares of a handful of giant
multinational industrial companies and banks. This has an important bearing
on Swiss index futures.
In the SMI index of the 21 leading Swiss shares, the three pharmaceutical
groups, Ciba-Geigy, Roche and Sandoz, account for over one-third of the
weighting, and Nestle alone another 28 per cent.
Lombard, Odier, the Geneva private bank, argues that these companies'
activities are so international that their performance has precious little
to do with the Swiss economy or business climate.
Thus, the SMI index and even the all-share Swiss Performance Index (SPI),
where the SMI 21 accounts for more than 70 per cent of the total market
capitalisation, give a misleading impression of what is really going on.
Lombard, Odier has developed two new indices, one of medium-sized Swiss
quoted companies (the MILO index) and one of small Swiss companies (the SILO
index). There already exists a Vontobel Small Companies Index (VSC), and
Lombard, Odier acknowledges that the performance of it and SILO are much the
same, even though composition criteria are slightly different.
Lombard, Odier uses the same criterion, market capitalisation, for selecting
the components of its indices as the SMI, and is basically taking up where
the SMI leaves off.
The MILO index is composed of the 94 listed securities of the next 50
largest companies after the SMI 21. SILO reflects the remaining 295 listed
shares of 209 companies.
Why draw the line at 50? It seemed the right place to split between medium
and small companies, Mr Serge Ledermann, Lombard, Odier head of Swiss
research, says. It also happens to be close to the capitalisation of SFr500m
which is accepted as the border between small and medium-sized companies.
Lombard, Odier has been able to project its indices backward to 1980. The
result is not a pretty picture. Both MILO and SILO have underperformed the
market as a whole, SILO disastrously.
The SBC index of nearly the whole market, for example, has doubled since
1980 while MILO is up only 80 per cent and SILO is down 20 per cent. The
divergence in performance is particularly pronounced since 1988. The SMI
(which was introduced in 1989) is up 30 per cent, while MILO is off 12 per
cent and SILO nearly 50 per cent.
Lombard, Odier analysts say this is to be expected, given a high inflation
rate and the Swiss government's credit squeeze in that period. Also, the
smaller company shares are generally less liquid and not of interest to
index funds. In recent weeks, the uncertainty over Switzerland's referendum
on joining the European Economic Area has accentuated the divergence between
big and small shares still further.
But it may also point to some opportunities when signs of recovery in the
Swiss economy appear. Many of the companies in these indices have made great
efforts to improve their competitiveness in the past few years.
'In the mid-range we think we will find the blue chips of tomorrow,' says Mr
Ledermann.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 26
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1530</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAE2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: KIO named as seller of C &amp; C
stake to Jardine
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KIERAN COOKE and REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   SINGAPORE
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
SINGAPORE banking sources yesterday confirmed that the Kuwait Investment
Office (KIO) had been the seller of a 16 per cent stake in the local Cycle &amp;
Carriage company to Jardine of Hong Kong for SDollars 212.5m (USDollars
129.7m).
Earlier this week, Jardine announced it had bought the C &amp; C stake from OCBC
Securities, a company owned by the Singapore-based Overseas-Chinese Banking
Corp.
Singapore-based investment analysts said the Jardine move was both good and
bad news for the island republic. The purchase has brought life into what
has been an inactive local market. It also signals a further move by Hong
Kong's biggest 'Hong' - or trading house - into Sing-apore.
In late October, Jardine announced that its retail division, Dairy Farm
International, would buy the Singapore retail company Cold Storage Holdings
for SDollars 130m.
But brokers were concerned about the effects on the local market of
continued KIO disposals. 'The KIO has sold a large chunk of its holdings in
this part of the world in recent months,' said one broker. 'If it sells
everything in a hurry then it could cause some nervousness around the
region.'
The KIO still retains substantial shareholdings in blue chip stocks in
Singapore, Malaysia and Indonesia. It also has extensive property holdings
and is involved in the plantations sector.
A consortium led by Singapore's Keppel Corp has acquired the Philippines
National Oil Dockyard and Engineering Corporation (PDEC) for 680m pesos
(Dollars 27.6m), Reuter reports.
The offer by Keppel and its three Philippine-based partners was the highest
among foreign bids which closed in October. The sale of the 22.9 hectare
yard is part of the Philippine government's effort to privatise state-owned
companies and revitalise the Philippines economy.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 26
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1531</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAE1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: Argentine insurer's issue
cleared
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD LAPPER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE ARGENTINE parliament has given the go-ahead for the privatisation of the
Caja Nacional de Ahorro y Seguro.
The Caja, the largest insurance company in Argentina with a 13 per cent
market share, is the latest of a number of companies to be offered for sale
by the government since it began an ambitious privatisation programme in
August 1989.
Kleinwort Benson, and Coopers &amp; Lybrand, together with its local partner,
Harteneck Lopez, have been retained to advise on the sale, which is expected
to go ahead as soon as March next year.
Kleinwort has been involved in other Argentine privatisations in the energy
sector including the sale of Gas del Estado, but this is its first venture
in the financial services area.
Mr John Williams, of Kleinwort Benson, said that the government was seeking
to sell a majority stake of between 50 and 60 per cent of a new holding
company, which would in turn own the Caja's insurance and banking
businesses.
The government is likely to be looking for possibly as much as
one-and-a-half times the these assets, added Mr Williams. Caja's net assets
are currently estimated at between Dollars 150m and Dollars 200m.
Companies in North America, Germany, and France had already expressed signs
of interest, said Mr Williams.
NCM Holding, the Dutch trade credit insurer, yesterday announced a joint
venture with The Fidelity &amp; Deposit Companies, a leader in the US domestic
bonding and insurance industry.
The new insurer, Maryland-Netherlands Credit Insurance, will underwrite
commercial export credit risks.
Maryland-Netherlands will be chartered as a composite insurer and will file
for licences in all 50 states.
F&amp;D will hold 51 per cent of the new company.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1532</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAEZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: US judge overturns Price
Waterhouse jury verdict
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW JACK
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A US JUDGE has overturned a Dollars 338m jury verdict brought by Standard
Chartered against Price Waterhouse, the accountancy firm, in a move which
paves the way for a new trial next spring.
Judge John Sticht, of the Superior Court of Arizona, has granted PW's motion
for a new trial, which was submitted in July following a verdict last May
against the firm on seven of eight charges.
In a memo circulated yesterday to all his Price Waterhouse partners, Mr
Shaun O'Malley, the senior partner in the US, says the judge called the jury
verdicts 'so irreconcilably inconsistent as to be blatantly erroneous'.
But Standard Chartered said last night that it remained confident in its
claims and would be 'pressing forward to recover the full amounts, together
with the interest now accruing'.
It has the options of appealing the judge's verdict, pursuing the new trial
or entering out-of-court discussions for a settlement. The PW memo said no
such discussions had yet taken place.
The court case stems from a lawsuit brought in 1988 by Standard Chartered
which alleges that Price Waterhouse had failed to identify and report
'material deficiencies' in the loan portfolio and internal controls system
of United Bancorp, an Arizona bank bought by the UK bank in 1987.
Standard Chartered paid Dollars 335m for United, which made heavy losses,
and 18 months later sold it to Citicorp for Dollars 207m.
The UK bank's lawsuit claimed that Price Waterhouse was negligent in its
1985 and 1986 audits of United Bancorp.
The trial in Arizona lasted 11 months until last May, and has already cost
Price Waterhouse and Standard Chartered millions of pounds in legal fees.
If Judge Sticht had not granted the application for a new trial, PW would
have been forced to produce a bond of at least Dollars 200m before it could
have appealed the verdict to a higher court.
Standard Chartered announced the sale of 13 commercial buildings in Hong
Kong housing some of its branches, which it will lease back from the local
purchaser.
The sale proceeds before disposal costs will be Pounds 64m (Dollars 97.3m)
while the cost of the properties including improvements was Pounds 9m. The
bank said the sale would increase its Tier 1 capital by Pounds 55m.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1533</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAEYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: Alcan optimistic on outlook
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By AP-DJ
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ALCAN Aluminium saw a 'bright mid to long-term future for the aluminium
industry.' Mr David Morton, chairman and chief executive of the Canadian
group, forecast that demand should grow significantly in 1994-95, adding
that it was 'a period when no additional primary capacity would becoming
on-stream', AP-DJ reports.
Mr Morton said net capital spending in 1993 would again be lower than the
USDollars 880m spent in 1991. He added that the level should be 'below
Dollars 500m'. The company is expected to end the year with about Dollars
530m in capital spending.
Since 1989, Alcan has cut about 8,000 jobs, or 14 per cent of its work
force, and has scaled back production costs as well as selling and
administrative expenses.
Through the first nine months of 1992, the company has cut Dollars 166m in
costs, after inflation.
Mr Morton said the industry's oversupply was not likely to be remedied in
the coming year. There is about a 1.5m metric ton surplus of aluminum, in
large part because of production by the former Soviet Union.
He added that a 500,000-ton swing in the surplus could cause a 'rocketing'
in aluminum prices, which are currently about Dollars 1,200 a metric ton.
Such a swing, he pointed out, could come from one or two smelters dropping
out, and from a surge in imports by China, which 'is growing like a weed'.
Mr Morton said the company would set up an office in Moscow which would be
in operation in the next quarter.
He said that the new office would help identify and pursue opportunities in
metal trading, the sale of smelter technology, possibly joint research and
development, and downstream fabrication. But, he went on, 'we are not
rushing out there with an open cheque book'.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1534</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAEXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: O&amp;Y Developments files debt
restructuring plan
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT GIBBENS and AP-DJ
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MONTREAL
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
OLYMPIA &amp; York Developments yesterday filed details of its November debt
restructuring plan in Ontario Court, but some bankers and bondholders said
acceptance in a mid-January vote was by no means certain.
In Toronto, O&amp;Y said the filing was based on the November proposal under
which senior creditors could claim their collateral at any time.
This eliminated an earlier provision that would have delayed this right for
five years and required further capital injections into O&amp;Y's flagship
office towers in Toronto.
Under the new plan, senior creditors could take back O&amp;Y properties
immediately and O&amp;Y would become a management company controlled by the
Reichmann brothers.
Besides the main Canadian properties, creditors could also seize O&amp;Y's stock
in Abitibi-Price, the Canadian forest products group, Gulf Canada Resources,
an energy company, and Trizec, Canada's largest publicly-traded property
holding company.
About 34 creditor groups will vote on the plan in the week of January 11.
Meanwhile, O&amp;Y remains under bankruptcy protection in Canada. O&amp;Y is
negotiating separately to restructure its US property holdings.
Several bankers and bondholders, who did not wish to be identified, said if
creditors refused the plan, for closure proceedings could begin immediately
as institutions rush to seize collateral.
A vote in favour would mean acceptance of what amounts to an orderly
liquidation of the O&amp;Y Canadian business under which further negotiation
might be possible.
BCE has raised total proceeds of about CDollars 377m from the exercise of
share purchase warrants for common shares of TransCanada PipeLines, AP-DJ
reports.
BCE, the Canadian conglomerate, said its investment in TransCanada had been
reduced to about 9 per cent.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1535</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAEWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: Intel expects to top market
expectations
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
INTEL of the US expects fourth-quarter results to be 'well above' analysts'
estimates due to high demand for its Intel486 microprocessors, Reuter
reports.
The company, which earned Dollars 189m, or 90 cents a share, in the 1991
fourth quarter, also said fourth-quarter revenues would be 25 per cent above
the third quarter's Dollars 1.43bn.
According to estimates collected by Zacks Investment Research, Intel's
fourth-quarter net income per share is forecast to be between Dollars 1.15
to Dollars 1.30 a share. Estimates from IBES place the figure between
Dollars 1.15 to Dollars 1.36.
Mr Andrew Grove, Intel chief executive, said the combination of seasonal
strength, brisk personal computer unit demand, worldwide migration from the
Intel386 to the Intel486 microprocessor, excellent factory performance and
solid demand 'for our other products' was producing better-than-expected
fourth-quarter results.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1536</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAEVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: Revco sets price for rights
issue
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NIKKI TAIT
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
REVCO, the US drugstore operator which emerged from bankruptcy earlier this
year, yesterday set the subscription price for its proposed rights issue at
Dollars 80 a share, writes Nikki Tait in New York.
The sale of the new shares will, therefore, raise Dollars 110m for the
retailer.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1537</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAEUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: Exploration by Amoco directed
overseas
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN FRIEDMAN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
AMOCO, the Chicago-based energy group, has underlined the trend in the US
oil and gas industry towards keeping a tight rein on capital spending and
directing more funds to projects outside the US.
Amoco said it planned to spend Dollars 3.2bn on capital investment and
exploration next year, a budget that is largely unchanged on the spending
level authorised for this year.
Some Dollars 1.85bn of this amount will be devoted to exploration and
production, of which 70 per cent, or some Dollars 1.3bn, will be outside the
US.
Last year, the company spent Dollars 1.275bn on exploration and production
overseas.
A growing number of US oil and gas companies have decided recently to
redirect exploration efforts away from the US. This trend results partly
from congressional and local restrictions on drilling offshore of Florida
and California and the coastal plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge
in Alaska.
Last July, Amoco announced cost-cutting plans to take an Dollars 800m
restructuring charge in the second quarter and to reduce its workforce by
8,500 employees, or 16 per cent, by the end of next year.
In the first nine months of this year, Amoco's net income was Dollars 222m,
compared with Dollars 1.33bn in the same period of last year.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1538</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAETFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: Argentine insurer's issue
cleared
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD LAPPER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE ARGENTINE parliament has given the go-ahead for the privatisation of the
Caja Nacional de Ahorro y Seguro.
The Caja, the largest insurance company in Argentina with a 13 per cent
market share, is the latest of a number of companies to be offered for sale
by the government since it began an ambitious privatisation programme in
August 1989.
Kleinwort Benson, and Coopers &amp; Lybrand, together with its local partner,
Harteneck Lopez, have been retained to advise on the sale, which is expected
to go ahead as soon as March next year.
Kleinwort has been involved in other Argentine privatisations in the energy
sector including the sale of Gas del Estado, but this is its first venture
in the financial services area.
Mr John Williams, of Kleinwort Benson, said that the government was seeking
to sell a majority stake of between 50 and 60 per cent of a new holding
company, which would in turn own the Caja's insurance and banking
businesses.
The government is likely to be looking for possibly as much as
one-and-a-half times these assets, added Mr Williams. Caja's net assets are
currently estimated at between Dollars 150m and Dollars 200m.
Companies in North America, Germany, and France had already expressed signs
of interest, said Mr Williams, while Mapfre, the large Spanish company which
already has strong Latin American subsidiaries, could also be a bidder.
The Caja sells annual life, motor and general insurance. Annual premiums in
the year to June 30 amounted to Dollars 503m. Its commercial and savings
banks had over Dollars 566m in deposits at the end of June.
At present, the company sells simple term life insurance products, but
prospects for life business could be transformed by new pensions legislation
planned for next year which will permit the provision of private pensions.
The life industry in neighbouring Chile grew strongly in the 1980s following
similar legal changes.
The Caja also has good distribution with a network of 42 branches and 12
agencies. It employs 3,064 people, of whom 1,972 work in insurance and 1,092
in banking.
Argentina also plans to sell off the nationalised reinsurance company
Instituto Nacional de Reasseguros (Inder). probably next year.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1539</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAEQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: Philips to change accounting
practice
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RONALD VAN DE KROL
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   AMSTERDAM
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
PHILIPS, the Dutch electronics group, is to switch to historical-cost
accounting from its previous current-cost system with retroactive effect
from January 1 1992. The move is part of wider changes in accounting
policies designed to bring the company into line with most other big
international companies.
Philips also plans to use the US dollar as the 'functional' currency in
highly inflationary South American countries such as Brazil instead of the
local currency. This will enable Philips to simplify reporting by dropping
the lines 'revaluation,' 'gearing adjustment' and 'monetary adjustment' for
these local currencies from its annual financial reporting.
If these changes had been implemented in 1991, Philips' net profit from
normal business operations would have been around Fl 881m (Dollars 489m), Fl
100m lower than the published figure. The ratio of total liabilities to
total capital employed would have been 75.8 per cent against 73.5 per cent.
The changes, foreshadowed in the company's 1991 annual report, coincide with
the appointment at the end of the month of a new Anglo-Saxon-trained finance
director, Mr Dudley Eustace, the former finance director of British
Aerospace. Mr Eustace, who joined Philips in mid-1992, will be taking over
from Mr Henk Appelo, who is retiring.
Philips also said it would adopt new US standards on post-retirement
benefits such as healthcare and other non-pension benefits for its former
employees around the world.
On software, Philips is to apply the principle of capitalising the
expenditure on software for certain products and then writing this off over
the product's life. However, it said it would not be capitalising any
expenditure this year 'in the interest of prudence'.
The company will also move to a more international practice on goodwill
payments by capitalising and amortising them. Dutch accounting rules allow a
company to charge goodwill directly to shareholders' equity.
In a recent interview with an in-house magazine, Mr Eustace said he planned
to start up a high-profile programme of holding meetings with analysts and
fund management to coincide with the release of quarterly figures, in line
with Anglo-Saxon practice.
He also said cutting the debt bill would be a priority. 'If there was just
one thing I would like to achieve in the next five years, that would be to
make this company healthy again by substantially reducing its debt,' he
said.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1540</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAEPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: Suez to expand capital of two
banking subsidiaries
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALICE RAWSTHORN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   PARIS
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE precarious state of the French property market has forced Suez, the
industrial and financial group, to pump FFr2.36bn (Dollars 430m) of new
capital into Indoseuz and Credisuez, two banking subsidiaries.
Suez, which has extensive holdings across the French property sector, has
already made provisions of FFr1.9bn on property losses.
It is expected to make additional provisions for the second half, in
addition to the recapitalisation which will inject FFr800m into Indosuez and
FFr1.56bn into Credisuez.
The announcement of Suez's refinancing comes when France's banks and
insurers are awaiting the announcement of government proposals to support
the property industry.
The property market has experienced difficult problems for the past three
years, particularly in Paris where average rentals have fallen by 20 per
cent.
The Paris market has not fared as badly as that of London or New York, but
French financial groups have still suffered sharp falls in the value of
their property holdings. Mr Gerard Worms, chairman of Suez, recently
estimated that the French banks' outstanding property loans were between
FFr400bn and FFr500bn.
Suez saw its interim net profits fall to FFr500m for the first half of 1992
from FFr1.8bn in the same period last year, mainly due to the large rise in
property provisions.
Indosuez alone raised its interim loan loss provisions to FFr1.39bn from
FFr517m, triggering a slide in net profits to FFr82m from FFr517m.
Banque La Henin, which is linked to Credisuez, barely broke even in the
first half because of property problems.
La Henin has already been restructured and will receive FFr560m of the
capital Suez is injecting into Credisuez.
The announcement of the recapitalisation comes when Suez is under pressure
from Union des Assurances de Paris (UAP), the French insurer, which is one
of its largest shareholders, to cede control of Colonia, a German insurer.
Suez recently broke off negotiations with UAP over Colonia.
World Stock Markets, Page 35
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1541</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAENFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: Swissair to open register to
foreigners
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By IAN RODGER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SWISSAIR, the Swiss airline group, will swap all its bearer shares into
registered ones and open its share register to foreigners.
At the moment, foreigners can only buy the group's non-voting dividend right
certificates.
After by-law changes planned for the next annual meeting, no single
shareholder would be allowed to hold more than 3 per cent of the shares or
exercise over 3 per cent of the votes. However, shareholders on the record
today with larger holdings will be allowed to hold and register them.
Swissair said it would take further measures to ensure Swiss majority
ownership of the group in conformity with its bilateral air services
agreements.
Baloise Holding, the Swiss insurance group, said its consolidated pre-tax
profit for 1992 would be slightly lower than last year's SFr140m (Dollars
99.32m) but the SFr30 dividend would be maintained.
The group said premium income would rise 3 per cent to SFr6.3bn. Life
business growth was weaker than in 1991 but satisfactory.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1542</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAELFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Bulmer expands 18% to Pounds 10.7m -
Marketing expenditure on main cider brands pays off
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROLAND RUDD
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
HP BULMER Holdings, the cider and soft drinks maker, reported an 18 per cent
increase in pre-tax profits for the half year to October 23 on the back of a
strong performance from its main cider brands.
Profits rose from Pounds 9.07m to Pounds 10.7m on sales of Pounds 131m
(Pounds 116m).
The increase reflected Bulmer's strategy of marketing its main cider brands,
Strongbow and Woodpecker, and sharply higher operating profits of Pounds
740,000 (Pounds 478,000) from the Australian cider business, which has a
near monopoly on the country's cider market.
In the UK, where operating profits rose from Pounds 9.65m to Pounds 11.6m,
the cider market grew by 7 per cent in spite of a decline in the drinks
market as a whole.
Mr John Rudgard, Bulmer's chief executive, said he was confident that the
cider market would continue to expand.
He welcomed the decision from main rival, Taunton Cider, to go public, which
he predicted would further expand the market.
Cidrerie Stassen, the recently acquired Belgian branded company, would
export its own cider to the UK while facilitating the import of Strongbow to
the Continent.
In spite of its Pounds 47,000 loss, mainly due to start-up costs, Mr Rudgard
was confident that the Belgian company would contribute profits by the year
end.
Lower demand in Russia for Pectin, a gelling agent, led to a decline in
Pectin operating profits from Pounds 1.1m to Pounds 584,000.
Capital expenditure for the year to April 24 is expected to increase by
Pounds 1m to Pounds 13.3m.
Net debt is expected to have risen from Pounds 17m to Pounds 25m,
representing gearing of between 35 and 40 per cent.
Earnings per share in the half-year rose from 10.8p to 12.99p.
The interim dividend is increased from 3.45p to 3.75p.
COMMENT
The big increase in marketing its brands, such as Woodpecker and Strongbow,
which depressed profits in 1989, is now paying off. The marketing spend is
running at about Pounds 12m a year - more than double what it was four years
ago. A 20 per cent increase in the sales of Orangina justifies its decision
to broaden activities into soft drinks. With forecast pre-tax profits of
Pounds 19m, giving earnings per share of 22.8, the shares - up 9p to 400p -
are on a prospective multiple of 17.5. Whether that premium to the market is
justified depends on one's view of the cider market. If its growth continues
unabated then Bulmers's shares are still good value. If the market slows
down, as it did in the mid eighties, the shares may look expensive.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1543</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAEKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Northern Investors net assets at 284.4p
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Northern Investors, the Newcastle upon Tyne-based venture capital group,
reported a fully diluted net asset value of 284.4p per share as at September
30.
The figure showed a marginal decline on the 289.4p of six months earlier but
an increase on the 276.8p at end-September 1991.
Mr Robert Dickinson, chairman, said the group's investments had shown
'encouraging resilience' in the economic downturn. Three new investments
were completed during the interim period, involving a total commitment of
Pounds 593,000.
Earnings per share emerged at 4p (5.4p) and the interim dividend is cut from
3.5p to 2p.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1544</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAEJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Haemocell loss marginally lower
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The delay of US regulatory approval for its S350 blood filtering process
held back annual results at Haemocell, the maker of medical and surgical
equipment.
The USM-quoted company had hoped that approval would be granted towards the
end of the year.
Sales rose from Pounds 295,000 to Pounds 676,000, but expenses related to
preparations for the US launch and general product development resulted in a
marginally reduced loss of Pounds 1.69m (Pounds 1.75m). Losses per share
were 9.9p (11.6p).
US approval was granted for the drug on October 6, since when a 1-for-4
rights issue has been launched to raise Pounds 6.1m to cut debt and for
working capital.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1545</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAEIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Bexbuild shows decline to Pounds 66,000
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Profits of Bexbuild Developments, the USM-quoted commercial property
investor and trader, fell from Pounds 138,000 to Pounds 66,000 pre-tax over
the six months ended September 30.
The figure included a Pounds 19,000 surplus on the sale of an investment
property. Turnover amounted to Pounds 908,000 (Pounds 944,000).
The interim dividend is held at 1p and is paid from earnings of 1.1p (2.1p).
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1546</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAEHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Bristol Water 33% up at Pounds 3.4m
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Strict controls over costs enabled Bristol Water Holdings to achieve a 33
per cent increase in pre-tax profits to Pounds 3.43m for the six months
ended September 30.
The interim dividend is lifted by 1p to 10.3p from earnings of 44p (33.5p).
Turnover improved from Pounds 23.5m to Pounds 26.1m. Sir John Wills,
chairman, said the 11 per cent advance reflected the 7.3 per cent increase
in charges agreed with Ofwat after a voluntary abatement by the group of 1.1
per cent from the maximum charges allowed.
Capital expenditure during the first half rose to Pounds 8m (Pounds 7m).
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1547</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAEGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Baggeridge drops 28% to Pounds 1.82m
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
BAGGERIDGE Brick reported a 28 per cent plunge in pre-tax profits to Pounds
1.82m in the year ended September 30.
Turnover fell from Pounds 28.4m to Pounds 26.3m, but Mr Martyn Haines,
finance director, said the group had not cut production and had maintained
market share.
Sales were hit by increased pressure on prices, reflecting sluggish demand
combined with industry over-capacity.
Operating profit fell to Pounds 3.16m (Pounds 4.11m). The decline in the
brick-making business was offset partially by a Pounds 1.2m contribution
from its landsource operation.
Earnings per share fell to 3.03p (4.84p).
The proposed final dividend of 2.375p leaves the total for the year at
3.125p.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1548</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAEFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Wentworth action against ex-chief
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER PEARSE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
WENTWORTH International Group, led by Mr Robert Gill, has launched legal
proceedings against Mr Haque Khan, former chairman and chief executive, who
left in July.
The USM-quoted plastic packaging products group, whose shares have been
suspended at 3p since October 20 pending its delayed results, has obtained
an injunction against Mr Haque, with the aim of recovering Pounds 1.5m, most
of which relates to the acquisition of Exmapla.
The new board yesterday announced that in the year to March 31 pre-tax
losses came to Pounds 4.05m, against restated profits of Pounds 63,000 or
Pounds 1.21m as previously reported.
Losses per share emerged at 3.89p (losses 0.13p or earnings of 1.7p
respectively).
Turnover was Pounds 25.6m (Pounds 18.4m). There is no dividend.
The new board is refocusing the group, which is 61.3 per cent owned by an
arm of Banque Indosuez. Edwards, the Belgian corrugated packaging company,
is to be sold and Exmapla is to be closed.
In the six months to September 30 pre-tax losses were Pounds 1.82m on
turnover of Pounds 14.6m after interest charges of Pounds 1.03m.
Losses per share totalled 1.68p.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1549</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAEEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Amstrad directors sell stakes
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PAUL TAYLOR
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
TWO OF Amstrad directors sold their entire equity holdings in the consumer
electronics group on Tuesday for 23 1/8 p-a-share, less than a week after
shareholders rejected Mr Alan Sugar's 30p-a-share buy-back bid for the
company he founded.
Mr Malcolm Miller, sales and marketing director, sold 714,000 shares to
raise Pounds 165,112. Mr Robert Watkins, technical director, sold 563,000
shares, raising Pounds 130,309.
Amstrad, which has 581m issued shares, reported the directors' action, but
declined any further comment.
Mr Sugar, who has a personal 35 per cent equity stake, warned shareholders
during his battle to take Amstrad private again that the share price might
fall sharply if they rejected his bid.
However, since Amstrad's 31,000 shareholders rejected his offer the shares
have traded in a narrow range around 25p. Yesterday, after gaining 1p to 26p
the price slipped following the sales' disclosure, but pulled back to close
just  1/2 p lower at 24 1/2 p.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1550</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAEDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Chemring advance lifts shares 55p
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER PEARSE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE CITY responded favourably to Chemring Group's announcement of a 10.5 per
cent rise in pre-tax profits from Pounds 4.72m to Pounds 5.21m in the year
to September 30. The shares climbed by 55p to 883p.
Mr Philip Billington, chairman since January 1 of this industrial holding
company with interests in the defence, marine, leisure, environmental and
engineering markets, said that the group aimed to 'increase its level of
civil business to approximately 60 per cent of overall turnover by 1996'.
Turnover rose by 10 per cent to Pounds 37.9m (Pounds 34.5m).
This rebalancing was at the behest of the City, and he said it would
probably be achieved via a large acquisition in marine, aviation or
engineering.
However, he said he was irritated by the tendency to lump Chemring with
defence companies like Vickers. 'We don't suffer like the hardware companies
do. Our products come out of revenue spend not capital spend.'
At present, the defence business accounts for about 53 per cent of turnover.
Mr Billington said there was currently a record number of ships being built
worldwide. That had helped the commercial marine business to grow, though
the leisure marine side had declined.
Trials for Protox, the secondary sewage treatment process, should be
completed by April, he said. He hoped to sell the plant and further, to sell
the by-product granules into the agricultural and horticultural markets.
The group is proposing a share split to increase the liquidity in the market
for the shares. Three 5p shares will be issued for every 5p share held and
this will be achieved by the capitalisation of about Pounds 600,000 of the
share premium account.
A recommended final dividend of 21.72p (19.75p) will make a total of 32.62p
(29.65p), payable from unchanged earnings of 68.6p per share.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1551</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAECFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Redundancy costs cut Alvis to Pounds 1.1m
and final is lowered
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW BOLGER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ALVIS, the defence contractor, yesterday reported a drop in pre-tax profits
from Pounds 3.83m to Pounds 1.13m for the year ended September 30 1992.
The final dividend is cut from 1.7p to 0.5p.
The company, formerly United Scientific Holdings, said redundancy and
restructuring costs at its Coventry plant were mainly responsible for the
drop in profits.
Alvis announced in October that it was cutting 230 jobs from a total of 750
at its Alvis Industries factory, mainly because of a drop in demand from the
Ministry of Defence for armoured vehicles and spares.
The company took an exceptional charge of Pounds 4.95m and also wrote down
by Pounds 2.5m the value of stock carried forward from previous years.
Sales fell from Pounds 114.2m to Pounds 92.4m in 1991-92. The group said its
profit before tax and exceptional items of Pounds 6.4m was 29 per higher.
The group said its electro-optical companies increased combined pre-tax
profits by 49 per cent and ended the year with a larger combined order book.
Alvis Industries, which now includes Self-Changing Gears (SCG) and United
Scientific Industries, barely broke even at the operating level, compared
with operating profits of Pounds 5m last time.
The group said this was because of lower MoD orders, reduced margins, the
stock write-down and operational problems, which followed the relocation of
the SCG business to the Coventry site.
Losses per share amounted to 5.5p, compared with 0.3p last time.
The reduced final leaves a total for the year of 1p (2.2p).
COMMENT
Different name - same old problems. Life is not easy if the Ministry of
Defence is your biggest single customer, as these figures amply testify.
Nevertheless, the shares advanced 5p to close at 19p, suggesting that the
market had overdone the gloom in marking Alvis down from 62p in February.
That sort of slide suggests a company which is about to go bust, and there
are no such signs at Alvis - even if the road to recovery remains long and
winding. The electro-optical businesses are sound and the problems at
Coventry are being addressed, although the order outlook is uncertain. A
market value of only Pounds 10.6m might attract a predator - and a spell of
solid trading could see the shares bounce back - but even speculators should
be able to find less troubled sectors to fish in.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1552</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAEBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Provisions push Daily Mail down
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RAYMOND SNODDY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE DAILY Mail and General Trust yesterday announced a 28 per cent increase
in profit before exceptional items.
Pre-tax profits for the year to September 30, however, fell from Pounds
47.7m to Pounds 43.8m. The main factor pulling down the pre-tax line was a
revaluation of the company's London investment properties.
A total property provision of Pounds 26.5m was made, although this was
partly offset by profits from the sale of a wharf in Purfleet and the
disposal of 1.3m Reuter shares. The exceptional loss totalled Pounds 15.2m.
The company yesterday described the performance of the group as
'satisfactory' and said the national newspaper division - the Daily Mail,
Mail on Sunday and the Evening Standard - had achieved record levels of
circulation revenue and display advertising revenue. Classified advertising
had been weaker, particularly at the Evening Standard.
The company proposes a final dividend of 98p, making a total for the year of
130p against 119p.
Turnover amounted to Pounds 663.8m (Pounds 644.1m), with newspapers,
regional as well as national, ahead from Pounds 525.3m to Pounds 559.2m.
Trading profits from newspapers rose from Pounds 59.9m to Pounds 70.6m.
Mr Derek Terrington, publishing analyst at stockbrokers Kleinwort Benson,
said: 'In this kind of market it goes back to basics and the strength of the
titles.'
Mr Terrington, who is forecasting pre-tax profits of Pounds 73m in 1993,
believes that the period of fluctuations caused by exceptional losses or
profits could be coming to an end.
The group's regional newspapers also improved their position mainly because
of close control of costs.
Associated interests declined as a result of lower profits at the Bristol
Evening Post and Whittle Communications in the US. There were also start up
costs for stakes in two new broadcasting ventures, Westcountry Television
and Teletext UK.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1553</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAEAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Northern rises to Pounds 39.5m and cuts
tariffs - Two regional electricity companies report profit increases of more
than 50%
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PAUL TAYLOR
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
NORTHERN Electric, the Newcastle-based electricity company, yesterday became
the first of the regional groups to announce a reduction in electricity
tariffs for its 1.4m customers.
The move came as the group reported a better-than-expected 52 per cent
increase in pre-tax profits for the six months to September 30 and raised
its interim dividend to 6.3p (5.55p).
Northern's electricity tariffs will fall by an average of 2.7 per cent from
the new year, with the domestic tariff cut by 3 per cent.
Mr David Morris, chairman, rejected suggestions that the tariff reduction
was designed to head off pressure from Offer, the industry regulator.
Instead, he said the price cuts represented 'the first fruits of our sound
management' which were being shared between customers and shareholders. He
said the 'encouraging performance' in the first half 'has given us the
confidence and security to pass on the benefits.'
Interim pre-tax profits increased from Pounds 26m to Pounds 39.5m on
turnover 9.5 per cent ahead at Pounds 394m (Pounds 360m) despite overall
flat electricity unit sales. Earnings per share increased by 48 per cent to
23.8p.
The year-on-year profit increase was mainly due to the absence of the
'unusually high' electricity purchase costs from generators in the first
half last year. However, Mr Morris said the group's underlying profit growth
'remains in line with our expectations for the full year.'
In the core electricity distribution business sales to domestic and
commercial customers rose by 1.5 per cent and 2.2 per cent respectively.
However, sales to industrial customers fell by 2.6 per cent, mainly in the
mining and chemicals sectors, partly offset by modest growth in the
engineering and manufacturing sectors. Operating profit in the distribution
business improved to Pounds 43.6m despite a reduction in charges for use of
the distribution system in April.
COMMENT
Northern's share price has begun to reflect the increased confidence
investors now have in the new senior management team. Costs continue to be
cut in real terms, its investment in the gas-fired power station being built
at Wilton on Teesside looks sensible, and the balance sheet is in good shape
with the Pounds 49.2m net cash inflow in the first half reducing debt to a
modest Pounds 10m and gearing to 2.6 per cent - although this will rise at
the year end. The biggest risk is that Northern will catch the regulator's
eye. However, its return on assets is not out of line and a combination of
tariff cuts and its enviable reputation for service performance should help
keep customers sweet. Pre-tax profits this year could reach Pounds
115m-Pounds 120m, with earnings of 70p a share. Given the run-up in the
share price, to 453p yesterday, this stock is not a bargain, but is still a
buy.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1554</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAD9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / UK Company News: A look at the life and times of an empire
builder - Hillsdown chief to quit
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MAGGIE URRY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
HILLSDOWN Holdings' share price rose yesterday after it was announced that
Sir Harry Solomon was quitting as chairman.
'That says it all, doesn't it,' laughs Sir Harry, an irrepressibly good
humoured and self-effacing man, who is anxious to be reassured that he is
doing the right thing.
He decided some time ago that at the age of 55 and after 17 years in his
second career, it was the right time personally to move on and the right
time for the company to have a new chairman.
That role will be taken from next April's annual meeting by Sir John Nott,
the former politician and merchant banker.
Sir Harry, knighted in 1991, says there has been no pressure from
shareholders to leave. However, some in the stock market, have been seeking
more focus and less unpredictability from Hillsdown.
The group's earnings per share fell in 1990 and 1991, and are expected to
fall again this year. The shares reached a low in September, when the yield
rose to 14 per cent despite assurances that the dividend would be held.
It was a different story when Hillsdown floated in 1985. Then acquisitive
companies were fashionable, and chairmen found themselves the subjects of
personality cults. Unlike some of the stars of the 1980s who courted
publicity, Sir Harry is a rather private man, refusing, for example, to have
his photograph taken.
His first career, which lasted 15 years, was as a solicitor. He started as a
criminal lawyer. 'I defended a few murderers,' he admits. Some were cleared,
others were jailed. 'And some of them still send me Christmas cards,' he
says.
But it was in 1966 that the seeds of Hillsdown were sown, though the company
was not founded until 1975. In 1966 Sir Harry's wife was expecting their
first child. She made friends with another woman at her ante-natal class,
and soon the two husbands met.
The other husband was David Thompson, who ran a family meat business, and he
became a client of Sir Harry's whose law practice had moved by then towards
commercial and property work. By 1975 Sir Harry had had enough of being a
solicitor and the two decided to set up Hillsdown - the name also of Mr
Thompson's house.
The business did not go far until the early 1980s when 'there were a lot of
opportunities around, a bit like now,' says Sir Harry.
Hillsdown did deal after deal, buying Lockwoods, the canning business from
the receiver in 1981, Buxted chickens from Imperial Group in 1982, buying
back Mr Thompson's family meat company from Imperial, the Smedley canning
company in 1983 and many more.
As one analyst says, 'they were buying very cheaply, on cheap bank debt, and
leveraging on rising asset values.' That was the period Sir Harry now looks
back on as the best of times. 'When we were doing some of the first deals,
when everyone was tremendously enthusiastic, things were coming right, the
management style was beginning to work.'
By 1985 the group needed more capital to expand, and floated on the stock
market. Its offer was nine times oversubscribed. In the same year it bid for
Christie-Tyler, a furniture group, and two years later bought Fairview, a
housebuilder. More deals followed, such as the purchase in 1989 of Premier
Brands, the Typhoo tea group.
Shares were issued to fund the expansion, and Mr Thompson, who had held the
bulk of the original Hillsdown shares, left the business and sold shares
too. The Premier Brands deal, for instance, was financed by a Pounds 110m
placing.
As the 1980s turned to the 1990s aggressive expansion went out of fashion,
and Hillsdown found itself struggling with tougher trading conditions, and a
less enthusiastic shareholder following.
It was then that Sir Harry's worst time came. In January 1991 bear raiders
circulated rumours about the group and the shares plunged.
The market's fear of Hillsdown's ability to shock gained strength after the
company sprung a rights issue in September last year, a surprise from which
the share price has yet to recover.
Stock market analysts think that the company may never regain the premium
rating it enjoyed after it floated. But they believe the rating can recover
if the Hillsdown empire, which has extended to North America and Europe,
becomes focused; if the swings in profitability in divisions such as poultry
can be ironed out; and if the business can be shifted towards its higher
margin activities.
Interests such as poultry, eggs and red meat, at the commodity end of the
food industry, have suffered in the recession but the food processing
businesses - such as Premier Brands and prepared meals - have fared better.
Sir Harry thinks 'change is good for one'. But so far he has made no firm
plans for his third career, remaining fully committed to Hillsdown until
next April. But he will be going to Arsenal's ground on Saturday to see
Middlesborough, his home team, playing.
And whatever else he does - jogging, trekking, playing tennis or collecting
historical autographed documents - one thing he will not do. 'I will not be
pruning roses' he promises.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1555</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAD8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / UK Company News: MTM share price halves as debt limit is
breached
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD GOURLAY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MTM, the fine chemicals company which has struggled since its share price
collapsed early this year, yesterday said it had breached its borrowing
limits under its articles.
The group - which has more than Pounds 100m of debt and net assets worth
less than half its called-up share capital - has also been forced to make
unspecified further provisions.
The share price halved from 31p to 15p yesterday.
High interest charges and professional fees on the ongoing capital
restructuring, combined with poor trading, had severely depleted the capital
base, MTM said.
In spite of this gloomy picture, banks have granted a three-month extension
to the standstill agreement which is due to expire at the end of the month.
Company advisers said efforts to raise fresh share capital appeared to have
been unsuccessful and the banks were considering swapping some of their debt
for equity.
The group has failed to secure the sale of two main assets which would help
reduce debt.
The company said negotiations were at an advanced stage to sell the UK Agro
chemical business's three sites and the sale of Columbus Ohio, a supplier of
pharmaceutical ingredients to the US market.
The sale of another four businesses was under way and was expected to raise
Pounds 15m in addition to the Pounds 5m proceeds from the disposal of five
businesses in September.
'It has not been a problem of finding buyers,' said the company. 'It has
been a matter of completing on those transactions.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1556</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAD7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / UK Company News: BLP employees stake rises to 48.3% after
tender offer
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MATTHEW CURTIN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
EMPLOYEES of BLP Group have increased their stake in the troubled USM-quoted
wood laminates supplier to 48.3 per cent through a tender offer, the company
announced yesterday.
The mandatory offer was triggered in November when the Takeover Panel ruled
that BLP's Employee Share Ownership Plan was acting in concert with
directors and a minority shareholder.
The offer has raised their combined holding from 45 per cent to 69 per cent,
making the company invulnerable to hostile takeover.
BLP was listed in 1987 and its shares peaked that year at 821p, valuing it
at Pounds 48m. The stock has been on the decline since with the company
wracked by ill-fated takeovers and other problems. It closed last night at
28p, just above the Esop's offer price and valuing the group at Pounds 1.9m
compared with net assets of Pounds 8.69m.
The concert party's stake is now seven times the maximum size recommended
for Esops earlier this year by the Association of British Insurers speaking
on behalf of a powerful group of institutional shareholders.
BLP's Esop is handled by Kleinwort Benson, the merchant bank, acting as the
trustee through BLP (Jersey). The Esop has built up its stake in the company
over the past two years without consultation of the employees.
The company has lent it most of the money for the share purchases including
funds for the current offer. Mr Malcolm Cohen, BLP's chairman, said majority
ownership by the employees would not affect the running of the company.
There are no rules governing the relationship between staff and an Esop,
they have no say over the investment decisions by the body set up to run it,
and there are no regulations preventing a company from using an Esop as an
anti-takeover device, the ABI said.
When BLP set up its Esop in 1990, the company believed employees would hold
less than 10 per cent of the group's shares and only as an incentive scheme,
Mr Cohen said.
The Esop was run independently of BLP, by 'independent directors, receiving
independent advice.'
Mr Cohen said it was fortuitous that after a two-year fall in the company's
share price, such a large stake was held by the trust, thereby affording
'security' against any potential takeover.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1557</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAD6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Aegis issues warning and plans further cost
cuts
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By GARY MEAD, Marketing Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
AEGIS, the media planning and buying group, said that it would pass its
final dividend for 1992, following a review of its financial position and
the likelihood of European trading conditions remaining difficult in 1993.
It also stated that it expected 'trading profits both in the current year
and in 1993 to be below the level of 1991'.
Aegis plans to reduce annual operating costs by Pounds 17m in 1993, in
addition to cuts of Pounds 15m announced earlier this year. Staff levels
will shrink from 1,900 to 1,650 and in a number of European countries
offices will be consolidated.
Operating costs in 1991 were Pounds 55m, and forecasts for 1992 were Pounds
50m. For 1993 analysts are now forecasting costs of about Pounds 30m.
The company said the cost-cutting was a necessary step in the light of the
probable passing into law of French legislative proposals known as the Loi
Sapin.
In the advertising sector the Loi Sapin threatens to curtail the levels of
commission obtained by media buyers from their trading in advertising space
with media owners. .
When details of the Loi Sapin leaked in June, Aegis dismissed suggestions
that it would severely affect its business. However, other agencies have
predicted revenue losses of up to 25 per cent, a figure Aegis now accepts is
not exaggerated.
Analysts expect that pre-tax profits for 1992 could fall to Pounds 40m
(Pounds 55.1m).
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1558</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAD5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Owners Abroad blames slide on one-off
factors
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD GOURLAY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE FALL in profits last year at Owners Abroad, the UK's second largest tour
operator, was 'a result of one-off factors' which would not be repeated,
according to Mr Howard Klein, chairman.
Owners Abroad, which yesterday announced a tie-up with Thomas Cook Group and
its parent, LTU Group of Germany, reported pre-tax profits in the year to
October 1992 down from Pounds 32m to Pounds 25m on sales up 20 per cent at
Pounds 772m.
Fully diluted earnings per share fell from 12.6p to 8.6p but the company is
increasing its total dividend from 3.2p to 3.5p via a final of 2.52p.
Mr Klein said there was every reason to expect that Owners Abroad would
resume profitability at a 'normal clip'.
The past year had been unusual for a number of reasons.
The group had misjudged the pricing in its first brochures for the 1992
summer holidays which came out before last Christmas.
As Mr Christopher Rodrigues, chief executive of Thomas Cook Group and Owners
new partner, said: 'This last year they (Owners Abroad) did goof. People
picked up the brochure in the shops and put it straight down again.'
In addition, Owners put on extra capacity, not only to take advantage of the
collapse of ILG in March last year but also because of a belief that
recovery was on its way.
Owners had tried to increase pricing and margins and lost out in the
pre-Christmas period, Mr Klein said.
On current trading, Mr Klein said that the demand for holidays was likely to
be the same as this year or marginally down on this year.
Bookings of Owners' holidays were up 18 per cent on the same time last year
even though the industry as whole was still down.
The company had also taken steps to cut the cost base by closing seven
offices which would lead to cost savings of about Pounds 4.5m in 1993.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1559</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAD4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Distribution side takes Seeboard to Pounds
9.2m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID LASCELLES, Resources Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SEEBOARD, the distributor for the south-east of England, yesterday produced
one of the strongest results of the electricity season with a 53 per cent
rise in pre-tax profits and a 14 per cent dividend increase.
Sir Keith Stuart, the newly-appointed chairman, described the results as
'excellent,' but stressed that Seeboard's domestic customers paid the lowest
electricity prices in England and Wales, according to the industry
regulator.
Pre-tax profits were Pounds 9.2m in the six months to September 30, up from
Pounds 6m. This was equivalent to earnings per share of 5.1p (3.5p). The
interim dividend is increased from 5p to 5.7p.
The progress was achieved despite a 1.8 per cent fall in the number of
electricity units sold.
This was due to a sharp decrease in industrial demand, mainly in the paper
and cement industries. Adjusted for the weather, though, there was
underlying growth in overall demand. Turnover increased 6 per cent to Pounds
524m (Pounds 495m).
Group operating profit totalled Pounds 8.6m (Pounds 6.8m). Distribution
contributed Pounds 37.3m, but the supply business lost Pounds 29.2m, because
of the front-loading of costs in the first half. This was better than last
year, however, and the full-year result is expected to be in the black.
Other businesses earned Pounds 500,000. The retailing business incurred a
small loss in a tough market. The contracting business was in profit, and
Southern Gas, the new gas joint venture, is expected to make a profit in its
first year.
The bottom line was also helped by further cost reductions. Over the six
months 180 jobs have been shed, against a long-term target of more than 500.
Tighter control over cash flow has also reduced gearing to zero.
COMMENT
The market was unexcited by the large increases. If anything, they fell
slightly short of expectations. But the results showed that there is plenty
of scope for improvement in costs and balance sheet management. Both these
areas must deliver the goods if overall electricity demand remains slack and
next year's tariff increases are slim.
There is a regulatory risk attached to large earnings and dividend
increases. But this seems small in the case of Seeboard, which has high
dividend cover and has been careful to share its good fortune with its
customers through its current Pounds 20m rebate. The shares gained 7p to
440p, ending with a yield of 5.9 per cent, at the low end of the sector
range.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1560</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAD3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / UK Company News: McCarthy loss grows to Pounds 19m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PEGGY HOLLINGER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SHARES IN McCarthy &amp; Stone fell 21 per cent yesterday from 28p to 22p as the
retirement home builder announced its third year of deepening losses and
warned that it would be unable to pay a dividend for at least two years.
The pre-tax loss of Pounds 19m, against Pounds 16.9m last time, was
aggravated by exceptional charges of Pounds 10.3m (Pounds 5m). This included
a Pounds 5.4m write-down on properties and Pounds 4.9m rationalisation
costs. These charges offset lower interest payments of Pounds 9.8m (Pounds
13.9m).
Sales for the year to August 31 were down from Pounds 73.1m to Pounds 71.4m.
At the operating level, profits fell from Pounds 2m to Pounds 1.1m.
Mr John Gray, joint managing director, denied that the group was in critical
condition. He pointed to the announcement that McCarthy had just completed a
refinancing for a credit facility of Pounds 83m. Group debt at the year-end
was Pounds 60.6m (Pounds 58.1m).
During the year, McCarthy sold 938 homes, just one more than in 1991. The
average selling price fell from Pounds 69,100 to Pounds 67,000. About 37 per
cent of sales were at a discount to the listing price.
McCarthy took a Pounds 1.2m extraordinary charge for the phased closure of
its Quadrant second homes business in France.
Net operating assets overseas stood at Pounds 14.1m. The intention was to
reduce this and no further investment would be made overseas.
Losses per share deepened to 29.3p (21.9p), while net asset value fell by 28
per cent to 81p. The absence of a final dividend leaves the total at 0.5p
(1p).
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1561</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAD2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Medicine replaces champagne for Ford of Europe: The
restructuring in the wake of losses and falling demand
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN DONE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
FORD of Europe executives had planned to spend New Year's Eve at the Hilton
in London's Park Lane celebrating, to the sound of popping champagne corks,
the launch of the new Ford Mondeo, the car that replaces the Ford Sierra
next spring. Now the New Year's Eve ball has been cancelled, and the
champagne has been shelved.
Instead Ford's European operations are being forced to swallow more bitter
medicine with heavy job cuts and further restructuring measures, as the US
carmaker seeks to staunch its renewed losses in Europe.
After a record loss last year of Dollars 1.079bn (Pounds 685m) on its
European automotive operations, including Jaguar, Ford believed it had begun
to turn the corner. 'In April I thought the horizon was bright and sunny,'
said Mr Bill Fike, president of Ford of Europe, but that was before demand
began to weaken in Germany, Italy and Spain and when UK recovery appeared
closer.
The operations had returned to the black in the first half of 1992 and Ford
of Europe had optimistically launched its 'Drive for Leadership' campaign
with the two aims of gaining 'world class product delivery and a fully
competitive cost structure'.
The return to profit in the first half has proved a false dawn, however, and
Ford's European operations, once one of the group's best profit earners
worldwide, face another round of restructuring.
The announcement yesterday that Ford of Europe is to cut more than 10,000
jobs by the end of 1993 means the workforce of its European automotive
operations (excluding Jaguar) will have shrunk 28 per cent to 83,000 in
three years, from 115,000 in 1990.
The need to cut costs became so acute that Ford was forced to cancel its
European automotive operations management meeting late last month 'because
of the continuing serious deterioration in our financial performance and the
absolute need, therefore, to avoid discretionary expense', according to Mr
Lindsey Halstead, Ford of Europe chairman.
In many respects Ford's productivity and cost base in Europe were
'uncompetitive', said Mr Halstead, who retires at the end of the month. He
will be replaced by Mr Jacques Nasser, the 44-year-old former chief
executive of Ford of Australia. Mr Nasser faces an uncomfortable
introduction to Europe.
New car sales in western Europe are forecast to fall 3.5 per cent next year,
the second successive annual decline. And the industry is facing the growing
spectre of overcapacity as new plants, planned in the era of record sales at
the end of the 1980s, are brought on stream.
At the same time competition is intensifying. Europe has become the main
battleground of the car industry in the 1990s, as the leading Japanese
carmakers establish their first car plants inside the world's biggest
market. Ironically Ford's announcement of job cuts coincided with Toyota,
Japan's leading carmaker, opening its new Pounds 700m, 200,000-a-year car
assembly plant in the UK. Ford is not alone in facing growing woes in Europe
 -Volkswagen, Europe's largest carmaker, admitted yesterday that it had
slumped into loss in the fourth quarter.
However, Ford has lost ground in Europe where it has slipped from leadership
of the car market in 1984 to fifth place this year.
More damaging is the loss of profitability. Ford's production planning in
Europe for 1992 has proved painfully over-optimistic and it has had to
resort to far-reaching short-time working since the summer in order to cut
excess stocks and bring supply into line with falling demand.
In September Ford calculated it would need, in the UK alone, 150-160
downshifts at its Halewood and Dagenham car assembly plants. This number has
now increased to 210 downshifts in 1992, and there have also been increasing
production shutdowns at the Cologne, Saarlouis, Genk and Valencia plants.
Ford of Europe is now attacking the continuing losses with emergency
measures announced yesterday, which include:
the elimination of more than 10,000 jobs across Europe;
the reduction of capacity at the four car assembly plants in the UK and
Germany;
the transfer of several in-house components manufacturing operations, such
as seat making, to outside suppliers;
the removal of further layers of management;
a cut in corporate bureaucracy and the elimination of dup-lication between
Ford's national sales companies and its European headquarters in the UK.
'We are trying to concentrate on the core business, the design, manufacture
and sale of cars and light commercial vehicles,' says Mr Fike. 'The
engineering of components for systems and the manufacture of some non-core
items will be eliminated.'
The biggest move in this direction is Ford's decision to transfer seat
making for its next generation Fiesta and Escort/Orion cars to a new joint
venture to be formed by Johnson Controls of the US and Bertrand Faure of
France, two specialist automotive seat makers. Ford will in future be
supplied on a just-in-time basis from satellite plants established by the
component makers. Ford's US-based Automotive Components Group is also
examining the establishment of a plant in Poland or Czechoslovakia to make
seat covers to supply the new joint venture.
Mr Fike says Ford of Europe is now determined to 'eliminate non-essential
work and reduce bureaucratic controls and layers of management'. In the
engineering activities, management layers are being cut from seven to five,
and in manufacturing from six to five.
Yesterday's job cuts bite heavily into the salaried workforce. 'We are
trying to cut duplication between national sales companies and staff
activities. There will be fewer checks and balances than historically. We
will run our business with fewer pieces of paper and much more with
numbers.'
While the latest cuts go deep Mr Fike insists that the reductions are being
made 'surgically. This is not a lawnmower'. He promises that new product
programmes will not be hit. 'But we must make cash to pay for future
programmes, and if that means our share must drop somewhat, then it will
drop.'
Dollars 8bn bill, Page 25; Volkswagen and Citroen, Page 26
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1562</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAD1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Companies in this issue
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
 -------------------------------------
       Companies in this issue
 -------------------------------------
UK
 -------------------------------------
Aegis                           22
Alvis                           23
Amstrad                         23
BLP                             22
Baggeridge Brick                23
Bexbuild Development            23
Bristol Water                   23
British Airways                 10
British Gas                     21
Bulmer (HP)                     23
Chemring                        23
Daily Mail                      23
Haemocell                       23
Hillsdown                   21, 22
MTM                             22
McCarthy &amp; Stone                22
Northern Electric               22
Northern Investors              23
Owners Abroad               22, 21
S Yorks Transport               12
Seeboard                        22
Severn Trent                    12
Thomas Cook Group               21
Wentworth Intl                  23
 -------------------------------------
Overseas
 -------------------------------------
Akzo                            23
Alcan Aluminium                 25
Banesto                         24
Caja Nacional                   25
Citroen                         26
Creditanstalt                   24
Cycle &amp; Carriage                26
Ford                     1, 21, 25
IBM                             21
Intel                           25
James River                     24
KIO                             26
LTU Group                       21
Nokia                           24
O&amp;Y                             25
Philips                         24
Reeebok                         25
Renault                         26
Revco                           25
SNIA BPD                        24
Standard Chartered              25
Suez                            24
Swissair                        24
Toyota                           9
USAir                           10
VW                              26
Z-Landerbank                    24
 -------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1563</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAD0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / IBM share price falls on payout warning
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MARTIN DICKSON
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
SHARES in International Business Machines plunged for the second successive
day yesterday as Wall Street analysts sharply lowered their earnings
forecasts in the light of Tuesday's announcement of deepening problems at
the world's largest computer manufacturer.
Many analysts said this week's restructuring announcement, which will
include 25,000 job losses and capacity cutbacks in 1993, might still be
inadequate to turn IBM around - even though it came on top of 40,000 job
cuts in 1992 and numerous other packages that were supposed to revitalise
the company.
Some analysts advised clients to sell the stock, which only a few years ago
was regarded as the bellwether of the US market.
The shares dropped Dollars 4 1/4 to close at Dollars 51 7/8 with IBM being
by far the most actively traded stock. The shares plunged 11 per cent on
Tuesday and stood nearly 50 per cent below the 1992 high of Dollars 100 3/8
.
IBM is to take a Dollars 6bn (Pounds 3.9bn) fourth-quarter charge to cover
its restructuring - bringing to Dollars 11.4bn its workforce and capacity
cut charges in 1992 - and it says its fourth-quarter operating results will
be about break-even, well below Wall Street forecasts.
Analysts said the company seemed to be on course for 1992 operating earnings
per share of around Dollars 2.50, and a loss after charges of around Dollars
4.75bn, which would be the largest by a US company, topping General Motors'
Dollars 4.45bn loss in 1991.
With IBM warning that poor business conditions will continue in 1993, many
analysts said they expected the company to record a first-quarter loss. Its
new earnings estimates for 1993 ranged from between Dollars 1.75 and Dollars
3.75, against a mean forecast before Tuesday's news of about Dollars 5.70.
Most analysts said the company was too fond of blaming economic conditions
while failing to react quickly to shifts in demand away from mainframe
computers to desktop models. One said it still needed to cut a further
50,000 employees.
The plunge in the share price was partly because of IBM's warning that its
Dollars 4.84 annual dividend was no longer secure. Its previous insistence
that it had no plans to cut the high yielding payout had helped put a floor
under the stock.
Lex, Page 20; World Stock Markets, Page 35
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1564</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / British Gas wins Argentine deal
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By STEPHEN FIDLER, Latin America Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A CONSORTIUM led by British Gas yesterday bought the largest gas
distribution company in Argentina in a privatisation auction in Buenos Aires
yesterday with a bid of just over Dollars 300m (Pounds 197m).
The bid for Distribuidora de Gas Metropolitana, which supplies 1.7m
consumers in Buenos Aires, values the company at just over Dollars 700m.
British Gas, which holds a leading 41 per cent stake in the consortium, will
take over management of the company by the month-end, installing Mr Rob
Varrion, a former regional operations director in Britain, as general
manager.
Mr Peter Lehmann, director of British Gas's global gas division, said the
price 'was very reasonable for us and very fair for the government'.
The consortium, which includes the Argentine conglomerate Perez Companc,
will own 70 per cent of Metropolitana and is taking over its debts. A
majority of the rest will be sold to the public next year, with the
remainder held by employees.
The other gas distribution company in Buenos Aires, Gas de Buenos Aires
Norte, supplying 850,000 consumers, was sold yesterday to Gas Natural, a
subsidiary of Spain's Repsol, for Dollars 155m.
The third-round auctions for the two companies complete the privatisation of
the state monopoly, Gas del Estado, split into eight distribution and two
transportation companies for sale. The sale valued the industry's assets at
more than Dollars 4bn, nearly double the minimum price.
Mr Charles Alexander, a director of NM Rothschild, adviser on the project,
said the privatisation had secured a 'very broad spread of investors in the
Argentine gas industry', with operators from Britain, Belgium, Spain, Italy,
Chile, the US and Canada all emerging as winners.
The acquisition will double the size of British Gas's global gas division
from where it hopes to make 20 per cent of its profits by the end of the
decade.
Further investment in Metropolitana - which covers 21 per cent of the
country's population and which supplied 4.8bn cubic metres of gas in 1991 -
would be financed out of its turnover, British Gas has said. It is committed
to invest Dollars 103.7m over the next five years in the company.
Insurer's issue cleared, Page 25
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1565</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Sir Harry Solomon to step aside at Hillsdown Holdings
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MAGGIE URRY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SIR Harry Solomon, chairman, chief executive and co-founder of Hillsdown
Holdings, the international food group, said yesterday he would step aside
at next April's annual meeting.
Sir John Nott, former UK defence secretary and a non-executive director of
the group, will become executive chairman, and Mr David Newton, chief
operating officer, will become chief executive. Sir Harry will stay as
non-executive director.
Sir Harry said that after 17 years running Hillsdown he decided it was time
to go. He said he had been planning this for some time and that 'my
responsibility has been to make sure there is a proper, orderly succession'.
He said it was also time to separate the roles of chairman and chief
executive.
He said that at the age of 55, 'it's time for me to do other things'. He
said he had no intention of selling any of his 5.3m shares. He had never had
a contract with the company and would receive no compensation for leaving.
Sir John said he had not wanted to be a non-executive chairman, and would be
based at Hillsdown's head office. He said he did not expect to be involved
in the day-to-day running of the business but would 'stand a bit further
back from it than Harry'.
He said there would be no strategic changes, but acknowledged 'the
overriding need is to reverse the (downward) trend in earnings per share'.
The group would continue with its rationalisation plans and the process of
selling its non-food interests, he said.
The company said that current trading was 'in line with expectations'
although it was too early to forecast final demand for the important
Christmas period.
It reiterated the intention, stated in September, that the final dividend of
6.6p would be maintained, to give an unchanged total for the year of 8.8p.
Also joining the board in January are Mr Keith Lillington, head of the UK
and European canning and chilled food interests, Mr Michael Teacher, in
charge of the non-food operations, and Mr Ray Mackie, from KPMG Peat
Marwick, as corporate affairs director. Mr Anthony Brice will be replaced as
non-executive director.
London Stock Exchange, Page 38; Details, Page 22; Observer, Page 19
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1566</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / French bank rates up to 10%
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALICE RAWSTHORN and JAMES BLITZ
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   PARIS, LONDON
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
FRANCE'S main commercial banks raised their base rates by more than half a
percentage point to 10 per cent yesterday, in the wake of intense pressure
on the franc on foreign exchanges.
The increase hits government hopes of stimulating the economy by restraining
interest rates.
Societe Generale, the largest French commercial bank, led the way by
announcing a 0.5 percentage point increase in mid-afternoon. Several other
state-owned banks followed suit.
The base rate increases were triggered by recent sharp rises in short-term
rates on the French money markets, which have accompanied the Bank of
France's attempts to stave off attacks on the French currency.
The franc remained weak yesterday against the D-Mark on the foreign
exchanges, and some dealers said there had been a deterioration in sentiment
towards the French currency. There was strong speculation the French
authorities might have to raise official interest rates to protect the
franc.
The announcement of the base rate rise produced an immediate fall in the
Paris stock market. The CAC-40 Index closed 0.46 per cent lower at 1,736.69.
The French economy has already slowed down this year because of the impact
of high real interest rates on confidence.
'The base rate rise is a blow to the government's hopes of improving
confidence,' said Mr Christopher Potts, chief economist at Banque Indosuez
in Paris. 'The question is whether interest rates will go up further.'
The increase raised new fears about the franc's strength on the foreign
exchanges. It closed unchanged in London at FFr3.4170 against the D-Mark.
But in US trading it fell below the FFr3.42 level, closer to its floor
against the D-Mark in the European exchange rate mechanism, of FFr3.4305.
Currencies, Page 29
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1567</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / OECD sees only weak world recovery in 1993: Inflation
predicted to fall as unemployment rises
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER MARSH
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   PARIS
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE INDUSTRIALISED world will see only a weak recovery next year, with a
further rise in unemployment, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development said yesterday.
The 24-nation body said in its twice-yearly Economic Outlook that short-term
prospects for growth across the region were 'relatively sombre', while
inflation was likely to fall by the end of 1994 to its lowest level for more
than 30 years.
Mr Kumiharu Shigehara, the OECD's chief economist, said he could not rule
out the current period of decline turning into a 1930s-style slump. However,
such an outcome was not particularly likely. Developed countries were better
able to co-ordinate policies than in the 1930s to stop damaging falls in
output and confidence.
In spite of this, Mr Shigehara warned that governments were restricted in
their efforts to boost output by expanding state spending because of large
budget deficits in many countries.
The OECD was especially gloomy about unemployment. It forecasts that 34m
people will be jobless in OECD countries by the end of 1993 - 10m more than
at the most recent low point for unemployment in the first half of 1990.
'Many of those who become unemployed over the next two years will drift into
long-term unemployment, with all that entails in terms of erosion of skills
and morale, and financial hardship,' it said.
The organisation's central projection for the region is that growth next
year will be 1.9 per cent, a substantially lower figure than the 3 per cent
it forecast six months ago. Growth this year is expected to be a meagre 1.5
per cent.
The outlook is better on inflation, which the OECD expects will come down to
2.5 per cent by the end of 1994, its lowest rate since 1960.
Mr Shigehara said individual countries should take whatever steps they could
to cut interest rates in the near future, while keeping inflation low.
German interest rates are expected to come down next year, enabling a broad
reduction in rates across Europe. However, the OECD is playing down hopes of
an imminent policy relaxation by the Bundesbank.
On a more upbeat note, Mr Shigehara said recent economic data indicated that
the US economy was picking up slightly more rapidly than expected a month
ago. But the impact of this on overall output had been reduced by the
greater slowdown in the German economy.
OECD economic outlook Page 6
Editorial Comment Page 18
Samuel Brittan Page 19
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1568</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / West offers Russia deal to cut debt burden
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By WILLIAM DAWKINS and QUENTIN PEEL
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   PARIS, MOSCOW
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
RUSSIA'S western creditor nations last night offered to re-schedule Dollars
15bn worth of debt to allow Moscow to reduce sharply its debt service
obligations next year.
At the same time Germany and Russia settled an important financial dispute,
agreeing that Moscow could defer for at least eight years repaying DM17.6bn
(Pounds 7.2bn) owed to the former East Germany.
The western offer to reschedule payments due by the end of next year was
made at a meeting in Paris between officials of the Group of Seven
industrial countries and a delegation of senior Russian officials. If
accepted by the Russian government, the deal will cut Moscow's debt service
obligations next year from Dollars 12bn to Dollars 2.75bn, said a G7 finance
official.
The G7 regards the offer as a generous concession. According to an earlier
Paris Club plan, the Russians would have been asked to meet debt servicing
costs of Dollars 4.6bn next year, while Moscow argued it could afford to
repay only Dollars 2.5bn to Dollars 3bn.
Russia was Dollars 3bn-Dollars 4bn in arrears by the end of last September
and will have clocked up another Dollars 2bn of arrears for this year's
final quarter. The German agreement was reached after two days of talks
between Chancellor Helmut Kohl and President Boris Yeltsin in Moscow.
For his part, Mr Yeltsin has renounced all claims for massive compensation
for Soviet military installations in eastern Germany. Originally, Russia had
claimed as much as DM18bn for the facilities, then reduced it to DM8bn, and
now to nothing.
The two sides were clearly delighted with their success in resolving the
dispute, in spite of the latest upheaval in the Russian government.
Chancellor Kohl presented his visit as a demonstration of support for the
Russian president. Mr Yeltsin, at their joint press conference, responded by
insisting that conservative forces had failed to halt the reform process.
'Start of road to reform', Page 2
Deal aims to lift trade, Page 5
Russian debt move, Page 6
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1569</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADTFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / The Lex Column: Hillsdown
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The 7 per cent rise in Hillsdown's share price yesterday may have been
rather a rude way of greeting the news of the proposed departure of the
group's founder and guiding spirit, Sir Harry Solomon. Hard-hearted
shareholders perhaps viewed the move as little more than a small but
favourable step in the food group's rehabilitation process - although
Hillsdown's confirmation of its dividend forecast also helped.
If Sir Harry's strategy of buying low quality businesses at cheap prices and
knocking them into shape proved a highly successful strategy for the 1980s,
the recession cruelly exposed its limitations. Fresh strategic thinking will
surely be required to chart the company's future course and earnings
revival. But in the short term, at least, the new management team is only
likely to press ahead, if more purposefully, with the current round of
rationalisation and retrenchment.
Hillsdown's shares have recently been helped by the hints of general
economic recovery and a consequent re-rating of the lower quality food
manufacturing stocks. This process may yet have a little way to run.
Hillsdown, though, will have to come up with some answers of its own. The
worry is that sometimes even good management cannot escape an unfavourable
market position.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1570</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / The Lex Column: IBM
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
IBM's long history of underperformance on Wall Street means investors might
be forgiven for doubting whether the latest restructuring effort marks the
turn. With the dividend now officially in doubt, the shares certainly look
vulnerable. But a cut dividend should hardly come as a surprise. Mr John
Akers had already challenged some cornerstones of strategy - not least faith
in mainframe computers - and the cherished policy of full employment. The
maintained dividend commitment looked likely to be next on the block. More
worrying is that IBM seems as far as ever from a sustained recovery.
Even before restructuring charges, IBM will do well to break even at an
operating level in the fourth quarter. The cycle has been cruel. The
downturn in Europe and slowdown in the Far East are hurting just as the US
market is showing the first signs of life.
That said, the incumbent management must take its share of the blame. The
promise, under pressure from institutional investors, to take out another
Dollars 1bn administrative expenses next year underlines that more could
have been done earlier.
Problems in mainframes mask promising performances in mid-range business and
personal computers. How that value can be realised is another matter. Mr
Akers has already loosened the corporate grip on the constituent parts of
the empire, with no obvious effect on profitability. More radical solutions
may be required. There are formidable obstacles to any demerger, not least
IBM's large integrated sales force. Having watched the shares underperform
by 80 per cent since 1985, though, shareholders are running out of patience.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1571</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / The Lex Column: VW changes down
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Doubtless Volkswagen derives a certain comfort from the hard luck stories of
others in the European car industry. Daimler-Benz, Ford and Peugeot also had
tales of woe yesterday. Yet VW's troubles run deeper than the cycle. They
also present an opportunity for Mr Ferdinand Piech, who is to take charge in
January.
Volkswagen's largest problem is that its main Wolfsburg plant is both
inefficient and expensive to run. It has tried to get round this - and
simultaneously to exploit growing markets in eastern and southern Europe -
by expanding abroad. But diluting its German costs in this way was never
more than half a solution. High fixed domestic costs meant that lower
capacity use in a downturn would feed through to the bottom line with brutal
rapidity. It is thus no surprise that Volkswagen itself is talking openly of
cutting its DM11 dividend, and that some believe the payout may have to be
omitted altogether before things finally improve.
Pessimists argue that the presence on the supervisory board of such
luminaries as the Lower Saxony state president and Mr Franz Steinkuhler,
head of the metalworkers' union, will only complicate the task of
rationalisation. But Mr Piech's performance in charge of Audi shows he is
made of stern stuff - and he was chosen by the supervisory board in
preference to the less hawkish Mr Daniel Goeudevert, another top executive.
The latest profit warning may be designed at least in part to prepare the
political ground for some rigorous cost-trimming soon after he enters
office. VW is certainly making a meal of it. Its estimate of a 20 per cent
decline in the German car market next year is markedly more pessimistic than
the consensus. Were Mr Piech to begin with an onslaught on costs, the slide
in VW's share price which has seen it shed 43 per cent since May might yet
be arrested. Until then, the downside risk remains considerable.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1572</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Economic Viewpoint: G7 should look to Asia for new year hope
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By SAMUEL BRITTAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
There is a big advantage in ploughing through a survey of the world's main
industrial countries such as the December Economic Outlook of the
Paris-based Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).
For any tendency to attribute misfortunes to the peculiar shortcomings of
one's own government is quickly remedied when it is seen that very similar
misfortunes affect other countries with governments of a very different hue.
Take the boom and bust cycle in the financial markets. It has actually been
greater in Japan than in the UK, if equities are taken into account.
Commercial property values have indeed fallen more in the UK than elsewhere,
but the fall in house prices has been greatest in Scandinavian countries, eg
Norway and Finland.
In spite of all this interesting information, it is quite hard work to
extract a real theme from the OECD report, which is in some ways a step
backwards. For instance, the growth tables in the main text start in 1992
and go on into 1994, thus putting the main emphasis on crystal gazing. One
has to extract from the statistical appendix the old standard tables which
put the projections in the context of earlier developments; and even they do
not go back far enough or indicate trends clearly.
If one looks for oneself, there is no mystery about what has happened.
Output in the Group of Seven 'summit' countries started to decelerate in the
early 1990s, partly as a result of counterinflationary policies and partly
as a result of the debt problems of individuals and companies. The end
product has been a prolonged growth slowdown which the OECD expects to
continue into 1993. The silver lining is that underlying inflation in G7
countries, which had already been reduced in the 1980s, is now declining
further and is expected to fall to 2 1/2 per cent by 1994, the lowest for
nearly 35 years. If achieved it should provide a platform for sustainable
growth later.
The recession is not as deep as popularly believed. The output shortfall
compared with trend is less than it was in the last two recessions in five
of the G7 countries. Only in the UK and Canada has it been substantially
greater. And it is only in these two countries that it has turned out to be
the longest post-war recession.
On an international scale, we have so far seen only a growth slowdown and
not a classical recession. By contrast, in both 1975 and 1982 the growth of
real gross national product came to a complete halt in the G7 countries
taken together.
It is true that this time round the US and Canada experienced an absolute
drop in output in 1991, as the UK did in both 1991 and 1992. But these were
offset by other countries that did not begin their recession until rather
later.
Another way of looking at the matter is to track nominal gross domestic
product, which is made up of real growth plus underlying inflation. This has
decelerated from an excessive 8 per cent per annum in 1988 to about 4 1/2
per cent at present. It is expected to rise to only 5 1/2 per cent by 1994.
Moreover, because of the expected drop in inflation, more of this
expenditure increase will represent real growth. But at no stage in the
recent past have the recorded figures shown anything like genuine
depression.
The OECD is rightly concerned that the relatively weak recovery it now sees
in prospect will not be enough to prevent unemployment rising further.
Exactly the same thing happened in the last cycle in the early 1980s when
unemployment in the G7 group continued to rise during the first year of
recovery by even more than the OECD expects it to do in 1993 and to a higher
level.
What obviously worries the OECD economists is not their central projections
but the downside risks. All their 'alternative scenarios' involve lower
growth. The first of these is 'sustained weakening in the US and Japanese
private sectors'. The main effect here is expected to be reduced growth in
these two countries with only modest spill-over. Developments since the
projections were prepared suggest that the countries are not on a par. While
the US seems at last to have embarked on a real recovery the outlook for
Japan has become cloudy indeed.
The other two scenarios show higher wages in Germany and slower than
expected progress in reducing the German budget deficit. In each case the
effect is deleterious to European as well as to German growth, mainly
because it will delay the expected drop in German short-term interest rates.
If all goes well, these are expected to fall from an average of 9 1/2 per
cent in 1992 to below 8 per cent in 1993 and just above 6 per cent in 1994.
The OECD looks at the case for fiscal stimulation for countries which still
have either low budget deficits or low debt ratios. It is clearly not keen
on stimulation even for these, and remarks that any such package should be
'both temporary and accompanied by a credible commitment to unwind it when
the economy picks up'.
There is also a lot of emphasis in the Outlook on improving the quality of
existing public sector spending to obtain better value for money. But surely
this is something which should be done in any case; there is some muddle
here, as there was in the UK Autumn Statement, between public investment as
a long-term supply side measure and as a component of demand.
Reading as best one can among the qualifications and the OECD-speak, the
basic view seems to be that while there is a modest recovery in prospect
which should not be artificially boosted, there is also a downside risk of
genuine depressionary forces. Of course governments should be prepared for
the latter. But the OECD does not tell them how.
Its main suggestion on monetary and exchange rate policy is 'to provide
market participants with more systematic information about underlying trends
in relative inflation performance in Germany and elsewhere'. The hope is
that they would then realise that France and some other countries have
'out-performed Germany on the inflation front and are likely to continue
doing so for some time', and thus allow these good performers to lower their
interest rates without putting their exchange rates in jeopardy. It is no
crime to argue with the markets in this way: the question is whether it
would do much good.
If one wants to cheer up, the place to look is at the new section of the
Outlook dealing with the 'dynamic Asian economies', excluding Japan. Even in
these countries output growth 'is subsiding to a pace likely to relieve
inflationary pressures'. But in the case of the four 'tigers' - South Korea,
Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore - the slowdown is from an average of 7 1/2
per cent to 6 1/2 per cent, with an expected recovery to 7 per cent in the
next couple of years. The star performer is China, where growth is estimated
at 11 per cent. Even the Indian growth rate is put at 3 per cent, higher
than any G7 member, and is expected to accelerate in 1993. If OECD analysts
had reflected more on the Asian experience they would have been better able
to draw a moral.
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
                     HOW OECD SEES THE WORLD
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Growth of real GDP in per cent
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
                   1987 share in
                    total OECD      1990    1991    1992   1993  1994
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
US                    36.0           0.8    -1.2     1.8    2.4   3.1
Japan                 19.1           5.2     4.4     1.8    2.3   3.1
Germany                8.8           4.8     3.7     1.4    1.2   2.9
France                 7.0           2.2     1.2     1.9    1.6   2.8
Italy                  6.0           2.2     1.4     1.2    0.8   1.7
UK                     5.5           0.5    -2.2    -1.0    1.3   2.4
Canada                 3.3          -0.5    -1.7     1.3    3.2   4.2
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
TOTAL                 85.7           2.4     0.9     1.5    2.0   2.9
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Inflation per cent (GDP deflator)
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
                     1980-89
                     average        1990    1991    1992   1993  1994
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
US                     4.7           4.3     4.0     2.7    2.3   1.9
Japan                  1.6           2.1     1.9     1.9    1.7   1.7
Germany                2.8           3.4     4.5     5.5    4.6   3.3
France                 6.6           3.1     2.8     3.2    2.6   2.1
Italy                 10.8           7.5     7.3     4.5    5.3   5.2
UK                     6.3           6.3     6.7     5.4    5.0   4.1
Canada                 5.2           3.3     2.7     1.0    2.2   2.1
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
TOTAL                  4.5           3.9     3.8     3.1    2.8   2.4
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
          MAJOR DECLINES IN ASSET PRICES FROM LAST PEAK
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
                                          per cent decline since peak
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Equities
  Japan        Tokyo Stock Exchange                             -60
  Finland      Industrials                                      -55
  Norway       Industrials                                      -25
Real Estate
  US           Commercial property, north east                  -25
  Japan        Residential land, six leading cities             -20
  UK           House prices, first time buyers, south east;     -25
               commercial property, London                      -45
  Finland      House Prices                                     -25
  Norway       House Prices                                     -30
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: OECD
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1573</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Observer: Up-beat
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Music-lovers of the world, take heart - the fight back has begun. A court in
Hong Kong has just suspended nine-month jail sentences passed on two
club-goers who responded to a karaoke singer by beating him up.
Although the song being murdered by businessman Lau Kin-chung was not My
Way, but a Cantonese number called Just Once, it proved too much for
defendants Chu Wai-kit and Lo Hoi-sze. They claimed the assault was provoked
by 'intolerable singing'.
Moreover, their lawyers said they were not the only assailants: just the
ones who'd been too drunk to get away before the police arrived.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1574</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Observer: Misdirected
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Having difficulty understanding the EC's complicated second banking
directive? Never mind, the Conservative party research department cannot
even spell it. It has just issued a briefing paper - The Second Banking
Directive Reguatlions.
At least they managed to keep the A in banking. . .
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1575</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Observer: Clarification
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Announcing the cancellation of an EC executive commission meeting in
fog-bound Strasbourg yesterday, an official explained: 'Many commissioners
have lost their way . . .', then hastily added that he wasn't speaking
symbolically.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1576</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Observer: Home again
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Harry Oppenheimer, the grand old man of South African mining, would dearly
love his Anglo American group to be back playing a big part in the Zambian
copperbelt. And it sounds as if his wish may come true now Zambia's
government is considering privatising ZCCM, the state-run copper giant.
Given its historical ties with the area, Anglo is the obvious candidate to
run the industry, and in S G Warburg it has a merchant bank with an inside
track. Not only is Warburg close to Anglo currently, but it was advising the
Zambian government when it nationalised Anglo's huge Zambian copper
interests back in 1970.
Not that Anglo will hold this against Warburg. The generous hard-currency
nationalisation terms provided the foundation on which Anglo's offshore arm,
Minorco, was built. Minorco's performance may have been less than dynamic,
but it has certainly been a better investment than Zambian copper.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1577</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Observer: Windfall
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
A legal variant of selling Nelson's Column to foreign visitors has been
found by tourist officials in south-east England - flogging the White Cliffs
of Dover.
Chunks of chalk from the famous landmark are on sale for Pounds 3.50 a
branded canful at the Channel port's White Cliffs Experience centre. But its
staff deny that they're profiting by dismantling Britain's bastion against
the likes of Napoleon and Hitler.
'Bits fall off the cliffs from time to time, and we have now been allowed to
collect and market them,' one explained.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1578</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Observer: Natural choice
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir John Nott's arrival in the hot-seat at Hillsdown, the most lowly rated
company in the food manufacturing sector, raises the inevitable question of
whether former defence secretaries make good butchers.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1579</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Observer: Mugged
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Still on the subject of presents, the lull in new product launches in
Britain's royal memorabilia market seems to have ended. One company, no
doubt staffed by republicans, has produced a 'Windsor in Flames'
commemorative mug. On one side is a picture of a burning Windsor castle,
while the other has a cartoon of a monarch, plus corgis, living in a
cardboard box on the Embankment and saying 'Can you spare us Pounds 60m,
guv?'
Rather surprisingly, the Guardian carried the advert but Time Out, the
London listings magazine, rejected it. Bet that wouldn't have happened when
it was being run by the previous bunch of lefties.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1580</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Observer: Trivial pursuit
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Meanwhile, after the toppling of Brazil's president, Fernando Collor,
Brazilians can spend the festivities seeing whether they can do any better
by playing a board game devised by a Rio professor.
Looking as if it is destined to be the country's best-selling present, the
game is called Casa da Dinda after Collor's house, which was the centre of
much of the corruption scandal that ousted him.
Players have the choice of following corrupt or ethical paths with a view to
being first to win the presidency and keep it. Among hazards en route are
love affairs between ministers, a symbolic sea of mud, and battles with the
ever-present inflationary dragon.
Temptations include kickbacks from government contracts which players can
use to buy flats in Paris and Babylonian gardens a la Collor, while the
ultimate obstacle comes in the shape of a vengeful brother determined to
destroy everything.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1581</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Observer: Power-lust package
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Goodness knows how many small boys have been turned off science for ever by
finding that the chemistry kits they were given for Christmas contained
nothing fit to cause a respectable explosion. But what price a new kit from
Japan which replaces the lure of the big bang with the scientific Holy Grail
of cold fusion?
The prospect of harmlessly harnessing the process that powers the sun and
stars galvanised the world when Martin Fleischmann and Stanley Pons
announced three years ago that they had done the trick. Despite countless
repetitions of their experiment, however, the results have proved a damp
squib.
Far from there being a surge of radiation, it was hard to tell whether any
more electricity came out of the process than had been fed into it in the
first place.
The Japanese test kit is designed to provide better proof by detecting an
atom that only cold fusion could produce: helium-4. But it is hardly a
Christmas gift the average family could afford. Marketed by NTT's Advanced
Film Technology, the package costs Pounds 360,000 - and no money-back
guarantee if it fails to deliver the goods.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1582</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Letter: A weighty solution to the problem of red tape
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr SIMON THORNTON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, While Charles Batchelor's article on red tape (Growing Business,
December 15) highlights the burden that government bureaucracy places on
small businesses, it misses one crucial point - nobody knows precisely how
big the problem is, or whether the situation is improving or worsening.
To combat this ignorance, an immediate survey should be carried out to
assess the precise costs of understanding and complying with the various
regulations. To gain an accurate picture, it will be essential for all
businesses to provide information. However, if the task is designated to one
of the more customer-oriented government departments, the necessary
questionnaire would run to no more than, say, 50 pages (plus notes, of
course) and would take a maximum of two days for company directors to
complete.
Simon Thornton,
director,
Initiative Europe,
69/71 Broadway, London SW8
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1583</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Letter: Bomb damage insurance essential if businesses to
avoid closure
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr ANTHONY M LORENZ
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, As if the property market were not already on its knees, the recent
threat by insurers to refuse cover for bomb damage has severe implications
not just for the property market but for the survival of many businesses
that may be affected by terrorist activity.
While landlords are normally obliged to provide comprehensive buildings
cover, it is unlikely that a court would find them in breach of their
obligations if they were unable to obtain insurance against terrorism.
On the other hand, tenants remain obliged to pay their rent for three years
even if they cannot use their offices because of bomb damage. They are then
obliged to move back into the reconstructed building or take on the
liability of disposing of the lease. To add insult to injury, insurers may
well now refuse contents cover which could close a business down permanently
overnight.
Terrorism itself is a national problem and should not be viewed as a private
one. Surely the time has come for the government to accept that part of its
responsibilities for tackling terrorism is to cover landlords and tenants
where insurers have refused, as they have done in Northern Ireland.
Perhaps it will mean another half-penny or thereabouts on income tax, but it
is the government's duty to stamp out terrorism and to cover the financial
consequences.
A precedent was set by the government at the end of the second world war in
creating the War Damage Fund, and a similar example should now be set by
this government to prevent a major crisis. Anthony M Lorenz,
senior partner,
Baker Lorenz,
25 Hanover Square,
London W1R 0DQ
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1584</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Letter: Eurostat supports new trade data system
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr YVES FRANCHET
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, In her article 'Blackout on trade figures at time of great import'
(December 14), Emma Tucker gives the impression that Eurostat did not attach
enough importance to Intrastat, the new system of collecting intra-EC trade
figures.
Nothing could be further from the truth. Intrastat is one of the most
important projects we have ever undertaken.
The single market means removal of the customs formalities on which current
trade figures are based. As a result of general acceptance that trade
figures would still be essential after 1992, Eurostat started to develop a
new system of collecting data as early as 1985. By the beginning of 1989 our
plan was ready to submit to the Council of Ministers. However, the
complications resulting from the linking of Intrastat with the VAT systems
of member states delayed final approval until November last year. Only then
could we begin detailed implementation.
Since then Eurostat has underlined the importance of Intrastat by what
amounts to a quite exceptional level of support for its implementation. Our
aim throughout has been to reduce the burden on the business community.
Such a fundamental change to European trade statistics is challenging for
everyone. In theory, running the old and new systems side by side might seem
'sound practice'. In practice, think of the burden on already hard-pressed
business people.
At the end of the day, Intrastat will mean a cheaper and simpler way to
obtain detailed, harmonised and comparable figures on intra-Community trade.
Surely an invaluable resource for any business seeking to exploit the
challenge of the single market?
Yves Franchet,
director general,
Eurostat,
Jean Monnet building,
rue Alcide De Gasperi,
Luxembourg
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1585</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Letter: Reforms to boost confidence in audit should be
acknowledged
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr W I D PLAISTOWE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, John Roques, in his article 'Two sides of a single coin should draw
together' (December 3), makes one good point and a number of poor ones.
He is absolutely right to point out that corporate failure does not equate
with audit failure. However, I find it particularly worrying that Mr Roques
is unwilling to acknowledge recent far-reaching reforms in the profession,
intended to boost confidence in the audit and in the regulatory process.
Mr Roques could have mentioned the institute's recent strengthening of
ethical guidance for auditors, moves to greater openness, and the
overhauling of the disciplinary processes. In a true and fair view he would
have acknowledged that, with the new audit regulation system introduced by
parliament only just over a year old, it is far too early to reach any
sensible judgment on its effectiveness, let alone its organisational
location.
More surprising, in the current debate on auditing, Mr Roques failed to
mention the Auditing Practices Board's consultative paper, 'The Future
Development of Auditing', which addresses many of the most contentious
issues of the day. The APB may be funded by the Consultative Committee of
Accountancy Bodies, but it is now an independently minded and
forward-thinking body, with a number of non-accountant members. The latest
APB paper is intended to promote public debate and this institute will be
taking a major role in considering and commenting on the very important
matters raised by the APB on very difficult issues. I am not persuaded that
the APB, which was only established last year and is already doing good
work, would be more effective if its reporting line were changed merely in
some pursuit of improved liaison.
In short, many of the 'problems' in the existing set-up that Mr Roques calls
on as evidence to support his argument have already been resolved or are
not, in fact, problems at all.
W I D Plaistowe,
president, Institute of Chartered
Accountants,
Chartered Accountants' Hall,
Moorgate Place, London EC2
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1586</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Letter: Pay and experience of non-executive directors
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr KEITH NICOL
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, Andrew Jack's article ('New breed on the board', December 4th) bemoans
the shortage of non-executive directors with marketing skills and overseas
experience. Perhaps one reason is an alleged tendency to take only
individuals who have served on the boards of UK publicly quoted companies.
This may have merit but it excludes an important pool of experience, namely
board members of UK subsidiaries of foreign multinationals. Such people are
likely to have made a range of overseas contacts (and in some cases worked
abroad) as part of their 'in-company' career and can be expected to bring a
broader perspective to many marketing and overseas issues.
Keith Nicol,
134A Kew Road,
Richmond, Surrey TW9 2AU
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1587</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Letter: Pay and experience of non-executive directors
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr PETER M BROWN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, David Daws suggests (Letters, December 12) that to do a proper job
non-executive directors need to commit a minimum of 180 hours a year to a
company and should receive fees of Pounds 32,000-Pounds 63,000.
As we advise NEDs and remuneration committees we are frequently asked to
recommend fee rates for partially executive chairmen, partially executive
and non-executive directors. Our solution to the problem posed by Mr Daws,
whereby top flight professionals could be unwilling to accept the Pounds
12,000-Pounds 20,000 normally offered, is that stand-by fees should be
arranged to cover additional training, crisis management or takeover bids
where the NED is required to commit additional time at short notice.
The problem with high fees for partially executive directors is that they
can lose their independence as two or three such appointments add up to a
significant income.
We have recently recommended fees of Pounds 45,000-plus for partially
executive chairmen of medium-sized PLC groups but are conscious that in a
takeover with no service contract such fees might lead them to over-oppose a
bid.
There appears to be no shortage of high quality candidates at current NED
rates though I know that leading professional firms are unwilling to allow
their partners, for conflict of interest and fee reasons, to serve as NEDs
as often as they probably should.
Peter M Brown,
chairman,
Top Pay Research Group,
Upper Ground Floor,
9 Savoy Street, London WC2
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1588</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAC9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Book Review: Mystery without thrills
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN FRIEDMAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE MONEY CHANGERS By Charles Raw Harvill/HarperCollins Pounds 20. 520 pages
The Banco Ambrosiano affair ranks as one of the gravest and most complicated
banking scandals since the second world war. Prior to the more recent
unravelling of the BCCI and BNL/Iraqgate stories it was also accurate to
describe it as one of the biggest.
The outline of this particularly Italian affair is already known to many in
the financial community. The late Roberto Calvi, chairman of Banco
Ambrosiano, was a Milanese banker with close personal and business ties to
both the secretive P2 Masonic lodge and the Vatican bank (Istituto per le
Opere di Religione). The corpse of Calvi, who became known as 'God's
banker', was found in June 1982 hanging beneath Blackfriars Bridge in the
City of London as his bank was collapsing under the weight of a massive
fraud back in Italy. It has never been clear whether Calvi's death resulted
from suicide or murder. It was initially ruled a suicide, but a second
inquest resulted in an 'open' verdict.
Some Dollars 1.3bn of Ambrosiano money was missing at the time of bank's
crash, and was later found to have gone to 10 offshore dummy companies
controlled by the Vatican. In 1984 the Vatican paid National Westminster
Bank, Midland and other creditors of Ambrosiano the sum of Dollars 244m 'in
recognition of moral involvement' in the Ambrosiano fraud.
By the late 1980s Monsignor Paul Marcinkus, the golfing, Chicago-born
archbishop who ran the Vatican bank, was indicted in Milan on fraud charges
only to have his arrest warrant ruled null and void by Italy's supreme
court. Two years after the charges were set aside, he lost his job and
subsequently returned to America, denying any guilt and yet regretting: 'I
will be remembered as the villain in the Calvi affair.'
This, in abridged form, is the tale. It has already been articulately
summarised in God's Banker, a book written in the early 1980s by Rupert
Cornwell. Now, after eight years of investigation as both a journalist and
consultant to the Ambrosiano liquidators, Charles Raw has produced a
voluminous tome that tackles the story with a wealth of financial detail and
hitherto undisclosed documents.
Raw's main revelations concern how Archbishop Marcinkus and his colleagues
at the Vatican bank made it possible for Dollars 250m of funds to be stolen
by members of the P2 lodge. The author states baldly that for a time Pope
John Paul II himself 'joined in the cover-up' of the Vatican's involvement
in the Ambrosiano scandal. He also cites 'blatant evidence of a conspiracy'
between Archbishop Marcinkus and Calvi to deceive third parties about their
joint dealings through the exchange of a series of letters of 'patronage'
and 'indemnity'.
There are a few moments of light relief in this dense history, such as the
recollection by Calvi's widow of a visit by Archbishop Marcinkus to the
Calvi family's rented villa in the Caribbean, with the Vatican banker
singing Arrivederci Roma.
Raw employs impressive detail to convey the intricacies of the scandal,
whether he is giving the background of the collapse of the Franklin National
Bank, controlled by Calvi's associate Michele Sindona, describing Licio
Gelli, head of the banned P2 lodge to which Calvi belonged, or telling of
behind-the-scenes manoeuvering by Midland, Natwest and other creditor banks
to persuade the Vatican to pay compensation. But ironically, the technical
minutiae that give the book much of its authority also make it somewhat
inaccessible to ordinary readers. Some chapters are opaque, such as one on
the role of Rizzoli, the publishing group in which an Ambrosiano subsidiary
was an investor. Names, numbers and documents cascade through the book,
seemingly there for their own sake, rather than to provide the clarity
needed in such a complicated narrative.
The mysterious death of Calvi, however, is one of the few sections of the
book that is easily digestible. The latter chapters provide a remarkable
reconstruction of the final days of Calvi's life, spent in Austria and a
London hide-out. But they do not arrive at any persuasive conclusions about
his demise.
Freemasons, archbishops, shadowy bankers, spies and Mafia men . . . The
Calvi affair is one of the great real-life financial and political thrillers
of the past decade. So it is all the more disappointing that Raw -
undoubtedly one of Britain's most talented investigative journalists and the
co-author of Do You Sincerely Want to be Rich?, an excellent book written 20
years ago about funds manager Bernie Cornfeld  - has become trapped by too
much extremely well-researched, but rather microscopic, material. As a
result, he frequently loses sight of the big picture.
In addition, he might be expected to draw some analytical conclusions about
the Ambrosiano affair's wider implications for Italian politics and
international bank regulation. He does not.
Bankers, accountants, lawyers and followers of things Italian will probably
find this book fascinating. But the general reader is in danger of becoming
numbed by the endless detail. This is one for the aficionados.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1589</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAC8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Beyond the recession
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
WHEN OECD countries are suffering from slow growth or outright recession,
prophets of doom gain an all too attentive audience. It is precisely at
times like these, when pessimism is so easy to find, that the more
optimistic alternative perspective must be remembered: the recession will
end; when at last it does, prospects for sustained economic growth are
excellent.
The OECD's latest Economic Outlook argues that there are three primary
reasons for the recession and the unexpectedly weak recovery. In the US,
Japan, the UK and a number of other countries, the principal problem has
been the need to adjust to the rise in private indebtedness of the 1980s. In
continental Europe, the difficulty has been high real interest rates, which
have been largely the result of German unification; and, finally, job losses
have fallen more widely across OECD economies, notably in services, and look
likely to be more permanent than in previous recessions.
This understanding has come with hindsight. Of foresight there has been too
little. There has, in fact, been a consistent tendency to underestimate the
recessionary forces. For this reason the OECD's analysis of the risks must
be taken seriously. The greatest danger is that the recessions in Japan and
Germany, both still at a relatively early stage, will prove deeper and more
prolonged than most forecasters expect.
That is not a comfortable prospect, but also not the end of the world. The
recovery under way in the US suggests that there is life after debt, even if
 -as Mr Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, argues - past
sins may condemn an economy to a long time in purgatory before it gets
there.
When recovery arrives, there is also much to suggest reasonably good
long-term prospects. OECD inflation is running at only around 3 per cent.
Unemployment may still be rising, but at the same time 'the gaps between
real wages and productivity levels which opened up in the 1970s and were
often cited as a leading cause of rising unemployment in Europe, have now
largely disappeared'. Above all, parts of the developing world are showing
self-sustaining economic dynamism.
In 1992, growth in the dynamic east Asian economies - Korea, Taiwan, Hong
Kong, Singapore, Thailand and Malaysia - is estimated to have slowed by 1
percentage point. But it was still 6 1/2 per cent. China's economy is
expected to grow by 11 per cent, while growth in Argentina and Chile should
exceed 7 per cent.
The World Bank concludes, in its latest World Debt Tables, that 'for the
commercial banks and some of their middle-income borrowers, the debt crisis
that began 10 years ago is largely over'. There are, for example, huge flows
of portfolio capital to developing countries, the gross amount rising from
Dollars 7.6bn in 1989 to Dollars 27.2bn in 1992 - more than half of it to
Latin America and the Caribbean.
A new world is growing up around the OECD countries, one of new
opportunities and new challenges. The task for the OECD will be to maintain
and, indeed, enhance global co-operation. As the countries of east Asia,
eastern Europe and Latin America advance, they need to be brought into the
circle of co-operation and consultation that the OECD itself uniquely
provides. The OECD should be defined as the grouping of advanced economies,
wherever they are located. Japan's membership has already shown the way.
Others must follow.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1590</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAC7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Europe isn't working: As the single market approaches,
rising unemployment has pushed inflation out of the limelight
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID GOODHART
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
In the run-up to next year's single European market, many of the continent's
biggest employers are shedding tens of thousands of employees. IBM, British
Petroleum and Ford joined the list this week, and the UK government will
today unveil figures showing more than 30,000 joined the dole queues in
November.
Unemployment in the European Community, consistently higher than elsewhere
in the industrial world and rising rapidly again, is rudely elbowing its way
back into the limelight.
Between 1985 and 1991 it was tempting to believe that unemployment rates
could return to the low single figures of the 1960s as, led by the UK, the
EC created 11.4m jobs. That performance was better than the US, Japan and
non-EC Europe, but still not good enough to bring EC unemployment rates down
to their levels.
One reason is that only a third of the 11.4m jobs went to the registered
unemployed, resulting in a disappointingly small fall in the EC's
unemployment rate, from 10.9 per cent at the end of 1985 to 8.4 per cent at
the end of 1990. About 30 per cent of the new jobs went to part-timers and
70 per cent to women. Many of the women, according to European Commission
officials, now form a reserve army of the semi-employed who come on to the
jobs market when jobs are plentiful and disappear again when they are
scarce.
Thanks to the rising level of female participation in the EC workforce, a
static, or slightly falling, EC birth rate will not lead to a shortage of
workers or the disappearance of unemployment by the end of the century.
Indeed, the Commission expects the labour force to grow 15 per cent,
requiring 25m jobs, by 2010, largely because female participation will catch
up with the rest of the industrialised world.
But the medium-term prospects are not good. Industrialists point out that,
on top of the unemployment arising from slower growth, is the extra loss of
jobs that will arise because of the single market. Companies' profit margins
in the new competitive environment are coming under pressure so they are
cutting overheads in the form of jobs. The combined result is that for the
past year unemployment has been rising in almost all countries, with the
exception of the Netherlands, and EC-wide unemployment is now edging back up
towards 10 per cent - about 16m people.
The UK, where labour-market deregulation has made it easier to hire and
fire, is the leader in the loss of jobs just as it was in job creation, and
accounted for almost 50 per cent of the increase in EC joblessness in the
year to August 1992. The continuing rapid increase in the UK will help to
propel the EC-wide unemployment rate to a new peak of more than 11 per cent
later in 1993, where the Commission expects it to remain until 1996.
The total should fall after that, but the continuing underlying upward
trend, which began with the first oil shock of the early 1970s, will leave
joblessness at the end of the 1990s six times higher than it was in the
1960s. The Commission estimates that 10m new jobs will be needed by 2000
merely to cut the unemployment rate to 7 per cent, something the tough
economic convergence criteria of the Maastricht treaty will almost certainly
rule out.
EC labour markets were not always such international laggards. Indeed it was
only in the early 1980s that EC unemployment overtook that of the US, but
academics and policymakers seem at a loss to find a convincing explanation
for what has gone wrong over the past 20 years.
Mr Charles Bean, of the Centre for Economic Performance at the London School
of Economics, concluded a recent survey of European unemployment thus: 'The
reader may feel that we are not much further on in understanding the causes
of high unemployment than 10 years ago. There are plenty of plausible
suspects, quite a few smoking guns, but little really definite proof.'
The basic pattern of EC unemployment has remained similar for 20 years,
although the problem is now spreading beyond the unskilled, the young and
the old to affect better-qualified, middle-aged workers. But the current
wave differs in one important respect from the early 1980s - there is no
surge in youth unemployment, which accounted for 45 per cent of total EC
unemployment in the early 1980s and now accounts for less than 30 per cent.
There remain large differences between countries within the EC -
particularly between northern and southern member states. As Mr John Morley,
head of employment policy at the European Commission, points out: 'Unlike
the United States we do have some very undeveloped parts of the EC with low
participation rates and a large black market.'
EC unemployment can be divided into three groups: the high-unemployment
countries (Ireland and Spain); the medium-unemployment countries (the UK,
Italy, France, Denmark, Belgium and Greece); and the low-unemployment
countries (the Netherlands, west Germany, Portugal and Luxembourg).
In some countries, such as France, Italy and Greece, unemployment has
remained relatively static for almost a decade; others such as the UK have
ridden the rollercoaster up, down and now up again. A virtuous trio of
Portugal, the Netherlands and west Germany have seen a consistent downward
trend since 1985, although Germany, following reunification, is now starting
to shed jobs rapidly.
Southern states such as Spain, Greece and Italy tend to have lower
participation rates, higher youth and female unemployment, and higher
self-employment rates. But Spain's very high unemployment rate stems from
its slow growth between 1975 and 1985; inflexible employment rules for
employers plus capital-intensive investment have done little to dent this.
Portugal, on the other hand, enjoys low unemployment because it has low
productivity.
There are other regional differences, such as high graduate unemployment in
Spain and Greece which results from people queueing for the better-paid jobs
in the public sector. But there is no single explanation for the EC's poor
employment performance which would help policymakers bring the rate down to
the low single figures that prevails in Japan, the US and non-EC Europe.
The EC's failures compared with other leading industrial countries (see
chart) cannot simply be attributed to slower growth. Though growth has been
below Japanese levels since the early 1970s it has been comparable with the
US and non-EC Europe.
Neither, as the UK government believes, can the failure be attributed to the
over-regulation of EC labour markets. Britain's own laisser-faire hire and
fire system is hardly a model - with the third-highest unemployment in the
EC - while two of the most regulated EC labour markets, the Netherlands and
west Germany, have relatively low unemployment. Related arguments about high
unionisation or generous benefit systems are disproved by the Nordic
countries, which have both, as well as historically low unemployment.
So was labour market deregulation and the reduction in union influence
pursued by some EC countries in the 1980s misconceived? Mr Robert Lindley,
of the Institute for Employment Research at the University of Warwick,
believes that the strategy hit the wrong target. Instead of forcing
full-time, well-paid 'insiders', from skilled manual workers to the
professions, to share out some of their job security and high pay, it has
merely made 'already weak workers even weaker and divided up the same amount
of work into smaller, part-time, parcels'. The percentage of French workers
in part-time employment has increased by 50 per cent over the past decade
and one-fifth of UK employment is now part-time.
The dominance of the insiders also helps explain the failure of EC wage
rates to respond first to the external shocks of the 1970s oil price rises
and then to the high unemployment of the early 1980s. Japanese workers took
a sharp drop in real wages in the 1970s and, at least for the past 10 years,
US workers have had static real wages. By contrast the EC saw a significant
increase in real wages in the 1980s. In Britain, for example, they rose by
39 per cent and in Italy by 31 per cent.
One reason that the insiders have remained so well-placed in the EC is the
high incidence of people out of work for more than one year who cease to
function as an effective pressure on the employed. The long-term unemployed
make up about 50 per cent of the EC unemployed, compared with only 6 per
cent in the US and 18 per cent in Japan.
The Commission wants a more 'integrated' labour market to accommodate the
longer-term unemployed but is unlikely to get it. EC employers are
fragmenting the labour market and, where regulations allow, increasing the
number of part-time, or temporary, service-sector jobs, which are often
insecure and low-paid.
To overcome the mismatch between the skills and aptitudes of the long-term
unemployed and the sort of jobs increasingly on offer, the unemployed will
have to adapt to the job market. Mr Morley says governments must help them
by adjusting their social security and taxation systems to encourage the
outsiders back into the labour market, making it easier for people to
combine two part-time jobs for example. Governments should also spend less
on 'passive' benefits - currently more than two-thirds of the 2.25 per cent
of EC gross domestic product spent on the unemployed - and more on
retraining, counselling and other active labour market measures.
Such reforms could take years to yield benefits. In the meantime it would be
unrealistic to expect greater labour mobility in the EC to help reduce
strains - only 2m EC citizens currently work permanently in another EC
country, fewer than the number 10 years ago.
There are, however, two grounds for optimism about EC unemployment. First,
thanks to lower productivity and the growth of labour-intensive services, it
now requires EC growth of only about 1.5 per cent to create jobs, compared
with 3 to 4 per cent 10 years ago. Second, a growing number of politicians
in the EC are starting to focus on high unemployment as a structural, not
just a cyclical, problem. As Mr Morley says: 'It's not much, but at least
it's a start.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1591</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAC6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Kenya's election
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
KENYA'S first multi-party elections for 26 years are in jeopardy. A
manipulated nomination procedure, violence, intimidation and abuse of the
machinery of state have seriously compromised the process, as the
Commonwealth observer group and other independent monitors have warned this
week. Far from marking the start of a new democratic era for Kenya, the
December 29 poll could become the catalyst for instability.
A year ago President Daniel arap Moi capitulated to internal and external
pressure - notably a freeze on aid flows - and lifted the ban on opposition
parties. But hopes have not been sustained. The loose coalition that pressed
for multi-party democracy broke into three main parties in which ethnicity
predominates.
Most worrying, however, has been the performance of President Moi and the
ruling Kanu party. They have exercised autocratic power for so long that the
distinction between state and party has been lost. Opposition parties have
been prevented from nominating candidates in as many as 45 parliamentary
seats. In no less than 17 seats Kanu candidates have been returned
unopposed, giving Mr Moi a head start in the contest for 188 seats. The
electoral commission has effectively disclaimed its responsibilities, saying
that aggrieved candidates must seek redress in the courts.
Meanwhile district commissioners behave like party functionaries rather than
civil servants, and harass opposition parties; state radio and television
display a pro-government bias; and there are growing suspicions that the
Kanu campaign is drawing on state resources. Only last Saturday a parade
marking the 29th anniversary of independence was turned by Mr Moi into a
Kanu political rally, prompting five western ambassadors to walk out.
Thus even before polling takes place, the credibility of the election
process has been undermined. A heavy responsibility now rests with the
Commonwealth observers, whose assessment of the conduct of a member state
will carry special weight with the international community.
As a first step, the number of observers should be increased. The team
cannot prevent election fraud; but 40 people cannot adequately monitor
10,000 polling stations. At the same time, the group should make clear to Mr
Moi that abuses of state power must cease if Kenya's elections are to be
judged free and fair. Only if they are will aid frozen a year ago resume. A
Kanu win under any other circumstances will be a Pyrrhic victory.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1592</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAC5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Cars and cycles
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
YESTERDAY'S spate of bad news from Ford, Volkswagen and Peugeot about job
cuts and financial losses in Europe will provoke fresh anxiety about the
depth of the European recession. But while the recession is real enough,
there is more to it than that. The problems of the world motor industry are
not confined to Europe. Nor is it clear how far they are caused by
recession, as against being uncovered by it.
As it happened, Nissan this week announced plans to increase its UK car
output. So did Rover, which is now closely associated with Honda. Yesterday
also saw the official opening of Toyota's first European plant in
Derbyshire. But while the build-up of Japanese competitive pressure ahead of
the single European market is plainly part of the story, the Japanese
producers are not enjoying life either. Nissan is in loss worldwide, as are
several of its smaller competitors. Toyota, whose profits last year were
almost halved, has just made a further cut in its profits estimate for this
year.
In the US, while there are glimmers of hope in the market place, most of the
producers are in no better shape. General Motors, the biggest car maker of
them all, is in worse. Not only is its organisation in turmoil, it has just
summarily got rid of its boss.
Around the world, the industry is suffering from twin afflictions. It has
high overheads which are not flexible enough to cope with fluctuations in
demand. Meanwhile, the competition is hotting up, with global producers
expanding into each others' markets faster than the markets themselves can
cope with.
These problems are not confined to the motor industry. But in one respect,
the travails of the motor industry are particularly instructive. In the past
couple of years, there has been much talk of the so-called 'lean production'
technique employed by Japanese car makers. Supposedly, this offers two
particular benefits. Its flexibility allows for frequent variations in model
within a relatively small output, and its responsiveness means that the
least possible inventory is built up through the supply chain.
In the event, this seems to have had its limits. Japanese car makers, like
their counterparts in consumer electronics, have found that extreme
proliferation in models was a mere frippery of the late 1980s, designed to
tempt the consumer into yet more excessive consumption. The emphasis is now
on a smaller range of models, changed less often and lasting longer. And
despite the supposedly lower inventories carried by the industry and its
reduced working capital, its collective overheads are still too high. There
are only two ways to address this problem: either the industry gets even
leaner, or some of the weaker fry get out.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1593</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAC4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Arts: Today's Television
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTOPHER DUNKLEY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Today The Essential History Of Europe is about the French. Let's hope the
programme obscures the fact that the Italians taught them to cook, and
overlooks the Second World War. French TV is another sore point, as is the
erosion of the French language by English. Oh, and the subject of wine is
best avoided: French wines now lose so often against the Australians in
blind tastings that the French are starting to sulk. Kinder to ignore pop
music and modern drama, too, and although you can hardly disregard their
racism remember that it is only a bit more virulent than that in Germany and
Britain. Otherwise they are marvellous people (8.00 BBC2). BBC2's Video
Diaries series has been very mixed. Some have been compelling, others
scarcely worth watching. Today's was made by Elhanan Oppenheim who lives in
the occupied West Bank. For That Was This Week That Was (9.00 ITV) the
poacher/presenter has turned gamekeeper. After 36 years, the programme ends
with a retrospective which attempts to discover what the programme did, why
it got into trouble with the government, and what may replace it.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1594</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAC3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Arts: Dylan Thomas - Return Journey
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
'Years ago, when I was a boy, when there were wolves in Wales and birds like
red-flannelled petticoats . . .' Dylan Thomas: Return Journey, a one-man
show in which Bob Kingdom impersonates Thomas solely by reciting Thomas's
own words, gives pride of place to the best loved facet of Thomas - the
lyrical, satiric, comic, tender and elegiac prose poet of the bygone Wales
of his youth. Thomas can be as funnily picturesque on Wales as Dickens on
England and as acute and ironic as Joyce on Ireland. The show refers only to
Thomas's own self-destructive adulthood obliquely.
But Thomas was less interested in Wales, or in memory, than in words.
Listening to this show, you can tell why Edith Sitwell once wrote him a
fan-letter; and Gerald Manley Hopkins is another poet whose work comes to
mind. Thomas gets a high from sound itself, though in the long run his
over-indulgence serves to diminish him. Return Journey confirms my suspicion
that Thomas is a poet best enjoyed in adolescence (lines like 'his sulking
skulking cold black soul,' 'the old ramrod dying of downfall,' 'black
business bowlers bobbed before . . .'). Few of us, however, are so entirely
adult as to be proof against his lyric charm.
Bob Kingdom moves little, and his face moves less. You never quite get past
the fascination of just looking at him - is his head too large for his body?
or is his forehead too big for the rest of his face? or both? and is that
permanent expression of his a melancholy frown? - but mainly you hang on the
voice. It is, as he produces it here, an entirely Welsh voice, preacherly,
singerly, fruity and deadpan in its solemnity, as oddly cultivated in its
bygone accent as the BBC voices of the postwar years were in theirs.
No doubt but that in most respects Kingdom does Thomas to a T. This show -
directed by Anthony Hopkins, no less - is excellent, and most recommended to
all those who want to intoxicate themselves on words - words and fun. Who
could not love Thomas's descriptions of the useful and useless books of
boyhood? ('Books that told me everything about the wasp except why'?) He
adores making crazy lists: 'balletomanes, Max Factored actors, bigwigs and
humbugs . . . and men from the BBC who sound as if they had the Elgin
marbles in their mouths.'
It is eventually Thomas's over-use of devices as lists, alliterations and
half-rhymes that make him seem a minor artist. He is, nonetheless, absorbing
company. Return Journey's only fault is that it moves with an over-smooth
gear change into the more vehement poetry ('Do not go gentle'), which
therefore does not make its full effect.
The show's most interesting achievement is the way it shows Thomas's
detached presentation of himself. He sounds as lonely as one of Dickens's
heroes, and he uses the first person singular in an ironic post-Romantic
tone that often evokes Eliot. Making his way back to his Welsh boyhood, in
fact, he often sounds much like Peer Gynt.
In my review of Grace last Friday I mistakenly called Kristin Marks Kristin
Thomas. My apologies.
At the Lyric Studio, Hammersmith, until January 2
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1595</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAC2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Arts: Billy Liar - Theatre
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Keith Waterhouse has achieved the unusual distinction of having a new play
running in the West End while one of his early works is being revived as a
period-piece at the Royal National Theatre. It is not that Waterhouse has
changed much as a playwright: he continues to chronicle the times as he sees
them, but in 30 years times have have changed almost beyond recognition.
Our Song, his new play at the Apollo, is about an abortive love affair in
the advertising world of the late 1980s. Billy Liar, which he wrote along
with Willis Hall, is a product of the late 1950s. Lindsay Anderson, the
original director, writes in a programme note that Billy was a protest play
about the class society, and remains so today.
That is not how it looks in Tim Supple's production at the Cottesloe.
Protest and anger are notably absent. This Billy Liar is a portrait of the
emergence of relative affluence and the continuation of deference. No-one
seems particularly short of the odd bob or two. Some, like the girl Liz
(Sally Rogers) are even fairly flush - ready to buy rail tickets from the
north of England to King's Cross on a Saturday night.
No-one is unemployed. When Billy's father threatens to throw him out if he
cannot earn his own living, Billy comes back within two hours having found a
job as a clerk, which he continues to hold down despite fiddling the petty
cash and not turning up on Saturday mornings. If he wanted to, Billy could
enter the family business - a removals firm. The family cocktail cabinet, by
no means despised by Billy, lights up and plays a tune when opened.
There is one area of contention. Billy has passed his 11 plus and entered a
grammar school where he feels out of place. He resents his parents' claim
that it is a willing financial sacrifice on their part to pay for the
uniform that goes with a grammar school education. This was before the late
Anthony Crosland pledged to abolish the whole effing lot of them, because of
their disruptive social influence.
Billy withdraws from school prematurely and retreats into fantasies. His
parents call them lies, which is literally true, but nostalgic fantasies is
the better description. He would like to be a concert-pianist, a
script-writer or even prime minister. When his father calls him into line,
on the whole he obeys. There is not the slightest sign of a social
conscience or serious break with conformity. Besides, he spends most of this
time chasing the girls: references to the campaign for nuclear disarmament
or South Africa are no more than an afterthought.
There are other dips into the past, like the grandmother who refuses medical
treatment because one of the doctors is a woman and the other is black. The
grandmother (Elizabeth Bradley) also talks about the trouble caused by the
blacks on the buses in Birmingham. It takes an effort of memory to realise
that she means Birmingham, Alabama.
Billy is played by Paul Wyett. He looks younger than his predecessors,
Albert Finney and Tom Courtenay, but that may be a sign of our growing
older. James Grant plays his father whose every third word is 'bloody',
which once seemed daring but now sounds quaint. June Watson as the mother
looks and acts exactly like a lower middle class woman of the time - bearing
up with some dignity. As a loving, careful reconstruction of a view of
Britain circa 1960, it is very well done. It should not be taken for
anything more.
In repertory at the Cottesloe Theatre (071 928 2252), then touring.
Sponsored by BP.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1596</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAC1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Arts: You gotta have a hero you can like - Cinema
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NIGEL ANDREWS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
CHAPLIN (12) Richard Attenborough
MALCOLM X Spike Lee
THE MUPPET CHRISTMAS CAROL (U) Brian Henson
MO' MONEY (15) Peter MacDonald
COOL WORLD (12) Ralph Bakshi
Charlie C and Malcolm X. Only through the world-shrinking,
history-scrambling quirks of movie production could the two have ever come
together.
Films about real people are called 'bio-pics': partly, one suspects, because
they are grown with the fertiliser of artistic presumption. Take a famous
fellow - Chaplin, Emile Zola, Napoleon, Gandhi, Malcolm X - and water him
with a few drops of liquid feed compounded from (equal parts) wild surmise,
canonisation and a democratising Everymanness.
Then watch your hero grow from someone real, measurable and idiomatic into
someone bland and generic enough to command a two or three-hour movie. Sir
Richard Attenborough's Chaplin is all about a handsome chap with curly hair
and quirky accent (it starts Elephant and Castle cockney, it ends Belgravia
posh) who floated through Hollywood between 1914 and 1952. Much of the time
this chap appears bewildered: partly because his life has been scripted by
four different people - Bryan Forbes, William Boyd, William Goldman and
(uncredited) Tom Stoppard - and partly because he is impersonated by a
fifth, Robert Downey Jr, who is brilliant when allowed to clown, comatose
when not.
Yet Chaplin, for all its faults, is a gust of pleasure compared with Malcolm
X. This, coming to British screens shortly, was witnessed by me a week ago
in Los Angeles. In the bio-pic cosmos Spike Lee's film is Yang to
Attenborough's Yin. Where Chaplin is a victim of innocence, stumbling into
aesthetic voids in the course of a well-meaning search for the Little Chap's
tragicomic essence, Lee's film is a disingenuous bland-out. Hustling its
hero through recent political history, it dodges controversial issues like a
soldier serpentining between bullets on a battlefield.
In both films the real-life subject is replaced by an expanded
glamorisation. But where Attenborough falls hapless victim to the
ineluctability of commercial movie tradition - gotta have a hero you can
like and understand rather than someone too prickly or protean (like Chaplin
himself) - Spike Lee uses that hagiographic trend as a propagandist tool.
In the role of race-war hate prophet Malcolm X he has cast Denzel
Washington, black cinema's Mr Nice Guy, best known for sweetening Steven
Biko in (Attenborough's) Cry Freedom. As a result, there is no sense of the
acrid aggressiveness with which the real Malcolm X played to black crowds
but which might, of course, have sent white audiences hurtling from the
cinema.
Malcolm X the movie, like Chaplin, pretends to portray a switchbacking life.
The civil rights leader did recant his own hate arias in late career,
converted to a gentler propagandism shortly before his own assassination.
But the conversion is meaningless - or impactless - in a movie where we
scarcely sense those hate arias to begin with. Even Malcolm X's notoriously
approving response to Kennedy's killing - 'The chickens have come home to
roost' - is camouflaged in a montage sequence where sounds and images are
pixillated to distract us from their content.
Chaplin owes its switchbacking structure to a different conversion: the
hero's change from silent-era supercomic to showbiz celebrity mugged by
history. This was not just movie history - the dooming effect of the sound
era on a performer whose work was grounded in mime - but political history.
Chaplin the man fell foul of the postwar American epidemic of anti-Communism
and Chaplin the movie suggests that even some of his troubles with women -
notably a litigious paternity suit - were the dark work of the FBI.
Could be true. But then almost anything in Chaplin could be true. Framing
the story with Swiss-set scenes of a white-haired Charlie discussing his
memoirs with his publisher (Anthony Hopkins), Attenborough and his scribes
make the film a giant flashback as if to say to the audience, 'Dispute what
you like. This is an old man's recall, not holy writ.'
Yet having taken this licence, they fail to use it interestingly. Charlie
recalls, it seems, only in cliches. His Ma (Geraldine Chaplin) is a
draggle-clothed cockney with a Monty Python line in penurious household
budgeting ('Sorry, it's only fish-'eads again, me darlins'.) The great
swashbuckler Doug Fairbanks (Kevin Kline) is introduced - yes - swinging
from a chandelier. And silent director Mack Sennett (Dan Aykroyd) is a
photo-fit assemblage of bullhorn, barking command and work mottoes designed
to tickle modern audiences' hindsight laughter ('I never make more than two
pictures a week').
The cartoonish approach might have earned its passage, if sustained and
intensified. But as Chaplin himself ages, so does the film's style. With the
comic practitioner pushed aside by the serial husband and suspected commie,
all the initially animated Robert Downey can do is to stand centre-screen,
arteries stiffening as he is assailed by a sirocco of subplots. Allowing
Chaplin to be his own first-person narrator - which may have seemed an
inspired idea at first - ends up playing straight into the hands of Bad
Bio-pic Practice. The hero freezes into a bland reactive icon, surrounded by
a cast of compensatingly exaggerated movers and shakers.
Throughout both Chaplin and Malcolm X we long for glimpses - and
occasionally get them - of the real man behind the movie surrogate. Each
time the real comedian or activist crackles forth from some old newsreel,
high-diving into a slapstick pond or haranguing from a fiery podium, we
suddenly see or hear what we have been missing. Danger. Surprise.
Attraction. Revulsion. Hilarity. Outrage. All those uneven, vivid,
corrugated emotions that are crushed smooth by the genuflecting gestures of
the bio-pic.
Meanwhile, Christmas draws on apace. And what more seasonal than The Muppet
Christmas Carol, directed by Brian Henson, son of the late great Jim? This
has Michael Caine's Scrooge adrift in a Victorian London packed with rats,
frogs, pigs, bears and creatures beyond description. Most of these animals
are gifted with the power of speech: not least the Great Gonzo as one
'Charles Dickens.'
This is very enjoyable and absurd for about 30 minutes, after which drama
and sentiment take over. Jerry Juhl's script becomes too obsequious to the
original, leaving the Muppets to mug frantically in the few seconds they get
between the Scrooge-and-ghost set pieces. Kermit gulps away prettily as Bob
Cratchit. Fozzie Bear shines for a millisecond as factory-owner 'Fozziwig.'
But Miss Piggy, wasted as Emma Cratchit, practises a porcine sneer in
preparation for better roles.
Mo' Money is a cops-and-robbers comedy scripted by black star Damon Wayans
(The Last Boy Scout). Wayans and real-life brother Marlon play two
knockabout con persons who, between scams, help the police expose big
business corruption. Fearlessly democratic in its offensiveness, the film
lampoons lawmakers and lawbreakers alike: not to mention cripples, junkies,
mental patients, paranoiacs, para-feminists, whole-earthists, half-earthists
and Uncle Tomism and all. It is so ill-behaved it is almost charming. Or am
I just suffering from pre-Christmas concussion?
Cool World may have contributed to that state if I am. Imagine a cartoon
dimension where migrated humans (Brad Pitt, Gabriel Byrne) turn into painted
likenesses of themselves and where painted nymphets long to depart so they
can turn into real earthy beauties. One such nymphet departs to become Kim
Basinger. But the strain proves too much and she returns to cartoondom.
Ralph Bakshi (Fritz The Cat, Lord Of The Rings) designed and directed this
live-action/animation folly, which is every bit as whimsical, circular and
one-idea as it sounds.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1597</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAC0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Arts: Bar, Von Otter and Nathan - Song recitals
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MAX LOPPERT
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Since the re-opening last month of the Wigmore Hall, London music has taken
on the aspect of a semi-perpetual song-festival. The parade of fine
song-recitalists (Price, Bonney, Hagegard, Mattila, Bartoli, Janowitz and so
on) anxious to re-kindle their relationship with the 'teure Halle',
alongside those youngsters fortunate enough to make their first appearance
there, continues. May it never cease]
A certain sentimental pleasure attaches to every concert here of Olaf Bar. A
1983 Wigmore debutant, youthful and unknown, he leapt directly thence to
world fame. Unfortunately, the Bar story seems to have reached something of
a dramatic crisis. Singing Mahler song-cycles at the Barbican recently, he
disclosed a voice so alarmingly straitened in terms of tonal resource that
one left the hall in a state of deepest anxiety and gloom.
On Tuesday he gave his now-celebrated account of Die Winterreise with
Geoffrey Parsons as piano partner. It did not provoke feelings of Barbican
order: the smaller hall is, after all, uniquely encouraging and
accommodating to the voice, and in place of a surging Mahlerian orchestra
there was the Parsons piano support at its most acutely sympathetic, never
egregiously assertive yet always aptly prominent in the narrative pattern.
Bar's beautifully clear and poetic diction in his native language, his
determination always to balance the various narrative, pictorial and
emotional demands of the great cyclic unfolding, are qualities undimmed: his
truthfulness as an artist still shines through.
But as evidenced in this Winterreise, the state of the voice still raised a
worrying number of questions. This is, after all, a man just short of his
35th birthday; the grey-ish, unresonant tone in soft mid-range phrases,
stringy over-forcefulness of the loud and high, and regular slippings below
pitch are simply not those of a young baritone coming into his prime.
Neither are the stratagems to which he regularly resorted to cope with
tricky phrase-shapes and intervals.
One agonises over Bar not for Beckmesser-ish or canary-fancying reasons,
indeed, but because his peculiarly precious artistry in Lieder is
continually being let down by current vocal technique. A period of
withdrawal for serious self-examination and vocal overhaul is urgently
required, while there is still time for it to do good.
On Saturday in the Wigmore, there was another house favourite, Anne Sofie
von Otter, and another outing of the 'House Full' sign. This was the final
song-recital in the 'Tender is the North' series, and the first half - two
songs each of six minor Swedish composers - was a duty smoothly if not very
grippingly accomplished. The Von Otter mezzo, that even, lustrous
instrument, was covered by small patches of cloud (the top sounded tight and
chancy); in Wolf she found her best simple, heartfelt form, but then did
Britten's four Cabaret Songs as a comic turn, changing hats for each one.
This singer's sheer efficiency is never less than astonishing, her
linguistic expertise and ease in adapting to a wide range of musical styles
always admirably thorough-going. On this occasion, however, the sense of
personality responsively shaping words and music proved oddly fugitive.
It made for strong, interesting contrast to attend, between these two
international-class recitals, Monday's Purcell Room concert (promoted by the
the Kirckman Society) by the young Irish soprano Regina Nathan. She had a
big success as Susanna in the recent Glyndebourne Touring Figaro. In
recital, even in a hall which lent her bright top notes an unkind edge, the
grace, fullness and warm, steady beauty of her singing gave unfailing
delight. She seems not fully awakened to the distinct, different demands of
Schubert, Brahms and Wolf; consonants are sometimes softened into mush. But
of her shining, elating promise there can be no doubt.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1598</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Technology: Bake me a tile as hard as you can - Italian
ceramics tougher than stone
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HAIG SIMONIAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
For decades, researchers have struggled to create materials, such as
synthetic diamonds or man-made rubber, which are better than their natural
equivalents.
In ceramics, the process is still relatively young. And while sophisticated
compounds have been developed to replace metals in some high-temperature
uses, it is only recently that the natural-versus-synthetic debate has
reached mass-market goods such as ceramic tiles.
By applying increasingly sophisticated materials analysis and automated
production techniques, manufacturers can now make heavy-duty tiles more
durable and resistant than stone. So confident are some companies about
their new products, which are non-absorbent, resistant to chemicals and as
attractive to the eye as natural stone, that they guarantee them for up to a
century.
Most of the technological innovations have taken place in Italy, the home of
world tile production. In spite of growing competition from lower cost
countries such as Spain, Turkey and Brazil, Italian companies still account
for 28 per cent of world output.
Most are concentrated in the ugly industrial town of Sassuolo near Modena in
Emilia Romagna, a central Italian region. Although local archaeologists have
found traces of tile-making dating back to Roman times in the region, the
real surge came in the 1960s as natural gas discoveries in the nearby Po
basin provided the plentiful energy to accompany the already rich local
deposits of clay.
Sassuolo today is an environmentalists' nightmare. Its streets heave with
lorries heading for export markets such as Germany and Austria, while other
trucks bring in clays not found locally. The region's 200 ceramics companies
account for well over half the membership of Italy's ceramics industry
federation.
Like other single-industry centres, Sassuolo contains both makers of the
final product and the specialist machinery needed to manufacture it. The
area abounds with family firms making everything from tile conveyor belts to
high-temperature ovens working at up to 1,2000C.
Most ceramics and machinery makers are still small and family-owned with an
average workforce of less than 100. However, a crisis in the ceramics
industry in the early 1980s led to a shake-out, which some think may be
repeated now. Only six companies have sales over L100bn (Pounds 46m), while
the two biggest, Iris and Marazzi, account for 20 per cent of national
production.
The development of bigger, tougher tiles capable of withstanding the daily
pounding of railway platforms or shopping centre floors has involved
occasional technological leaps, combined with frequent, less dramatic,
innovations, says Romano Minozzi, the chairman and founder of Iris.
He does not foresee anything to match the invention of single firing,
pioneered in 1974 by his arch-rival Marazzi. By eliminating one of the two
firing processes needed to make tiles, the discovery speeded up production
times and saved immense amounts of energy. Single firing now accounts for
around 65 per cent of glazed tiles produced globally.
Mr Minozzi thinks the industry's future now lies in smaller, but constant,
innovations, notably to improve the consistency of the raw materials and to
refine production processes which are already almost entirely automated.
Today's tilemakers, as the inheritors of an artistic tradition, are proud
that no two tiles are ever quite the same. However, the introduction of
increasingly sophisticated process technology has already allowed them
unprecedented control over processes such as the mixing of raw materials,
glazing and firing, which have traditionally been the most vulnerable to
random factors. The result has been to create tiles that offer unprecedented
consistency in their composition, and hence new levels of strength and
durability.
Filippo Marazzi, the owner and chairman of Marazzi, is slightly sceptical of
the 100-year guarantees offered by his rival. 'How many customers will be
around to make a complaint?' asks one company official. However, even his
group now guarantees its new Enduro range for 30 years of heavy-duty use.
Such longevity was inconceivable only a few years ago.
Iris's single-firing plant in Sassuolo, the biggest and one of the most
modern in Italy, illustrates how computers have vastly improved materials
handling and automated production in what was until relatively recently a
handicrafts industry.
The process starts with detailed chemical analysis of each new shipment of
clay, quartz, feldspars and other raw materials which form the base
substance for ceramic tiles. 'Only by increasingly sophisticated controls
can manufacturers be sure of reaching the required quality standards for the
new long-life products,' says Giuseppe Marasti, Iris's head of external
relations.
Mixing, one of the most complex processes, takes place in huge 25-metre long
rotating drums, like giant inverted tumble driers. Only by precision mixing,
followed by computer-controlled humidification and drying procedures, can
the clay-silicon compounds be turned into the atomized powder which is the
basis for the individual 'biscuits' from which tiles are made.
Computers stretch as far as the kiln. It is there that the key process of
vitrification takes place, whereby the various particles comprising the tile
are fused into a single structure of immense strength and resistance.
Microprocessor-linked sensors track temperatures throughout the kilns,
making sure the heat is exactly right at each stage of the firing process.
Recently, Marazzi has taken matters one stage further, with a patented new
procedure for spraying the biscuits with a fine silicon powder which, when
heated, produces a glass-like crystalline surface impervious to attack.
Technology has not yet managed to eliminate the deafening noise and
pervasive dust of even the most modern tile factory. However, the extent to
which tile-making has become a capital-intensive industry is evident at the
Iris works, where advances in automation mean that far fewer employees are
exposed to such conditions than in the past.
'The human element is largely limited to quality control,' explains Mr
Marasti. The Sassuolo plant, capable of producing 14m sq metres of tiles a
year - equivalent to over 3 per cent of Italy's total production - works on
a three-shift system round the clock with a workforce of just 300.
For manufacturers, further advances in technology promise to push tiles to
new limits of durability and strength, and help relatively high-cost
producers such as the Italians to meet the mounting challenge from
lower-cost rivals.
For consumers such as architects and builders, looking for the floor and
wall-coverings of the future, the choice between 'artificial' tiles and
'natural' stone will be harder than ever.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1599</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Technology: Italy faces growing deficit in R&amp;D
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANTONIA SHARPE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ITALIAN industry, in need of innovations to help it survive in competitive
markets, is slipping behind in the technology race.
As the country struggles to sort out its public finances, austerity measures
are likely to further weaken the commitment of both government and industry
to research and development.
Italy has already fallen behind the other Group of Seven industrialised
countries in R &amp; D spending. Between 1985 and 1989, it spent only 1.2 per
cent of its Gross Domestic Product on R &amp; D, compared with 2.8 per cent in
Germany, 2.3 per cent in France and the UK, and 2.9 per cent in the US and
Japan.
Italy's dependence on imports of technology is also much higher and its
share of new patents is far smaller than that of other industrialised
countries.
In 1990, Italy accounted for 4 per cent of patents issued by the European
Patent Office, compared with 9.4 per cent for France, 5.7 per cent for the
UK, 20.5 per cent for Germany, 23.4 per cent for the US, and 25.1 per cent
for Japan.
Italy has its largest technological deficits with the main industrialised
nations and the gaps are widest in the most advanced areas.
It tends to have a positive balance with less developed countries. But in
sectors where Italy has traditionally been strong, especially textiles,
leather goods and furniture, there are signs that Italian companies are
being undercut from the Far East and eastern Europe.
Italy's apparent technological laziness stems partly from a growing tendency
by companies to acquire producers of the goods they want or to buy the
technology from abroad rather than invest in R &amp; D. This is in sharp
contrast to the entrepreneurial spirit of the 1960s and 1970s.
Also to blame is the lack of a coherent national industrial policy, as well
as the habit of some big companies of asking for state hand-outs when they
hit problems.
But there are some areas where Italy is showing its innovative spirit -
electronics, advanced transport systems and precision instruments. Aerospace
accounted for 12 per cent of total R &amp; D spending by private companies in
1988 against 9 per cent in 1981. Spending on precision instruments and
machine tools and on electricals and electronics also rose.
Several state ministries have funds for R &amp; D. The ministry of scientific
research aims to use its funds - amounting to L250bn (Pounds 114.7m) last
year - on research programmes that will strengthen the position of Italian
companies in export markets or enable them to catch up in high-tech areas.
However, the ministry allocates most of its funds to larger companies which
hinders the innovative potential of the country's smaller, more flexible,
groups.
The ministry is encouraging more private investment in its research
programmes and is increasingly linking its own financing to results, in an
attempt to lessen the dependence of big companies on state funding.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1600</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Technology: The fax about saving money
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DELLA BRADSHAW
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Spending your way out of recession could be as strong a piece of advice for
companies as for governments.
Meredith Fischer, vice president of marketing at Pitney Bowes' facsimile
division, has done some calculations to prove - not surprisingly, some might
say - that buying or renting a new fax machine could save you money.
Nevertheless, for the large corporate fax user many of the calculations make
surprising reading. The problem for many corporations, says Meredith, is
that 'the costs of fax machines are well hidden'.
In a survey for Pitney Bowes by Gallup, which questioned large corporate
users in the US, Canada and the UK, 65 per cent of UK respondents said they
did not know how much it cost to send a fax.
Savings can be made in sending faxes: the newer the machine, the faster the
transmission and the lower the phone bill. Even more can be saved at the
receiving end.
Because ordinary paper is less expensive than thermal paper, plain paper fax
machines reduce running costs. Perhaps more surprising is that because
thermal fax paper is so unpopular half the incoming messages are
photocopied, according to Gallup. Taking secretarial costs and paper into
account, Fischer reckons that it costs 60p to copy each document. With an
average 60 faxed messages received on every corporate fax machine every day
in the UK, costs soon mount.
All in all, Meredith reckons that buying the latest fax machine could cut
the fax bill by Pounds 3,000 a year - for every machine. But savings do not
end there. Companies could save more if they used all the functions on the
machine, such as delayed transmission, where messages are stored and sent
after office hours when tariffs are lower.
Companies with data lines between offices - particularly transatlantic data
lines - could also save money by sending their inter-office fax messages on
those lines. According to Meredith, as many as 90 per cent of all faxed
messages from large corporations are sent within the company.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1601</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / People: Amber Day picks new chairman
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Amber Day has found a chairman to succeed the controversial Philip Green,
who resigned in September - after a deluge of adverse press coverage - when
the discount retailing group reported a sharp slump in profits.
He is Stacey Ellis (above) who, until recently, was director of planning and
development for Inchcape, the blue-chip business services group which in the
past year has substantially changed its senior management.
Ellis, 52, was a senior figure in the former regime at Inchcape under Sir
George Turnbull, who was forced by ill-health to step down at the end of
last year as chairman and chief executive. Charles Mackay took over as chief
executive at Inchcape, which has since appointed Sir David Plastow as
chairman.
Amber Day says it is now seeking to appoint as soon as possible two
non-executives and a chief executive, a role which Green shared. In the
meantime, David Thompson, finance director, will continue to act as
temporary chief executive.
Ellis has bought 500,000 Amber Day shares, which yesterday gained 4p to 34p.
The group's shares collapsed from a peak of 129p last year after a series of
bear raids and newspaper stories about Green's business associates and
commercial deals.
According to Thompson, Ellis's appointment would enable the group to
concentrate on developing the business.
Ellis, for his part, says he is impressed both by the prospects for the
group's Glasgow-based 'What Everyone Wants' chain, and the commitment and
enthusiasm of the Amber Day team.
*****
Nicholas Gray has been named finance director of ALLIANCE RESOURCES, the oil
and gas company which was put into receivership by unquoted Manx Petroleum
in October. Alliance is chaired by Manx's managing director, John O'Brien,
who was briefly unseated as chairman following a surprise boardroom coup. He
was reinstated in November.
*****
Martin Saunderson has been appointed finance director and company secretary
of THE HOPKINSONS GROUP. Alan Thompson has resigned and leaves the company.
*****
John Bridgeman, md of British Alcan Enterprises, has moved to Montreal as
director of planning of ALCAN ALUMINIUM.
*****
Rod Alexander, director of purchasing and supply at the POST OFFICE, is
promoted to md of Subscription Services.
*****
Andrew Huntley is the new chairman of the UK partnership of RICHARD ELLIS.
Robin Broadhurst has been elected chairman of JONES LANG WOOTTON
INTERNATIONAL.
*****
Liam O'Mahony, md of CRH Group companies in Republic of Ireland and the UK,
has been appointed an executive director of the group.
*****
Alex Williamson, md of Quilty, CUPID's nursery care division, has joined the
main board.
*****
Jim Gray has been promoted to head the CO-OPERATIVE RETAIL SERVICES food
division.
*****
Rod Alexander, director of purchasing and supply, has been appointed md of
Subscription Services Ltd, a subsidiary of the POST OFFICE, on the
retirement of Brian Sproat.
*****
Simon Tebbett, formerly a consultant with Price Waterhouse, has been
appointed customer service director at THAMES WATER.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1602</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / People: Clutterbuck comes to the head
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir Humphrey Prideaux is stepping down from Morland, the Thames Valley
brewer which successfully fought off a hostile bid from Greene King over the
summer, after the agm at the end of January. His retirement, at the age of
77 after 12 years on the board and nine as non-executive chairman, means
that Jasper Clutterbuck, deputy chairman and chief executive, steps up to
become executive chairman.
Mindful of the Cadbury report's recommendations, Morland says it will be
installing Michael Watts, previously trade and property director, in the new
position of managing director, taking over the day-to-day operational
responsibilities and leaving Clutterbuck, 57, time to concentrate on
strategy and external relations.
At the same time, Martin Mays-Smith, previously head of banking at Kleinwort
Benson and a non-executive director of Morland since 1989, is made deputy
chairman, effectively the most senior of the non-executives and chairman of
the audit and remuneration committees.
Clutterbuck (right) was not prepared to comment on the reasons for the
company not appointing another non-executive chairman and leaving him in the
position of chief executive.
Meanwhile, reflecting recent growth in Morland's business in the tenanted
trade, the brewer is now looking for someone to fill the newly created
position of commercial director, in charge of the tenanted and free trade as
well as marketing. It is also in search of another non-executive director
ahead of Sir Humphrey's departure to restore a complement of three outside
members of the board.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1603</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / People: Long sports Ladbroke colours in US
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Ladbroke, Britain's biggest retail betting business, has reshuffled the top
management of its fledgling US betting operation and replaced a Briton with
an American. John Long has taken over from David Goodwill as president of
Ladbroke Racing Corporation based in Michigan.
Goodwill, who had been president of GrandMet's Watney North America
business, was appointed president and chief operating officer of Ladbroke
Racing in 1988. Although Ladbroke Racing now operates in five states, its
growth in a potentially vast US market has been slower than expected.
Ladbroke does not disclose the size or profitability of its US betting
business. Although it noted in its interim report that its US operations had
produced 'satisfactory results', its Minneapolis race track, in particular,
has been adversely affected by new casinos opened on nearby Indian
reservations under the provisions of the Federal Indian Gaming Regulatory
Act.
To earn decent profits on the low margin US pari-mutuel system of betting
requires high turnover. However, to help it obtain off-track betting
licences, Ladbroke has had to invest in race tracks and as the Minneapolis
venture has shown, this can present problems when local laws are changed.
By contrast with its involvement in US race tracks, Ladbroke's investment in
five off-track tele-betting theatres - complete with restaurants and bars -
in Pennsylvania appears to have been more successful and it is from this
side of the business that John Long has been recruited.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1604</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACTFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Accountancy Column: Where charity does not begin or end at
home - The growing links between the accountancy world and voluntary
organisations
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW JACK
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE ARCHAIC practices of the livery companies of the City of London may seem
far removed from the deprivation of the boroughs just a little further east,
but a new scheme has been forging some powerful links between these two
worlds.
Chartered Accountants in the Community, launched by the Worshipful Company
of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales at the start of the year, has
placed senior accountants onto the management committees of charities around
the country, including a number in London.
As thoughts turn to charity at Christmas, other accountancy firms,
organisations and individual professionals might do well to copy its lead in
providing constructive help to organisations beyond their own workplace or
normal client base.
Bringing together accountants with local charities has not been entirely
straightforward. Mr Alma Munson, chief accountant for the life division of
Guardian Royal Exchange, was not quite sure what to expect earlier this year
when he joined the board of Hackney Youth Workforce, which provides training
and work experience for unemployed people with special needs.
'It's no good standing on your high horse,' he says. 'Some people might
think it's all rather left-wing, having to call the chairman 'chair'. The
people are not financially oriented, and don't see it as a business. It's
another part of the world.'
Mr Graham Finegold, manager of the organisation, also had his doubts. 'I was
very worried how the staff would react when this City gent walked through
the door in his three-piece suit,' he said.
But Munson showed tact and a willingness to learn about the organisation
which has gradually earned him respect. He has helped provide financial
advice, including co-ordinating the introduction of a computerised
accounting system, and in persuading the charity to transfer money from a
current account to one paying interest. He has also advised on changing the
management structure, by reducing the length of the one unwieldy monthly
committee meeting which lasted from 6-11pm, and creating instead a series of
specialist sub-committees to help spread the work.
'Alma had very real, identifiable skills at a time when we needed them,'
says Finegold. 'We are trying to buy a property and need to raise Pounds
500,000. It is useful to be able to talk to someone who is dealing with that
kind of money every day.'
The same pattern emerged when Mr Bill Packer, retired national tax director
with Touche Ross, linked up with Tower Hamlets Co-operative Development
Agency, which provides advice and support to business start-ups.
'I went in with a little apprehension, not quite knowing what I was going to
meet,' he says. 'But they made me welcome. I feel I've been able to make a
contribution to this community.'
He helped introduce a regular staff appraisal system, and says he has
'brought them to address financial problems rather earlier than they might
have done before - when the crisis hit'.
Mr Gregory Cohn, co-ordinator of the agency, says: 'None of the three
professional staff has much financial experience, so it was useful to have
someone on the management committee who can discuss finance and act as a
support mechanism. Just having someone from outside is constructive.'
The original idea for the chartered accountants in the community scheme came
from the Action Resource Centre, based in London, which helped launch a
similar programme called lawyers in the community about two years ago. ARC
matches a large number of potential volunteers each year with charities in
need of secondees or other assistance.
Mr Richard Wilkes, immediate past master of the worshipful company, concedes
that the idea of the livery body may seem arcane. But he places importance
on its role as an organisation with charitable objectives.
It was only founded in 1976, and now numbers 100 members, including Sir
Brian Jenkins, last year's Lord Mayor of London. 'We do not have a large
endowment,' says Wilkes. 'Instead of money, we've got talent.'
Previously it had donated money to help support training overseas and reward
achievement in student examinations in England and Wales. Wilkes says the
chartered accountants in the community scheme seemed an ideal way to apply
the company's members' own skills more directly.
While the lawyers in the community placements tend to be focused in London
and use younger staff from law firms, the accountants scheme is designed to
cover England and Wales, and uses what Wilkes calls 'the mature chaps' from
the livery. About 12 have so far been linked with charities and a number are
waiting to be found suitable placements.
Mr David Shaw, almoner or the livery officer responsible for charitable
giving, stresses that the scheme is also focused around offering
professional, advisory skills, not providing time-consuming day-to-day
activities such as doing the bookkeeping.
Some initial delays came less in finding volunteers than identifying
suitable placements for them. Now the plan is to expand the scheme until it
offers 20 to 30 attachments a year. It will also then be widened beyond the
livery company to include other chartered accountants, through the firms and
the district societies.
Mr David Hemsworth of the Action Resource Centre stresses a number of ground
rules for successful placements. He emphasises that the benefits are
two-way, with the charity gaining expert assistance, and the accountant
learning about voluntary organisations and giving something back to the
community.
'Accountants should not go in with pre-conceived ideas thinking it is just
about parachuting people in with a bag of solutions,' he says. 'There is
learning to be done. Most voluntary organisations are well run but have a
rather different ethos.'
On the other hand, charities need to take time on the induction of new
committee members. They should not simply use them to provide narrow
technical skills, but rather think of the process as a transfer of expertise
so the contribution lasts after any individual's commitment.
Graham Finegold adds that charities should be honest about the commitment
expected from a committee member and be flexible to accommodate their
availability.
The idea of charitable work by accountants is not a monopoly held by the
livery company, of course. The Chartered Institute of Management Accountants
offers a charity helpline (071-917-9204) to link up local charities with
willing, trained volunteers. Many business and firms are beginning to offer
their staff on secondments, as well as offering resources or donating money
directly.
Few of the accountancy firms are so eager to offer on-going professional
advice free to charities, which are increasingly offer substantial prospects
for paid work. Mr George Westropp of Touche Ross says that pro bono work
tends not to attract the best staff: 'If you want something to be badly
done, you do it for free.'
Nevertheless, Mr Pesh Framjee, head of the charity unit at BDO Binder
Hamlyn, says that he actively encourages his staff to serve on management
committees in their spare time. That helps them learn about voluntary
organisations from the inside, and gives them skills which can be applied to
other clients of the firm. Volunteerism can clearly make sound economic
sense.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1605</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACSFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Santa rises in the
east - The commercial exploitation of Christmas has arrived in the former
communist countries of Europe, much to the delight of entrepreneurs and
consumers alike
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTOPHER BOBINSKI, VINCENT BOLAND, ROBERT CORZINE, NICK DENTON and
VIRGINIA MARSH
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   WARSAW, PRAGUE, LONDON, BUDAPEST, BUCHAREST
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
There may be little economic cause for seasonal cheer in much of central
Europe this year. That, however, has not deterred the new entrepreneurs in
the region from embracing the commercial possibilities of Christmas.
The appearance of oranges, bananas and the occasional forbidden fruit from
the western consumer culture symbolised Christmas under communist rule. But
with much of the central European retail sector having been privatised in
the past few years, this season's festive symbols come straight out of
western marketing textbooks.
Santa Claus, that most potent western symbol for gift-giving, is finding the
region fertile ground. Polish Santa Clauses pose for pictures on Warsaw
streets where Solidarity demonstrators used to confront the communist
government while their Hungarian counterparts peddle Sony televisions and
videos in TV advertisements.
The density of store and public decorations confirms the spread of Christmas
consciousness among retailers and consumers alike, although the motive for
their use is not entirely commercial.
In Romania's bleak capital, Bucharest, about 60 per cent of the stores in
the city's two main shopping streets boast some decoration. But many are old
and have been brought from home by employees, partly out of tradition but
mostly to relieve the gloom.
That contrasts sharply with shops in Budapest, which are using fewer but
higher quality decorations than last year, according to Dekorgraf, a company
which designs and installs seasonal bunting in shops.
In Poland, marketing companies such as Multi-Investment, set up in 1989 by
American Jacques Tourel, have used decorations as a way of stretching the
holiday buying period. The company donated a 22-metre high Christmas tree
that stands in the middle of Warsaw's Old Town square outside the Royal
Castle. The tree went up on November 22 as a signal that the shopping season
had begun, a tactic that appears to have been successful as many shops
quickly followed with their own decorations.
'We want shopping to be a pleasure and not a last-minute duty, all done in a
rush,' explained Ivona Kochanska from Multi-Investment.
The Christmas decorations in Wenceslas Square in Prague are dwarfed by
advertisements for big western brand names, a development of which many
residents approve. 'It shows Prague as a world city. It is like Piccadilly
Circus in London,' said a 26-year-old bank official without a hint of
overstatement. 'It is much more colourful than it was before, and now it is
possible to buy all the goods.'
An informal survey by FT correspondents suggests that the novelty of western
goods has yet to wear off, even if they remain beyond the reach of many
consumers.
Petr Trybil of the Czechoslovak Chamber of Commerce says: 'People seem to be
buying more western goods, especially electronics which are expensive but
not excessively so. I believe the reason is quality and, of course, the fact
that they were not available until recently. But quality is becoming more
important and there is a lesson there for us.'
Eva Ruzekova, who runs a small, specialised Prague gift store, believes the
high prices of western goods are mistakenly seen as a mark of quality. But
she concedes that 'they are practical and attractive and everybody would
like one for Christmas.'
An advertising executive said: 'Western companies and Czechoslovak
entrepreneurs are tapping into the perception of the country as a relatively
wealthy place with a history of a market economy behind it.' 'It is not too
difficult to sell a product here.'
Western goods also remain popular in Hungary where Philips, for example, has
launched a Christmas competition with its electrical products as prizes. But
some of the big retailers have adopted western marketing methods to sell
local products.
Centrum Department Stores, the Hungarian state-owned general retailer, has
given prominence to the products being promoted and has brought out its
first glossy Christmas brochure.
Skala, Centrum's main rival, hired the Young &amp; Rubicam advertising agency
which created a cartoon character, the 'Skala angel', for the chain's
Christmas television spots.
Its efforts seem to have paid off: the chain's customers are spending 10 per
cent more in real terms than last year, reversing a long decline.
Both retailers benefit from the Hungarian tradition of buying a television
set, video recorder, washing machine or other expensive consumer durable to
coincide with Christmas and provide a gift to be shared by all the family.
At Warsaw's Kidi Land, a small-scale version of Hamley's toy shop in London,
sales are up 50 per cent this year over 1991. Its windows feature two
displays of hand painted dolls from B. Altman's in Manhattan while, inside,
the staff sport Father Christmas garb.
Polish television ads promote gifts for both children and adults, with Lego
 -a runaway success in Poland - and the Swiss Swatch watches featured
prominently.
In Czechoslovakia, workers received their Christmas pay packets at the end
of last week and sales in December are running 25 per cent ahead of previous
months, according to Lubomir Staffen, commercial director of Kotva, a large
Prague department store.
This year for the first time, Kotva has devoted a separate section within
the store to Christmas gift ideas, including magnificent glass and giftware.
'We have special departments offering western haute couture and luxury
goods,' Staffen says. 'The market is there, and we want to tap it. But we
must remember that most of our customers are ordinary people whose spending
power has not increased at all in the last five years.'
The biggest sellers throughout central Europe this year have been small
consumer goods, such as do-it-yourself equipment and electronics, products
that are also perennial favourites in the west. But the choice of some
Christmas gifts might surprise western retailers.
In Hungary, gifts of deodorant - among other cosmetics - are persistently
popular. It is no reflection on Hungarian hygiene, rather a hangover from
communist times when vanity products were in short supply.
And what of central Europe's Santa Clauses? Do they think there is a future
in western-style commercialism? One somewhat cold Santa who stands by the
Multi-Investment tree in Warsaw and who lets parties of school children have
their picture taken with him for 15,000 zloty a time, thinks he has found a
niche.
'I'm a poser. That's what I do - I pose for pictures,' he said. When the
Christmas season ends he simply plans to don other costumes.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1606</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Sweet reason is
introduced to life assurance - Gary Mead meets Allied Dunbar's chief
executive
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By GARY MEAD
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
There are perhaps only three informally acknowledged international
'universities' of marketing, where it forms the very marrow of corporate
philosophy; Procter &amp; Gamble, Unilever and Mars. And perhaps the greatest -
certainly the most private - is Mars.
Senior Mars people do not normally up sticks and move on, but last year one
of their top executives did just that. George Greener left in 1991 after 20
years with Mars to become chief executive of Allied Dunbar, itself known for
placing considerable emphasis on marketing.
Headhunted by BAT Industries, which owns Allied Dunbar, Greener was head of
Mars confectionery in the UK since 1986. At first glance it looks an odd
move - exchanging a life in chocolate bars for one in life assurance.
But only at first glance. What Greener feels himself to be now engaged upon
is almost precisely the same task he had at Mars - building and defending
brand reputation which, in Allied Dunbar's case, has not been all that it
might have been in recent years.
The company has acquired a reputation for aggressive marketing of its
policies and while Greener is equally intent on growth as his predecessors,
his Mars schooling means achieving that by finding out what the consumer
wants and giving the best deal possible.
As a former Mars man, Greener gives priority to consumer demand. He says the
future brand definition of Allied Dunbar products will require persuading
the consumer that they offer a 'rewarding partnership'.
Greener says: 'Treating people fairly, meeting claims even when we are not
obliged to do so - these are the sort of things that are really important,
where we want to earn our reputation. If we tell people the truth we will
sell more, not less.'
Greener has a deep-structured view of the marketing process which 'is not
just image. It has to be underpinned with the product. Our marketing
strategy is our business strategy and I'm the chief marketing officer. The
market-led approach here, which is new, shapes the whole business. Consumers
are going to become the dominant factor in this marketplace.'
Moreover Greener relishes the challenge he faces in reversing the relatively
poor image the life assurance industry currently has.
'The industry has a very bad name. That was an attraction to me because our
business is necessary; what we do most of the time is essential, in a way
that lots of consumer products are not.'
The difficulty will be in measuring consumer response to the Greener
approach in life assurance. But measurement, Greener believes, is only of
limited value, a precursor to making managerial decisions.
'Mars, almost beyond anybody else, tried to measure everything possible,
everything in sight. We charged the advertising agencies with producing
results in accord with the quality parameter on the model that they had
agreed they were going to accept as being right,' he said.
'But having measured everything in sight, there was still no way of actually
relating any of the figures to the performance of any individual brand. The
best you could do was to get a view of the effectiveness of the total
budget.
'If you are going to advertise you have to be very clear about what it is
you want to communicate. Allied Dunbar in its early days of TV advertising
tried to get across certain basic messages. What I would prefer to do, is to
get to the point where we are communicating, in a relatively simple way,
something about our essence which really fits what we do out there.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1607</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / 'Archaic' rules on disclosure attacked
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW JACK
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
COMPANIES are required to make too many disclosures in their accounts, Ernst
&amp; Young, the accountancy firm, said yesterday.
The firm called on the Accounting Standards Board and the Department of
Trade and Industry to simplify the rules governing disclosures.
It said there were now more than 600 individual disclosure requirements in
company law and accounting standards, many of which were 'archaic, obscure
or otherwise redundant'.
Ernst &amp; Young said simplification would provide clearer and more informative
accounts for users, allow preparers to concentrate on presenting a true and
fair picture of their company and help to reduce the burden of compliance on
many small companies.
It has published a list of nearly 50 disclosure requirements, including
employment policies, that it believes should be abolished or amended.
The suggestions are likely to be criticised, not least because they come
when most users of accounts are calling for greater financial information on
companies.
Disclosures in Company Accounts. Ernst &amp; Young, Becket House, 1 Lambeth
Palace Road, London SE1 7EU.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 12
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1608</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Turkish diplomats head fines league
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
TURKISH diplomats head the league of unpaid parking fines incurred in London
in the first six months of the year, with 141, Mr Mark Lennox-Boyd, the
junior Foreign Office minister, said in a Commons written answer.
Saudi Arabia was second with 126 and Russia - top in the same period last
year - was third with 124.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 12
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1609</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Banks levied for BCCI payment
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
BANKS were levied Pounds 80m by the Deposit Protection Board yesterday to
cover payments to depositors in Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
BCCI depositors have so far received Pounds 58m, leading to a growing
deficit in the fund.
The fund was in deficit by Pounds 28.9m in February this year and has
covered payments from a Pounds 125m borrowing facility at the Bank of
England. Payments to BCCI depositors are expected to total between Pounds
80m and Pounds 85m.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 12
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1610</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Hoover probes flight offer
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
HOOVER, the electrical goods manufacturer, has launched an investigation
into a free flights offer after claims that the rules had been altered.
The inquiry concerns an apparent change in the conditions of a recent
promotion offering free airline tickets for flights in Europe to purchasers
of Hoover goods. Hoover said there had been an error by JSI Travel, the
company running the Europe offer.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 12
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1611</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Submarine dockyard allegation is dropped
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID WHITE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BACKERS OF the campaign to secure vital submarine work for Plymouth's
Devonport dockyard yesterday withdrew allegations that details of a dock
project were leaked from the Ministry of Defence to the rival yard at Rosyth
in Fife, David White writes.
Mr Gary Streeter, Conservative MP for Plymouth Sutton, said he accepted the
ministry's assurances that no leak had taken place.
Mr Mike Leece, managing director of Devonport Management, the yard's
operator, said he had received similar assurances in writing from consulting
engineers on the rival projects, on which several thousand jobs are at
stake.
He added: 'We were suspicious that anyone could put forward a scheme very
similar to ours without a leak taking place.'
The two yards are competing for the contract to refit the UK's latest
Trident ballistic-missile submarines, which cannot be accommodated in
existing dock facilities.
Both consider the contract vital to their survival.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 12
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1612</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Water watchdog attacks salaries
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By BRONWEN MADDOX, Environment Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
DIRECTORS' salaries and dividend increases at a water company came under
attack yesterday from one of the customer service committees of Ofwat, the
water industry regulator.
Mr Clive Wilkinson, chairman of the central customer committee, said in a
letter to Mr John Bellak, chairman of Severn Trent, the Birmingham-based
water and sewerage company: 'To see dividend increases at more than twice
the rate of inflation by a monopoly utility at a time of serious recession
is unacceptable.'
Ofwat said yesterday that the committees did not speak on behalf of Mr Ian
Byatt, its director-general.
In July Mr Bellak was given a 29.6 per cent increase in basic salary to
Pounds 160,000. He said last night that total remuneration included bonuses
set at the end of the year, and that because of a cut in bonuses he had seen
a 4 per cent drop in remuneration in the year to March 1992.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 12
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1613</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Lords back MMC over bus combine
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT RICE, Legal Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
GOVERNMENT attempts to reduce takeover activity and increase competition in
the bus industry received unexpected support yesterday when the Monopolies
and Mergers Commission won its final appeal in the Sheffield bus mergers
case.
Five law lords ruled unanimously that the commission had the power to
investigate local bus company mergers under the terms of the 1973 Fair
Trading Act. They restored a 1990 MMC recommendation that South Yorkshire
Transport (SYT) should sell four rival bus companies it acquired in 1989.
The decision will be a severe blow to private-sector bus companies hoping to
build up their strength through acquisitions.
Mr Richard Boardman, the Leeds lawyer who handled the case for SYT, said the
decision 'opened the floodgates for thousands of other investigations' into
small local mergers.
The commission's report, which was accepted by Mr Peter Lilley, then trade
and industry secretary, recommended that SYT should sell Sheffield and
District Transport, Sheafline (PSV), Michael Groves and SUT on the ground
that each merger might be expected to operate against the public interest.
As a result of the acquisitions, SYT's share of bus miles in Sheffield
increased to the point at which the commission said competition to SYT in
Sheffield had, in effect, ceased.
It said each acquisition could result in higher fares as well as lower
standards, declining quality and frequency of service and less choice.
The commission's decision was challenged by SYT on the ground that the
commission had no jurisdiction to investigate the acquisitions because they
did not affect a 'substantial part of the UK' within the context of the
market-share test set out in the 1973 act.
In March last year, the High Court overturned the commission's
recommendation that the mergers should be reversed.
It said the area of operation examined by the commission was not a
'substantial part of the UK' according to the meaning of the 1973 act. That
decision was upheld by the Appeal Court in November last year.
But the law lords said that where the task was to interpret an enabling
provision, intended to confer on the commission the power to investigate
mergers believed to be against the public interest, the court should lean
against an interpretation that would severely limit the commission's
jurisdiction.
In deciding whether a merger affected 'a substantial part of the UK' and
therefore qualified for investigation, the commission had to be satisfied
that the 'part' was 'of such size, character and importance as to make it
worth consideration for the purposes of the act'.
The law lords ruled that it could not be said that the commission had
misapplied that test in the present case. It therefore had power to
investigate the acquisitions.
The commission said yesterday: 'We are very gratified by the result.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 12
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1614</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Banks reject wide ombudsman role
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOHN GAPPER, Banking Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BANKS yesterday publicly rejected the idea of extending the banking
ombudsman scheme to cover small business complaints.
The idea is being discussed in meetings this week between Mr Norman Lamont,
the chancellor, and senior bankers.
Sir Nicholas Goodison, president of the British Bankers' Association, said
it would be 'impractical' to extend the scheme's terms of reference.
'If you started changing the terms, you would end up with a muddle,' he
said.
Sir Nicholas said incorporated businesses had redress against banks through
the courts.
The ombudsman would not be equipped to 'second guess' banks' commercial
decisions, such as what rate of interest to charge on loans.
He said he could not disclose the topics of discussion between Mr Lamont and
the chairmen and chief executives of banks this week.
The chancellor is, however, thought to have raised the idea of extending the
scheme.
Mr Lamont yesterday met Sir Nicholas, Mr Andrew Buxton, the chief executive
of Barclays Bank, and Mr Derek Wanless, chief executive of National
Westminster Bank.
The chancellor has been urging banks to pass on base rate cuts to borrowers.
National Westminster Bank said Mr Wanless told the chancellor the vast
majority of allegations about banks and small business were 'unsubstantiated
and misplaced'. The bank had passed on all base rate cuts in full . Two
years ago the government rejected suggestions by the Jack Committee on
banking services that small businesses should be brought within the scope of
the banking ombudsman scheme. The scheme is funded and supported by banks.
Separately, Sir Jeremy Morse, chairman of Lloyds Bank, last night criticised
both the government and the press for their role in encouraging what he
called 'the biggest wave of anti-bank sentiment in Britain since the 1930s'.
Sir Jeremy, making his presidential address to the Chartered Institute of
Bankers in London, said the government had been 'happy to find someone else
to share the blame for the hardships in the economy'.
Banks faced further criticism from the Consumers' Association, however. It
said high street banks had been 'unacceptably slow' in implementing the
banking code of practice and had made 'parsimonious' interpretations of it.
Ms Jean Eaglesham said that 'honourable exceptions apart', banks had
implemented the code in a 'slow, half-hearted, grudging' way and favoured
their own interests over customers when there was a clash.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 12
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1615</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: Unionist attacks Mayhew's
'surrender speech'
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RALPH ATKINS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SIR PATRICK MAYHEW, the Northern Ireland secretary, yesterday said the
British Army presence in the province might be reduced to a 'garrison role'
if there was 'a genuine and established cessation of violence'.
Sir Patrick defended the rights of the province's nationalists, offered
regret if Britain had contributed to the island's sadness, and said that a
lasting renunciation of violence by terrorists would have 'profound
consequences'.
In a speech designed to make clear his strict impartiality, Sir Patrick
significantly went further than any of his predecessors in insisting that he
was only a 'facilitator of the expression of democratic will in Northern
Ireland'.
The province would remain part of the UK as long as a majority of its
population wanted, he said, but he indicated that he would not embrace a
unionist agenda for reforming its government - in spite of the breakdown
last month of the round-table political talks.
Mr Peter Robinson, deputy leader of the Democratic Unionist party, described
Sir Patrick's 'surrender speech' as 'outrageous' and said that 'no unionist
will do business with him while he is stuck in a nationalist mode'.
Addressing the centre for the study of conflict at the University of Ulster
in Coleraine, Sir Patrick expressed 'profound respect' for Irish
nationalists such as Charles Parnell and admitted that British involvement
in Ireland had not all been positive. 'There is much in the long and often
tragic history of Ireland for deep regret, and the British government for
its part shares in that regret to the full.'
He announced the repeal of 1940s legislation passed by the
unionist-dominated former Northern Ireland parliament which prevents local
street names being written in Irish as well as English.
But Sir Patrick was careful to avoid any hint that the British government
would talk to Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA, unless it rejected
violence.
Although terrorism in Northern Ireland's has continued for two decades, Sir
Patrick believed its difficulties would be resolved through cross-party
dialogue.
He said Yugoslavia was an example of which many in Northern Ireland had
taken heed. In a recognition of the fears of unionists, he said that
Yugoslavia 'has perhaps created a fresh understanding here that, properly
understood, 'Brits out' means the ethnic cleansing of a million human
beings.'
Sir Louis Blom-Cooper QC has been appointed to ensure fair treatment of
suspected terrrorists in Ulster's interrogation centres at Castlereagh,
Londonderry and Armagh, Sir Patrick Mayhew announced last night.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1616</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: Major and Bush to debate Serbia
plan
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
NEW MEASURES to tighten sanctions against Serbia in response to the
deteriorating situation in Bosnia are expected to be finalised this weekend
at talks between Mr John Major and President George Bush.
British officials said yesterday that the two leaders, who meet in the US at
the end of a week of international meetings on Bosnia, may also settle the
terms of the new UN resolution designed to enforce the no-fly zone over the
former Yugoslav province.
Mr Major remains more cautious than his US counterpart about the possibility
of military action against Serbian aircraft violating the zone. Ministers
repeated yesterday their concerns that such action would risk retaliation
against British ground forces and might wreck the humanitarian effort.
The officials said a compromise was emerging between London and Washington
on a package combining tougher sanctions and a new UN resolution. They
pointed out that the passage of such a resolution, expected next week, would
not automatically imply that intruding aircraft would be shot down.
Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, suggested that Serbia be treated as
an international pariah, with existing sanctions supplemented by cuts in
telephone links and diplomatic contacts, possibly the sealing of borders.
Mr Major will spend two days with Mr Bush in Camp David at the weekend after
an EC-US summit in Washington on Friday. The prime minister will be
accompanied at the summit by Mr Jacques Delors, the European Commission
president, who will also join him later today for an EC-Canada summit in
Ottawa.
Both of the EC meetings will be dominated by the slow progress of the Gatt
talks in Geneva, where last month's breakthrough on US-EC farm trade has
failed to unravel all the disputes holding up completion of the Uruguay
Round.
Mr Major will press the outgoing administration to review its decision to
impose countervailing duties on EC steel imports. He will also sound out the
possibility of a compromise on the disputes over industrial tariffs that are
holding up progress in Geneva.
Baroness Thatcher last night called for air strikes against Serbian
artillery, tanks and supply lines if they do not withdraw their troops from
Sarajevo and other besieged Bosnian towns.
The former prime minister said in The European newspaper that by stating in
public repeatedly that 'we will not intervene militarily' the west had to
some extent not been neutrals but 'more like accomplices'.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1617</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Political Notebook: No place for heroism
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PHILIP STEPHENS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
FOR the Conservative MPs leaving Westminster today, it is enough to have
survived. The events of the past few months have left them nothing to
celebrate. But they can feel relief that a government that for several weeks
was on the verge of disintegration has recovered a semblance of poise.
Labour has little reason for cheer. As Mr John Major has floundered, Mr John
Smith has failed to sound a distinctive voice above the Tories' disarray. If
the voters have despaired of the government, they have yet to embrace Mr
Smith's ill-defined alternative.
Government and opposition are at one that the political mood in the new year
will be shaped by the economy.
Ministers believe that this time the green shoots are taking root. They are
probably right. But the upturn will be painfully slow, weakened by the debt
overhang in the housing market, further hefty rises in unemployment, and a
gloomy international environment. By the time the recovery takes hold,
inflation may again be a problem. Sterling's devaluation has already shown
up in a sharp rise in import costs.
So Mr Smith will have a target to shoot at. The tortuous passage of the
Maastricht legislation will make his task easier. Mr Major can be confident
that the bill eventually will be passed (assuming Yes in the second Danish
referendum) but the process will be debilitating and distracting.
Wiser minds at Westminster believe both leaders face precisely the same
problem. The prime minister lacks a programme for government. The Labour
leader has yet to construct a platform for opposition.
To take Mr Smith first. His aides offer a half-convincing rebuttal of
charges of inaction. He has not used the past few months to draw up a
detailed blueprint for a general election still four years away. One of
Labour's mistakes last time was to commit itself to an elaborate set of
policies too early. It fought the April election on a tax policy that might
have been saleable in an economic boom but proved fatal during a recession.
But as Mr Roy Hattersley put it in a speech to the parliamentary press
gallery yesterday, assaults on the government are an enormously enjoyable
but equally inadequate raison d'etre for the main opposition party. Labour
must convince the voters that it stands for an exciting alternative. If
Labour is not the party of modernism, it is nothing.
Mr Smith has not been idle. The launch today of his Social Justice
Commission may provide the backdrop for a radical rethink of the social
policies which have left Labour tagged as the party of lost causes.
Early in the new year, the leadership will have the conclusions of the Plant
Committee on electoral reform and of the working group examining
institutional links with the trades unions.
But there is a lacuna. Labour lacks an identity. Mr Neil Kinnock told the
voters what it no longer stood for. Mr Smith's caution - particularly over
breaking the links with the unions - has left them uncertain about what
replaces the discarded ideological baggage. He needs also to learn another
lesson of the 1992 election - that the electorate needs time to get used to
Labour's alternatives. They must not be surprised or frightened by them
during the election campaign.
So on to Mr Major. He has always been an arch-pragmatist, a manager rather
than an ideologue. Success at the Edinburgh summit has given a much-needed
boost to his confidence. But the disintegration of its economic strategy has
left the government's policies without a binding thread. No longer can Mr
Major see his place in history as the prime minister who eradicated
inflation.
Like Labour, the Conservatives have plenty of ideas for new year policy
launches. A burst of deregulation, additional bricks for its newly emerging
industrial strategy, and a series of training and education initiatives are
among them.
But after two years, Mr Major has still to give definition to his
government. It is not so much the absence of any particular policy that
might be dubbed the 'big idea'. More a sense - among Conservatives as well
as observers - that the government has yet to find a replacement for the
discarded ideological certainties of the 1980s.
Many at Westminster think there are greater forces at work. In their
different ways, Margaret Thatcher and Neil Kinnock were heroic political
leaders. She changed the political landscape. He dragged his party kicking
and screaming on to the new ground. But the last two years have extinguished
that brief flicker of hope during the late 1980s that Britain might yet
recover some of its past greatness. Perhaps Mr Major and Mr Smith are proof
that there is no longer a market for heroism in British politics.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1618</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: Maastricht bill
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE government yesterday signalled its determination to press ahead with
ratifying the Maastricht treaty, indicating that the European Communities
(Amendment) Bill is to return to the Commons within three days of MPs
returning from the Christmas recess.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1619</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: Lamont probe
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE cross-party committee on MPs' interests has decided to press ahead with
an inquiry into whether Mr Norman Lamont should have declared the payment by
an anonymous Tory benefactor of most of his legal bill for removing an
unwelcome tenant.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1620</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: Heseltine warns on coal inquiry
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
MR Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, warned yesterday that
there would be 'uncomfortable conclusions' from his department's inquiry
into the market for coal. He told the Commons employment committee, which is
investigating the proposed closure of 31 pits, that there would be still no
contracts for coal when the existing ones ended in March, apart from a
conditional contract signed by Eastern Electricity and PowerGen this week.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1621</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: Allegation on council angers Labour
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID OWEN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
LABOUR MPs erupted in fury during Scottish questions yesterday as a
succession of Tories highlighted alleged breaches of duty at a local
authority that includes the parliamentary seat of Mr John Smith, the Labour
leader, David Owen writes.
Mr Ian Lang, Scottish secretary, indicated that he was considering whether
the allegations might amount to a breach of Monklands District Council's
statutory duties.
Answering a question from Mr Bill Walker, Tory MP for Tayside North,
regarding the authority's use of public money, Mr Lang said the Commission
for Local Authority Accounts in Scotland could submit a report to him if it
concluded the council had illegally authorised expenditure.
The row resulted from a contribution from Mr David Shaw, Tory MP for Dover,
who said many Scots had been 'shocked to learn that 22 relatives of Labour
councillors are employed by Monklands District Council'.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1622</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / UK Economic Indicators
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                         UK ECONOMIC INDICATORS
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
ECONOMIC ACTIVITY - Indices of industrial production, manufacturing
output (1985=100); engineering orders (Pounds billion); retail sales
volume and retail sales value (1985=100); registered unemployment
(excluding school leavers) and unfilled vacancies (000s).
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Indl.    Mfg.    Eng.   Retail   Retail   Unem-
                 prod.   output  order*    vol.   value*   plyed  Vacs.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1991
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1st qtr.        106.7    113.4   31.8    120.0    139.8   1,989  142.9
2nd qtr.        105.2    112.4   31.4    118.6    147.7   2,231  110.9
3rd qtr.        106.3    112.3   30.8    119.7    149.8   2,414  105.7
4th qtr.        106.2    110.8   29.9    119.6    177.6   2,515  114.1
August          105.5    112.0   31.9    119.4    147.9   2,422  106.6
September       106.0    111.7   30.8    119.4    149.0   2,458  106.5
October         106.5    110.6   31.0    119.2    153.5   2,477  107.3
November        106.2    110.9   30.9    120.4    169.0   2,518  111.8
December        105.8    110.8   29.9    119.3    203.8   2,551  123.3
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1992
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1st qtr.        105.3    111.1   30.8    119.5    146.0   2,635  119.8
2nd qtr.        104.9    111.6   31.0    120.0    153.5   2,712  115.2
3rd qtr.        105.7    111.4   30.5    120.7    154.2   2,805  107.0
January         104.7    110.1   31.1    119.7    144.9   2,607  119.1
February        106.1    111.6   31.4    120.1    145.2   2,645  120.0
March           105.1    111.6   30.8    118.9    147.5   2,653  120.2
April           105.6    111.7   31.1    119.7    154.8   2,695  117.8
May             104.5    111.3   31.0    120.0    152.9   2,716  115.2
June            104.5    111.7   31.0    120.3    153.1   2,724  112.5
July            105.6    111.7   31.5    119.9    155.0   2,760  112.6
August          105.5    111.3   31.2    121.0    154.0   2,811  108.4
September       105.9    111.1   30.5    121.2    153.8   2,843  100.1
October         107.0    111.4           121.4    159.8   2,868   97.6
November                                 121.3    172.0
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
OUTPUT - By market sector; consumer goods, investment goods,
intermediate goods (materials and fuels), engineering output, metal
manufacture, textiles, clothing and footwear (1985=100); housing starts
(000s, monthly average).
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
              Cnsmer.  Invest.  Intmd.   Eng.   Metal  Textiles  Housg.
               goods   goods    goods   output  mnfg.    etc.   starts*
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1991
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1st qtr.      110.4    117.2    101.4   113.9  108.0     89.4    12.3
2nd qtr.      110.0    114.5     99.9   111.3  111.0     87.9    14.3
3rd qtr.      109.4    114.1    102.2   110.5  111.2     87.6    14.3
4th qtr.      108.5    111.7    103.2   108.2  109.4     86.4    11.8
August        108.5    114.1    101.3   110.0  111.0     88.0    13.4
September     109.1    112.8    102.3   109.0  112.0     87.0    13.6
October       108.5    110.8    104.1   107.0  110.0     87.0    14.1
November      107.9    112.8    103.1   109.0  110.0     87.0    12.0
December      109.1    111.6    102.4   108.0  109.0     86.0     9.2
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1992
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1st qtr.      110.3    110.5    101.4   107.8  107.3     86.5    14.0
2nd qtr.      111.5    111.0     99.9   108.3  107.9     87.5    14.5
3rd qtr.      110.8    111.7    101.3   108.3  105.7     88.2    13.0
January       108.9    109.8    101.1   107.0  106.0     86.0    14.0
February      111.0    110.7    102.4   108.0  109.0     87.0    13.1
March         110.9    110.9    100.6   108.0  107.0     87.0    14.8
April         111.1    111.5    101.1   109.0  108.0     87.0    14.0
May           111.3    110.3     99.6   108.0  110.0     88.0    14.1
June          111.9    111.1     99.0   108.0  105.0     88.0    15.3
July          111.2    111.6    101.1   108.0  107.0     87.0    14.1
August        110.3    111.9    101.2   108.0  109.0     88.0    12.5
September     111.0    111.6    101.7   108.0  101.0     89.0    12.0
October       111.0    112.5    103.3   109.0  102.0     89.0    11.8
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
EXTERNAL TRADE - Indices of export and import volume (1985=100); visible
balance Pounds m); current balance (Pounds m); oil balance (Pounds m);
terms of trade (1985=100); official reserves.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
          Export  Import  Visible  Current   Oil   Terms of Reserves US
          volume  volume  balance  balance balance  trade*   Dollars bn
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1991
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1st qtr.  122.6  135.8   -3,040    -2,856   +217     98.9     42.33
2nd qtr.  126.0  137.6   -2,234      -456   +213     98.2     44.26
3rd qtr.  127.8  139.8   -2,385    -1,297   +319     98.0     44.59
4th qtr.  128.8  139.2   -2,631    -1,711   +453     97.5     44.13
August    130.9  144.7     -838      -476    +59     98.2     44.69
September 125.4  135.8     -904      -541   +223     98.0     44.59
October   125.9  137.4     -919      -612    +97     97.7     44.25
November  128.3  139.3     -985      -679   +167     97.8     43.91
December  132.1  141.0     -727      -420   +189     96.9     44.13
1992
1st qtr.  127.2  143.1   -3,050    -2,882   +432     99.4     44.31
2nd qtr.  129.5  147.9   -3,188    -2,852   +365    100.9     45.70
3rd qtr.  130.6  148.1   -3,246    -2,946   +378    101.7     42.68
January   121.4  137.0   -1,153    -1,097   +149     99.0     44.59
February  130.3  147.3   -1,008      -952   +113     99.9     44.75
March     130.0  145.1     -889      -833   +170     99.4     44.31
April     128.1  150.7   -1,384    -1,272   +119    100.2     45.77
May       133.3  146.9     -857      -745   +171    101.1     45.80
June      127.1  146.0     -947      -835    +75    101.5     45.70
July      129.2  149.0   -1,115    -1,015    +48    101.6     45.75
August    132.5  149.7   -1,140    -1,040   +251    102.5     44.45
September 130.0  145.6     -991      -891    +79    101.1     42.68
October   134.1  147.8   -1,163    -1,063   +164     99.4     42.14
November                                                      42.09
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
FINANCIAL-Money supply M0, M2 and M4 (annual percentage change); bank
sterling lending to private sector; building societies' net inflow;
consumer credit**; Clearing Bank base rate (end period).
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     Bank       BS      Cnsmer.    Base
                 MO    M2    M4    lending    inflow*  credit**    rate
                  %     %     %    Pounds m  Pounds m   Pounds m     %
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1991
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1st qtr.        2.9  10.5  10.6    +12,099    2,085      +485     12.50
2nd qtr.        1.7  11.5   8.9     +7,696    2,555      +477     11.50
3rd qtr.        2.0  11.0   7.1     +8,518      739      +202     10.50
4th qtr.        2.9   9.8   6.1     +7,900      426      -104     10.50
August          1.6  11.4   7.1     +3,203      188       +13     11.00
September       2.3  10.7   6.7     +2,413      265       -37     10.50
October         2.6  10.3   6.4     +1,850      529        +2     10.50
November        3.0   9.9   5.7     +4,113      -49       +32     10.50
December        3.1   9.2   6.2     +1,937      -54      -138     10.50
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1992
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1st qtr.        2.2   7.2   6.0     +5,485      266      +120     10.50
2nd qtr.        2.0   4.8   5.3     +9,917       77       +39     10.00
3rd qtr.        2.3   4.2   5.3     +4,435     -262       -18      9.00
January         2.1   7.6   6.2     +3,344      293       +16     10.50
February        2.2   7.4   5.9     +1,164      145       +89     10.50
March           2.3   6.7   5.8       +977     -172       +15     10.50
April           2.3   5.2   5.6     +4,306      212       +26     10.50
May             2.5   4.9   5.1     +2,724      179       +68     10.00
June            1.3   4.2   5.3     +2,887     -314       -55     10.00
July            2.5   4.5   5.6     +2,866     -325       +78     10.00
August          2.4   4.5   5.5     +2,415      327       -36     10.00
September       2.1   3.5   4.8       -846     -264       -60      9.00
October         2.4   3.7   5.4     +5,106      281       +76      8.00
November                                                           7.00
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
INFLATION - Indices of earnings (1988=100); basic materials and fuels;
wholesale prices of manufactured products (1985=100); retail prices and
food prices (Jan 1987=100); Reuters commodity index (Sept 18th 1931
=100); trade weighted value of sterling (1985=100)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
           Earn-  Basic    Whsale.                  Reuters
           ings   matls.*   mnfg.*   RPI*   Foods*   cmdty.*  Sterling*
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1991
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1st qtr.  126.0   103.0    130.6    130.8   123.9    1,689      93.8
2nd qtr.  128.1   103.4    133.1    133.6   126.1    1,737      91.4
3rd qtr.  130.8   101.5    133.9    134.2   125.7    1,680      90.7
4th qtr.  132.4   102.5    134.6    135.5   126.5    1,625      90.9
August    131.5   101.1    133.9    134.1   126.4    1,662      90.7
September 131.7   101.0    134.1    134.6   125.4    1,655      91.1
October   132.0   101.5    134.3    135.1   125.6    1,635      90.5
November  133.0   102.6    134.7    135.6   126.8    1,631      91.0
December  132.3   103.4    134.8    135.7   127.2    1,609      91.2
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1992
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1st qtr.  135.8   102.9    136.5    136.2   129.0    1,599      90.6
2nd qtr.  136.1   102.2    137.9    139.1   129.1    1,598      92.3
3rd qtr.  137.5   100.7    138.5    139.0   127.3    1,541      90.9
January   134.0   103.2    135.8    135.6   128.4    1,596      90.8
February  135.7   103.2    136.3    136.3   129.1    1,586      90.9
March     137.6   102.2    137.3    136.7   129.4    1,615      90.1
April     135.5   102.7    137.8    138.8   128.9    1,614      91.4
May       136.6   102.2    137.9    139.3   129.5    1,593      92.8
June      136.3   101.6    138.1    139.3   129.0    1,586      92.9
July      136.4   101.0    138.4    138.8   127.2    1,555      92.5
August    138.0   100.0    138.5    138.9   127.5    1,530      92.0
September 138.2   101.0    138.6    139.4   127.1    1,540      88.2
October   103.7   138.7    139.9    127.4            1,610      80.8
November  106.8   139.1    139.7    127.3            1,656      78.3
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
*Not seasonally adjusted
**Net changes in amounts outstanding, excluding bank loans.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1623</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAB9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: MP cautious over sale of
Parcelforce
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID OWEN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE GOVERNMENT is running into fresh difficulties in its attempts to
privatise Parcelforce because it may not be able to transfer any surplus in
the parcel deliverer's pension fund to a private-sector buyer, a Labour MP
will tell the Commons today.
Mr Peter Hain, Labour MP for Neath, will use a debate on the future of
postal services in rural areas to argue that present trust deeds would
prevent such a transfer - a contention that is believed to be supported by
professional advice in the hands of the Post Office, Parcelforce's current
owner.
Mr Hain will put the current level of surplus in the Post Office's pension
fund, accumulated over four years, at Pounds 311m and will estimate that
Parcelforce's share of this could amount to some Pounds 20m.
He is also expected to return to the question of Parcelforce's exemption
from value added tax, which it is expected to lose once it ceases to be part
of the Post Office. Parcelforce has a 34 per cent share - the largest in the
market - of ordinary parcel deliveries but only 2 per cent of the premium
'next-day' market.
Earlier this week it was disclosed that the division had cut its first-half
losses from Pounds 27m to Pounds 21m. Sir Bryan Nicholson, Post Office
chairman, said Parcelforce hoped to break even by the end of its financial
year.
Government moves to strengthen the voice of passengers in the regions after
rail privatisation were endorsed by Mr Roger Freeman, transport minister,
last night.
'The current system of consumer representation by the consultative
committees works well and we are committed to ensuring that none of the
benefits are lost,' he said.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1624</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAB8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: Labour leaders pressed on Europe
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RALPH ATKINS and IVOR OWEN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
PRESSURE ON the Labour leadership to take a more overtly pro-Europe stance
came last night from 85 of the party's MPs who urged 'the rapid completion'
of the Maastricht treaty's ratification.
The move by senior figures, including Mr Neil Kinnock, the former leader,
will increase the pressure on Mr John Smith, his successor, not to take any
action that would block or hinder the treaty's progress when it returns to
the Commons next year. It was designed to counter the tactics of a
significant minority of anti-Maastricht Labour MPs and other Labour
Euro-sceptics. Other signatories of the pro-Maastricht 'early day motion',
included Mr Roy Hattersley, former deputy leader, Mr Gerald Kaufman, former
shadow foreign secretary, and Mr Peter Mandelson, the party's former
communications director who is now MP for Hartlepool.
The carefully worded motion notes how the European socialist leaders'
meeting in Edinburgh last weekend backed 'the rapid completion of the
ratification of the Maastricht treaty and its implementation'.
That, the motion says, is 'in accordance' with Labour policy and it calls on
the government to endorse the social chapter in the treaty, 'so that passage
of the European Communities (Amendment) Bill can receive the wholehearted
support of both sides of the House (of Commons) at the earliest
opportunity'.
Meanwhile, the party's post-election revamp took a further step forward
yesterday when the ruling national executive agreed to cut headquarters
spending by a third and to set up an independent 'social justice
commission'.
Mr Smith will announce today the membership of the Social Justice
Commission, dubbed the 'new Beveridge', which will report on Britain's tax
and benefit system. It comes as Mr Smith received a warning from Mr
Hattersley that Labour had to develop policies to excite the electorate  -
and not depend on the government's continuing misfortune.
The commission will be chaired by Sir Gordon Borrie, former director-general
of fair trading, and run by the left-leaning Institute for Public Policy
Research. Not all its members will be Labour supporters.
The national executive committee discussed the commission only briefly
yesterday but spent much of a five-hour meeting debating spending cuts
forced by the fall in party membership and in donations from unions.
A report by the party's finance committee was not formally approved but a
Labour official said the NEC had agreed the thrust of its recommendations:
that spending on day-to-day running of the party will have to be cut by 30
per cent in 1993 to about Pounds 8m. Numbers employed at Labour's
headquarters will fall from a peak of 120 to 90. Many of the jobs have
already gone since the general election but the NEC wants a review of the
party's management structure and has not ruled out compulsory redundancies.
There are also to be consultations on proposals to cut the number of Labour
party regions in England from nine to either six or seven.
Meanwhile, Mr Hattersley said Labour should stand by its commitment to
creating a more equal society. It should not shy away from advocating an
increase in income tax for those with above-average earnings, he said. While
distancing himself from recent criticism within the party of Mr Smith, Mr
Hattersley said the time had come to open a second front. He warned that
Labour would not win the next election by relying on a combination of
dissatisfaction with the Tories, the class-interest of the lower income
groups and support for the party's new-found political responsibility.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1625</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAB7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: IRA strikes again
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By BETHAN HUTTON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
POLICE sealed off a large area of London's West End yesterday after two
small bombs injured three people, Bethan Hutton writes.
The first bomb, placed in third-floor lavatories at the John Lewis
Partnership department store in Oxford Street, exploded about half an hour
after vaguely worded warnings had been telephoned to news organisations by
callers claiming to be from the IRA. The second bomb, in a litter bin in
Cavendish Square, directly behind John Lewis, went off 10 minutes later as
staff and customers were being evacuated.
The three casualties were taken to hospital with minor injuries, together
with a fourth, a man who suffered an asthma attack after the explosions.
Commander David Tucker, head of Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist branch, said
the attack was part of the 'obscene game' the IRA wished to play with the
police.
'The pattern is there: imprecise messages not indicating inside the store or
outside the store, and impossible time scales for the police to clear the
area.'
Mr Tucker said both bombs appeared to be small, but it was 'miraculous' that
there had not been more injuries.
Oxford Street was closed for several hours. Damage to the John Lewis
building was limited and the store reopened later.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1626</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAB6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: PM seeks to save stake in US
airline
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PAUL BETTS, Aerospace Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MR JOHN MAJOR, the prime minister, will make a final effort to secure US
government approval for British Airways to acquire a 44 per cent stake in
USAir for Dollars 750m (Pounds 493.4m) during talks with President George
Bush on Saturday.
The proposed share stake agreement will expire on Christmas Eve. The deal,
which would greatly further BA's ambitions to become a global carrier
through the acquisition of stakes in other big international airlines,
continues to be fiercely opposed by other large US carriers.
Failure to complete its partnership with USAir, the sixth-largest US
carrier, would be a serious setback to BA's international expansion
strategy.
The three biggest US carriers - American Airlines, United Airlines and Delta
Air Lines - have asked their government to block the BA-USAir deal unless it
can secure greater access for US airlines in the UK market, especially into
London's Heathrow airport.
Mr Major will throw his weight behind UK proposals tabled two months ago to
liberalise the UK-US airline transport market to help win US government
approval of the USAir deal.
The UK three-stage liberalisation proposal so far rejected by the US
involves:
Immediate access from all US cities to all UK regional airports for US
carriers if the BA-USAir deal is approved.
The opening up of transatlantic routes to London airports other than
Heathrow if the US simultaneously agrees to ease its rules on foreign
ownership of US airlines. Foreign airlines are restricted to 25 per cent of
the voting rights in a US carrier although they can acquire up to 49 per
cent of the shares.
Complete 'open skies' between the two countries including access to Heathrow
once UK carriers can compete on equal terms with US airlines in the US
domestic market.
Mr John MacGregor, the transport secretary, confirmed this week that the
UK's phased liberalisation proposal hinged on the proposed BA-USAir deal
going through.
Unless a last-minute breakthrough can be achieved, it now looks increasingly
likely that the US administration will not clear the BA-USAir deal.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1627</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAB5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: Scottish questions provoke anger
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID OWEN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
LABOUR MPS erupted in fury during the last session of Scottish questions
before Christmas yesterday, as a succession of Tories used it to highlight
alleged breaches of duty at a local authority that includes the
parliamentary seat of Mr John Smith, the Labour leader.
Mr Ian Lang, Scottish secretary, indicated that he was considering whether
the allegations might amount to a breach of Monklands district council's
statutory duties.
'My powers to intervene in such matters are limited by statute law,' Mr Lang
said. He did, however, have discretionary powers to order a local inquiry
'if I consider that a local authority have either failed to carry out a
statutory duty or I am of the opinion that an investigation should be made
to determine whether they have so failed'.
Answering a question from Mr Bill Walker, Tory MP for Tayside North,
regarding the authority's use of public money, Mr Lang said the Commission
for Local Authority Accounts in Scotland could submit a report to him if it
concluded the council had illegally authorised expenditure.
The commission's recommendations might include 'the surcharging of those
responsible and I am empowered to do so,' Mr Lang said. 'But I have no
evidence that would be appropriate.'
The row resulted from a contribution from Mr David Shaw, Tory MP for Dover,
who said many Scots had been 'shocked to learn that 22 relatives of Labour
councillors are employed by Monklands District Council'.
Labour MPs were also incensed that the first three questions listed on the
order paper were tabled by MPs representing English seats.
The Commons yesterday approved a new power for Scotland's most senior law
officer to appeal against sentences he considers too lenient.
The move, an amendment to the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland)
Bill due to complete its Commons stages tonight, matches changes made in
England and Wales in 1988.
Junior Scottish minister Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said the Lord Advocate,
Lord Rodger of Earlsferry, envisaged that the power would be used 'very
sparingly'.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1628</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAB4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: Maastricht bill is scheduled
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE GOVERNMENT yesterday signalled its determination to press ahead with
ratifying the Maastricht treaty, indicating that the European Communities
(Amendment) Bill is to return to the floor of the Commons within three days
of MPs' getting back from the Christmas recess.
Mr Tony Newton, Commons leader, told MPs that the bill's committee stage
would continue on both Wednesday, January 13 and Thursday, January 14.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1629</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAB3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Recession forces new rise in PSBR
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER NORMAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
GOVERNMENT finances continued to show the scars of recession last month as
the public-sector borrowing requirement jumped to Pounds 2.18bn from Pounds
1.66bn in October and only Pounds 293m in November last year.
The Central Statistical Office said the deficit for the first eight months
of the financial year amounted to Pounds 22.3bn compared with Pounds 9bn in
the same period of 1991-92 and the latest official forecast of Pounds 37bn
for the total 1992-93 PSBR, announced in last month's Autumn Statement.
November's deterioration in the UK's finances was slightly less than the
consensus forecast on financial markets, where the figures had little impact
because the government has overfunded its borrowing requirement so far this
year. Looking ahead, however, Mr Michael Saunders, UK economist of Salomon
Brothers International in London, warned that a further worsening of the
PSBR might lead to a tax-raising spring budget.
Privatisation proceeds in November were close to zero for the second month
running. Over the eight months to November, public borrowing, excluding
privatisation receipts, was Pounds 27.1bn, nearly twice the Pounds 14.1bn of
the same period of 1991.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 9
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1630</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAB2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Surveyors report housing 'spring'
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW BAXTER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE ROYAL Institution of Chartered Surveyors today reports what may be 'the
first sign of spring flowers' for the housing market, with increased
activity in late November continuing - against the seasonal norm - into
December.
Its survey of market conditions in England and Wales for the quarter to the
end of November based on chartered surveyors who operate as estate agents
says the trend may herald a return of confidence next year.
Mr Peter Miller, the institution's residential-property spokesman, says: 'We
now have the foundations on which, given some good economic news on output
or retail sales, the recovery can be built.'
Lending rates, the survey says, are now at their lowest for many years; the
ratio between house prices and earnings is at its most favourable for at
least 10 years; there is a big supply of keenly priced houses; and pent-up
demand from first-time buyers is very high and 'just waiting' for improved
confidence. Mr Miller says: 'If, as we expect, the first six months of 1993
witness increased levels of activity, underlying demand could be unleashed
and actually outstrip supply, leading to price rises at the bottom end of
the market. Increased demand will then move slowly up the housing ladder.'
In spite of the survey's guarded optimism, it discloses the depths to which
the housing market has sunk this year. The 150 agents who responded sold an
average of just 19 properties in the past three months compared with an
average of 159 secondhand houses and flats for which direct instructions
were received.
The survey also shows sharp contrasts on the effects of interest rate cuts.
A Northampton agent said November saw a flurry of activity as a result of
rate cuts and the belief that the bottom of the market might have been
reached. In Bishop Auckland, Co Durham, however, there were few signs of the
market moving.
Housing Market, RICS, 12 Great George St, Parliament Sq, London SW1P 3AD.
Free.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 9
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1631</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAB1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Economy still flat, say owner-managers
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL CASSELL, Business Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MORE than two thirds of Britain's owner-managed businesses do not believe
the economy will improve over the next 12 months, a survey published
yesterday reports.
A study of 600 owner-managed companies conducted by Mori for Ernst &amp; Young,
the accountancy firm, shows a marked deterioration in business confidence
during the past six months.
It suggests that 67 per cent of companies studied believe the recession is
likely to continue or deepen further. Nearly a quarter say they have no
confidence in the government's ability to help revive the economy.
The study shows that half of all respondents expect no change in employment
levels over the next year, although 20 per cent expect to shed more labour.
Even so, a clear majority believe their output will rise during 1993.
The last Mori study, carried out six months earlier after the general
election, said two thirds of companies were confident about the economic
outlook.
Mr Jock Lennox of Ernst &amp; Young said: '(The findings) reflect a realistic
view of the economic climate facing owner-managed businesses.
'Some recent signs of increased activity in the high street have not yet had
time to lift the overall mood of the UK's owner-managers.'
There are mixed signs about prospects for increasing exports in the
aftermath of sterling's devaluation. While companies selling overseas
expected to maintain or raise export sales in 1993, businesses without
export markets did not intend to seek them over the next year.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 9
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1632</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAB0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Toyota predicts exports boost
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOHN GRIFFITHS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
TOYOTA said yesterday that it expected its UK carmaking operations to
contribute between Pounds 400m and Pounds 500m a year to Britain's external
trade balance when production reaches 200,000 cars a year after the mid
1990s.
At a ceremony yesterday to mark the arrival of the first production car off
the line at Toyota Motor Manufacturing UK's Pounds 700m plant at Burnaston,
Derbyshire, company executives also made clear that production and the use
of 'local' - European - content programmes had been accelerated.
The UK-built cars, a Ford Sierra-sized range of vehicles called Carina E,
will start production with the 60 per cent 'local' content originally
targeted for mid 1993.
Although the company expects to build only 100 cars between now and the end
of the year - as it continues to test processes and double-check quality
standards - its scheduled output for next year has been raised to 36,000
from 30,000.
It expects to reach output of 100,000 cars a year, the maximum on a single
shift, by the end of 1994, six months earlier than expected. By then, the
European content of the cars should be 80 per cent.
When 200,000 units a year is reached, Toyota will employ 3,000 people at
Burnaston and a further 300 at its Pounds 140m engine manufacturing plant at
Deeside, north Wales.
Burnaston now employs just under 1,100 people, with a further 84 at Deeside.
An additional 600 will be taken on at Burnaston over the next year. Mr
Shoichiro Toyoda, Toyota's chairman, said the plant did not contribute to
overall overcapacity in the car industry.
Although Toyota has also just finished bringing on stream new plants in
Japan and Kentucky - and has no immediate plans for more - Mr Toyoda also
gave the clearest, albeit reluctant, indication yet that Toyota will be
prepared to consider expanding Burnaston to 400,000 cars a year about the
end of the decade if demand warrants - although a continental European
option is not ruled out.
'In the long term, if customers in Europe show that they wish to buy
Toyotas, then we would increase capacity,' he said. 'That is much better
than importing from Japan, and whether it is in the UK or continental Europe
doesn't really matter.'
The 580-acre Burnaston site could easily accommodate an extra unit of
identical size. Toyota executives acknowledge that if one were built,
Toyota's spending with European suppliers would rise from an annual rate of
Pounds 700m a year at 200,000 units a year to more than Pounds 1.2bn. Toyota
intends to export 70 per cent of Burnaston's output to continental Europe
from early next year.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 9
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1633</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Retail sales fail to lift
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER NORMAN, Economics Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
RETAIL SALES declined slightly in volume terms last month, suggesting that
lower interest rates since Black Wednesday have failed to stimulate a rapid
economic recovery.
The Central Statistical Office said volume sales fell 0.1 per cent on a
seasonally adjusted basis in November compared with October after a 0.2 per
cent increase in October compared with September.
Sales in the latest three months, which the CSO regards as a more dependable
measure of trends, were up 0.7 per cent compared with the previous three
months and 1.4 per cent higher than in September to November last year.
The latest figures came as a slight disappointment to the City, where the
average of forecasts had pointed to a 0.2 per cent increase in volume sales
last month.
The Treasury said the figures were consistent with a modest upward trend in
recent months that had brought retail sales back to record levels last seen
at the start of 1990.
November's sales performance has left retailers hoping for a late rush of
sales before Christmas.
Mr Hugh Clarke, trade policy director at the British Retail Consortium,
which says it represents more than 90 per cent of British retailing
companies, said sales in December were already showing a better trend.
Mr James May, the consortium's director-general, said retailers were
'cautiously optimistic for a reasonable Christmas', but warned that any
significant improvement in retail sales was not expected until 'well into
the new year'.
The consortium said sales of traditional Christmas gifts started slowly last
month with the average sale value lower than a year ago. It reported
relatively strong demand for food and drink, healthcare products and
do-it-yourself goods. Sales of electrical and electronic goods and furniture
and carpets were strong, but clothing and footwear sales weakened last
month.
There also appears to be a considerable regional variation in sales. The
Retail Consortium said department stores in London were experiencing
difficult trading conditions.
The Meadowhall shopping centre near Sheffield reported 14 per cent more
visitors since the beginning of September compared with the same period of
1991.
Broad CSO figures also showed a considerable variation among the retail
sec-tors.
Food retailers reported 1.1 per cent growth in volume sales in the latest
three months compared with the June-to-August period, while sales of mixed
retail businesses were 2.5 per cent higher.
Sales of non-food retailers were down by 0.1 per cent in the same period.
In yesterday's table of retail sector performance, the top line should have
read 'total distribution' and not 'retail total' as published.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 9
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1634</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Sunday ruling fails to produce open-and-shut case: The
implications of the European Court decision
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NEIL BUCKLEY and ALISON SMITH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE European Court ruling on Sunday trading was unexpectedly clear, but did
little to end the confusion surrounding the issue.
The EC Court of Justice ruled Sunday trading laws in England and Wales did
not clash with European trade laws and were enforceable.
The ruling has intensified calls for a review of the current laws.
'It's a historical decision rather than one of historic significance,' said
Mr Nigel Whittaker, corporate affairs director of Kingfisher retail group,
which includes B&amp;Q, Woolworth and Comet. 'It leaves the way clear for the
Home Office to press ahead with new legislation.'
The court was not ruling simply on the legality or otherwise of shops'
opening on Sundays. Rather, it was asked to guide the English courts in
interpreting an apparent clash between the Shops Act of 1950, which is
supposed to regulate Sunday trading in England and Wales, and Article 30 of
the Treaty of Rome, which forbids any barrier to trade between member
countries.
Retailers said their turnover was reduced if they did not open on Sunday,
meaning they needed to import fewer goods from Europe - a form of trade
barrier. The counter-argument from the anti Sunday-trade lobby was that the
aim of the Shops Act, to protect workers, justified any breach of trade
laws.
The European Court had to decide whether the Shops Act was 'proportionate',
in other words whether its effect on trade was no more than necessary to
achieve its objective of worker protection.
Its decision was clear-cut: 'Article 30 of the Treaty is to be interpreted
as meaning that the prohibition which it lays down does not apply to
national legislation prohibiting retailers from opening their premises on
Sundays.'
The ruling must now go to the Lords for ratification.
But the Home Office indicated that it was now up to councils to decide
whether to prosecute shops opening on Sundays, and several said they would
do so. Others are thought unlikely to spend time and money trying to enforce
what is seen is a dying law.
The ruling is not the end of the story.
The existing legislation is clearly doomed, and new proposals will be put to
parliament.
The first will be the private member's bill sponsored by Mr Ray Powell,
Labour MP for Ogmore, due to be debated on January 22.
The bill aims to rationalise the Shops Act, taking into account the
retailing needs of the 1990s, and provide adequate protection for Sunday
workers.
It is based on the proposals of Keep Sunday Special, the campaign group,
which would permit the opening of shops in four categories: recreation,
emergencies, social and travel - hence the acronym Rest - at council
discretion.
The recreation category includes sports centres, historic buildings,
newsagents, garden centres and florists. The emergency category covers
chemists and small food shops, while the social category includes
restaurants, take-aways, pubs and off licences. The travel section would
cover petrol stations, motor spares shops and motorway service stations.
Ministers are unlikely to force Tory backbenchers to attend and vote against
the bill, so its progress will depend on Mr Powell's skills as a whip (he is
a senior member of the Labour whips' office) and on backbench opposition to
it.
Even assuming it is allowed to proceed in January, there is practically no
prospect that it will become law. Discussion on backbench bills cannot be
guillotined, and time available for them is very limited. So the realistic
route for a change in the law is government legislation.
The Conservatives promised in their last two manifestos to reform Sunday
trading laws, and Mr Kenneth Clarke, home secretary, told parliament in
November that he planned to present a so-called 'options' bill.
That would give MPs the chance to choose between complete deregulation of
Sunday opening (Mr Clarke's favoured option but considered unlikely to gain
widespread support); the KSS/Rest proposals; and partial deregulation as
proposed by the Shopping Hours Reform Council.
The reform council, whose proposals are supported by retail groups including
J. Sainsbury and Kingfisher, wants all shops to be allowed to open for all
or part of the day, depending on their size. Shops below 3,000 sq ft would
face no restriction, but larger shops would be allowed to open for only
limited hours.
The council also wants legislation to include protection for shop workers,
outlawing any attempts to force workers to work on Sundays or discrimination
against those who refuse.
Premium wages should also be paid for Sunday working.
Mr Clarke's desire to press ahead with legislation on Sunday trading is not
in doubt. More in question is the enthusiasm of Mr Tony Newton, the leader
of the Commons, for introducing a bill that would be time-consuming and
divisive. The business managers say that the legislative programme is
already full of controversial measures, not least the Maastricht bill and
the legislation to privatise British Rail.
So Mr Clarke may lose his battle for a bill to clear up the confusion before
next Christmas.
Even if he wins it, the passage of the legislation will be far from a
formality. Although ministers are relaxed enough about the extent of
deregulation to include three different options, they have no intention of
giving in on the question of employee protection.
The campaign to get premium wages for shop employees who choose to work on
Sundays and give future as well as existing shop workers the right not to
work on Sundays unites both the KSS and the reform council.
For a Tory administration that sees as one of its lasting achievements of
the 1980s as the removal of government intervention from industrial
relations, the prospect of reintroducing that in the form of wage regulation
might well prove unacceptable.
But Labour MPs are unlikely to refuse the invitation to join in defeating
the government over workers' rights.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1635</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Thorp inquiry completion date
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
A GOVERNMENT inquiry into the future of British Nuclear Fuel's Thorp
reprocessing plant at Sellafield in Cumbria may be finished by early
January.
Discussions chaired by the Cabinet Office between the Department of the
Environment, the Ministry of Agriculture, the Treasury and the Foreign
Office, will produce a paper assessing the economic and environmental case
for starting the Pounds 2.8bn plant.
BNF estimates the eventual decommissioning costs of the plant at more than
Pounds 1bn if it starts and becomes radioactive.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1636</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Tax switch for insurance offices
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE GOVERNMENT will change the way it taxes UK branches of overseas life
insurance offices, Mr Stephen Dorrell, financial secretary to the Treasury,
said yesterday.
Mr Dorrell said in a Commons written answer that the 1993 Finance Bill would
include amendments updating rules that have hardly changed since the First
World War.
There are relatively few such overseas branches, but the Inland Revenue said
their share of the UK life insurance market was significant.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1637</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Ministers are urged to act soon on shops legislation
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALISON SMITH and DAVID OWEN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
PRESSURE mounted on the government from all sides at Westminster yesterday
to press ahead with Sunday trading legislation as fast as possible in the
light of the EC judgment.
MPs across the argument were united in calling on ministers to realise that
the decision meant that a bill should be introduced as quickly as possible
to end uncertainty.
Mr Tony Blair, the shadow home secretary, said the government should 'now
bring forward its proposals as a matter of urgency'. He repeated his warning
to Mr Kenneth Clarke, the home secretary, to honour his promise to allow a
free vote on all issues related to Sunday trading.
Mr James Couchman, Tory MP for Gillingham, said: 'Sunday shopping has become
a normal British weekend activity, and the sooner we have a sensible law
which reflects this the better.'
He has put forward a backbench bill that reflects the proposals of the
Shopping Hours Reform Council, but it has no chance of becoming law.
Some Tory MPs privately expressed anger that the government had not moved
earlier, saying it had been clear which way the EC judgment would go. 'We
should press on with this as a priority even over Maastricht,' one
commented.
MPs also demanded an urgent government statement to clarify the position
after the judgment.
Mr Ray Powell, the Labour MP whose backbench bill would strengthen existing
Sunday trading restrictions, said there should be a statement by the home
secretary or attorney-general explaining whether the Shops Act 1950 still
applied after yesterday's ruling.
The government should make its position clear before large stores were
allowed to trade on the last Sunday before Christmas, he said.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1638</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABTFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / MPs demand national public debate on NHS trusts
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN PIKE, Social Affairs Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE GOVERNMENT'S National Health Service reforms demand a 'public debate at
national level,' the Commons health committee said yesterday.
In its first report during the present parliament, the committee sets out
plans for a four-year programme to monitor the effects - 'both positive and
negative' - of last year's measures and next April's community care changes.
Included in its plans are questions about what citizens are entitled to
demand from the health service and what resources are necessary to meet
those demands.
The Commons committee's programme was announced in an interim report on NHS
trusts, which have day-to-day managerial responsibility for their own
affairs, published yesterday. It concluded that it 'remains difficult at
this stage' to distinguish benefits of trust status from the wider effects
of the NHS reforms and the impetus likely to arise from any management
restructuring.
Some early concerns about the impact of trust status - including potential
loss of the benefit of strategic planning - might not be said to have been
totally allayed, the report says.
But it complains of a 'lack of clarity in the government's policy towards
future investment in the NHS'.
In addition, it suggests that difficulties might arise from dismantling the
national framework for negotiating terms and conditions of employment, the
committee reports.
It also highlights questions of accountability and involvement of NHS users
in consultation on allocation of financial resources.
Publication of the report gave rise to immediate political disagreement.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health secretary, interpreted the health committee's
report as putting added weight behind growing acceptance of trusts as the
model of NHS organisation for the future.
'The fact that trusts represent the future of NHS provision makes it more
important that any problems, some of which the select committee has
identified, are properly addressed. I welcome debate on these issues,' she
said.
Mr David Blunkett, shadow health secretary, said the report showed that the
government's reforms were leading to fragmentation of strategic planning,
the further destruction of accountability and the development of a two-tier
health service.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1639</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABSFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Clogged main road causes trouble at mill
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY, Northern Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BRITAIN'S last volume manufacturer of industrial clogs is facing an
uncertain future because it has become too much of a tourist attraction.
Three-mile queues of cars have jammed the main road through Hebden Bridge,
West Yorkshire, at peak periods and the number of visitors to Walkley mill,
where the clogs are made, has passed 500,000 this year. A public inquiry
will be held next year to decide whether a property development - which
would help raise Pounds 1m towards a new road, a bridge over the River
Calder and a car park to ease the congestion - should go ahead.
'Without it, Walkley mill could end up popping its own clogs,' said Mr Mark
Clyndes, who bought Walkley Clogs from descendants of its founders six years
ago.
The mill employs 11 skilled clogmakers, but a Pounds 1.7m refit after a fire
in 1990 enabled Mr Clyndes to bring in other crafts and speciality shops,
creating about 90 jobs.
He wants to build a 62-bedroom hotel, shops and housing near the mill in an
Pounds 8m scheme that would include a public swimming pool. There have been
objections because of the intensity of the development and the possible
effect on shops in the town.
A Calderdale Council planning sub-committee this month decided by one vote
not to recommend the scheme, triggering a public inquiry over Walkley's
appeal.
Industrial clogs have had a difficult time in Britain since the advent of
North Sea gas 30 years ago. Gasworks, where gas and coke were made by
carbonising coal, were big customers. The thick wooden soles of the footwear
insulated workers' feet.
Demand fell from more than 100,000 pairs a year as gasworks closed. They
slid even faster after the steel industry's coking ovens started shutting
down in large numbers from the mid 1970s.
The market is down to 20,000 pairs a year, with Walkley claiming market
leadership through its supplies to ICI, Ford, London Brick, British Steel
and Rover, as well as exports to the Netherlands and the US. The company's
clog sales will be worth Pounds 350,000 this year.
The company sells directly to tourists and makes a few pairs for clog and
Morris dancing.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1640</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Retailers stick to seasonal plans
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By BETHAN HUTTON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
RETAILERS pledged yesterday to press ahead with plans to open this Sunday -
the last before Christmas - although some said they would take legal advice
on continuing Sunday trading in the new year.
Early legislation on Sunday trading was demanded by shops and councils on
both sides of the debate.
'The European Court ruling adds urgency to the home secretary to reform this
unworkable and unpopular law,' Mr Ron Trenter, chairman of Texas Homecare,
the DIY chain, said. 'It should now be given parliamentary priority.'
Stores and local authorities said the European Court ruling could not be
seen as not a final judgment on the issue, as a House of Lords ruling is
pending. 'The case has been somewhat overtaken by political events. Only two
weeks ago the home secretary announced the funeral arrangements for the
Shops Act 1950,' Mr David Ramsden, retail services controller of B&amp;Q, the
DIY chain, said.
Mr David Quarmby, joint managing director of J. Sainsbury, the UK's biggest
food retailer, said: 'Our plans are in place to open this Sunday and we do
intend to. We have had only four days' notice and our customers and staff
are expecting us to open.'
He said the company would take advice from its lawyers about Sunday trading
in the future.
Tesco, the supermarket group, said its stores also would open next Sunday.
'The company feels it would be quite wrong to change its arrangements and
disappoint its 1 1/2 m Sunday shoppers. It would also be unfair to deprive
the 18,000 Tesco staff who work on Sundays of an income they are counting on
just before Christmas.'
The John Lewis Partnership, one of the retailers to hold out against Sunday
opening, said the European ruling made clear that the Shops Act 1950 still
stood. John Lewis said that Waitrose, its supermarket chain, was losing
Pounds 1m a week by abiding by the law. The partnership also wants
parliament to enact new legislation as early as possible.
Some councils, which took rigorous legal action against stores trading on
Sundays, said they did not plan to apply for injunctions until after the
House of Lords ruled on the issue.
Stoke-on-Trent City Council, which together with Norwich council has been
involved in a protracted legal battle with B&amp;Q over Sunday opening, said the
ruling was a 'complete vindication' of the city's stance.
But Mr Paul Hodgson, the assistant city secretary, said: 'Now we have to
wait for the House of Lords to rule on the matter.'
Kirklees council in West Yorkshire rejected using injunctions in the
immediate future, but said its policy of responding to complaints from the
public would continue, although prosecution after a complaint, imposing only
small fines, was less of a deterrent than an injunction that forced a store
to remain closed.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1641</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Thorp inquiry completion date
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
A GOVERNMENT inquiry into the future of British Nuclear Fuels Ltd's Thorp
reprocessing plant at Sellafield in Cumbria may be finished by early
January.
Discussions chaired by the Cabinet Office between the Environment
Department, the Agriculture Ministry, the Treasury and the Foreign Office,
which began several weeks ago, will produce a paper assessing the economic
and environmental case for starting the Pounds 2.8bn plant.
The BNF estimates the eventual decommissioning costs of the plant at more
than Pounds 1bn if it starts and becomes radioactive.
The government paper should be completed at about the same time as the
public consultation by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution, which ends
on January 11.
Mr Michael Howard, the environment secretary, is responsible for deciding
whether to hold a public hearing, that might further delay the start of the
plant - originally expected at the end of the year.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1642</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Scotland caught in recession
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE Scottish economy does not have the strength to pull itself rapidly out
of recession, and unemployment is likely to continue rising longer than in
the south of England.
That is the view of the Fraser of Allander Institute, Scotland's principal
economic research organisation, in its latest quarterly bulletin.
The institute says the latest Scottish Chambers' survey of business opinion
pointed to a poor industrial production performance and a probable
acceleration in unemployment.
The Scottish economy until recently has suffered less from recession than
the south of England, and its seasonally adjusted unemployment rate of 9.7
per cent is below the UK average.
There are now some signs that the UK economy as a whole is recovering.
Quarterly Economic Commentary, Fraser of Allander Institute, Curran
Building, 100 Cathedral Street, Glasgow G5 0LN. Pounds 15.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1643</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / World Bank on Debt: Plight of poor countries belies claim
that the crisis is ended
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By STEPHEN FIDLER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MORE than two dozen of the world's poorest countries face continuing debt
problems and need greater forgiveness of their debt burdens, the World Bank
says today.
These countries, which have for more than a decade faced problems in
servicing debt owed mainly to official creditors, belie the fast-growing
conventional wisdom that the debt crisis has come to an end.
'External viability for these countries remains to be established and will
require, in many cases, stronger adjustment policies and additional
forgiveness of their debt burdens,' says the bank in an assessment of the 10
years of the developing country debt crisis.
However, it adds later that 'the debt crisis facing middle income countries
worldwide is past'. According to bank definitions, middle-income countries
include Latin America's largest debtors, such as Brazil, Mexico, Venezuela
and Argentina. These countries' main concern is now to maintain and
strengthen their market access.
Preserving market access also remains an important concern for a group of
other countries - it cites 14, including China, India, Indonesia, Hungary
and Algeria - that have maintained debt servicing throughout the 1980s.
However, for the severely-indebted low income countries - most of them in
Africa, owing most of their debt to official creditors - the picture remains
bleak.
Even with the proposed 'Trinidad Terms' treatment of their debts to export
credit agencies - which is more favourable than existing treatment - and a
total write-off of all their aid debts 'the restoration of external
viability may require additional action by official and commercial
creditors', the bank argues.
The poorest countries, most heavily dependent on concessional foreign aid,
are also suffering a decline in development assistance, the bank says,
adding that this is due to constrained aid budgets in developing countries.
The statement will reinforce concern that the entry of new aid claimants in
eastern Europe and elsewhere will diminish the aid available to traditional
beneficiaries.
The bank also acknowledges that for some smaller countries 'commercial banks
have little incentive. . . to incur the administrative costs of regularising
the debt in some countries that account for only a small fraction of their
balance sheets.'
In other countries, conditions in the debtor countries have hampered
negotiations.
In either case, 'there is no simple solution to the commercial bank debt
overhang of these countries.'
The bank rejects the idea of an officially-created facility to buy back this
debt at a discount.
It takes the view that the current case-by-case approach of the debt
strategy offers the best hope.
Overall debt of developing countries - including the former Soviet Union,
added to the figures for the first time - are expected to rise this year to
Dollars 1,703bn, from Dollars 1,608bn at the end of last year.
The main factor behind this was the depreciating dollar, which swelled the
value of non-dollar denominated debt, as well as new debt flows. However,
debt ratios are not expected to worsen this year because of improved
economic performance and trade conditions.
The overall debt-to-exports ratio is expected to stabilise at about 178 per
cent, while debt-to-GNP will stick at around 37 per cent.
This hides a slight improvement in the overall ratios for those countries
defined as highly indebted.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1644</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / World Bank on Debt: Flow of private capital 'may slow'
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD WATERS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE wave of private capital that has flooded into developing countries in
the past three years could prove unsustainable in the years ahead, the World
Bank warns in its latest annual report on developing country debt, published
today.
Thanks largely to the surge in private investment, external finance for
developing countries will this year reach a third more than two years ago,
at Dollars 134.3bn (Pounds 88.3bn), the bank estimates. Last year, the net
flows of resources to these countries totalled Dollars 115.2bn. The bank
adds that the poorest countries have not benefited from this financing boom,
being forced to rely on official loans and grants which have grown only
marginally this decade.
The private capital on which the middle-income countries have come to rely
could prove a double-edged blessing, Mr Masood Ahmed, head of the bank's
debt and international finance division, warned. 'There is some degree of
concern about how sustainable the new flows will be,' he said, commenting on
the report.
Much of the new private capital has been driven by a search for higher
returns, against a background of low or falling interest rates in developed
countries. Such capital flows could be reversed if investment returns in the
developed world rise. Also, it represents a redirection of a small portion
of the total portfolios of institutional investors in developed countries -
a one-off process which will not lead to a sustained flow of capital.
'Voluntary private capital flows provide welcome financing for development
but may become a mixed blessing if mismanaged,' warns the bank. As financial
markets around the world become more integrated, allowing capital to move
more rapidly, pressure will grow on policy makers in developing countries.
'Both good and bad policies and macroeconomic conditions will be rewarded or
punished sharply by international investors,' the bank says.
'Portfolio debt flows, especially short-term deposits, are more volatile
than long-term commercial bank loans and trade financing. Likewise,
portfolio equity flows in emerging markets can be taken out fast at low
cost.'
A further concern highlighted by the bank is that foreign direct investment
is unlikely to provide a net source of finance over the medium term. As
investments made in recent years start to yield results, the flow of profits
out of the developing world will come to exceed new capital being invested.
The main benefit of this investment 'may lie more in the transfer of
technology than in medium-term balance of payments financing,' the bank
says. Foreign direct investment has amounted to Dollars 38bn in 1992, up
from Dollars 34bn last year and just Dollars 24bn in 1990.
By contrast, the bank says that the growing indebtedness of developing
countries as a whole should not be a matter for concern, provided it fuels
economic development and stimulates exports rather than simply being used to
plug fiscal deficits. Total foreign debt of the 116 countries under scrutiny
leapt by nearly Dollars 100bn last year, to Dollars 1,700bn.
During 1992, portfolio investment to developing countries has amounted to
Dollars 27.2bn, up from Dollars 20.3bn in 1991. While last year these flows
were driven largely by a return of flight capital held abroad for tax or
other reasons, to Latin America, this year they represent growing investment
in a wider range of countries, principally the East Asia and Pacific region.
Institutional investors such as insurance companies and pension funds have
become more important as providers of capital, and there has been a greater
use of debt rather than equity: bonds and loans this year are expected to
total Dollars 26bn, up from Dollars 14bn in 1991, while portfolio equity
investment has risen from Dollars 7.6bn to Dollars 8.1bn.
Net transfers of finance to the developing countries - total net flows less
debt servicing and profit remittances - rose this year to Dollars 56.3bn
from Dollars 37.7bn.
World Bank Debt Tables 1992-93. Volume I Analysis and Summary Tables; Volume
II Country Tables. The World Bank, 1818 H Street, Washington DC
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1645</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / OECD Economic Outlook: Britain top when it comes to hitting
the bottom
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE recession in the UK has been significantly worse in terms of lost output
than in all but two of the other periods of economic decline affecting the
world's richest nations over the past 20 years, according to the OECD.
In what amounts to a statistical guide to recessions, economists at the OECD
have analysed all the periods of economic decline since the 1970s in the
seven leading industrial countries - the US, Japan, Germany, France, Italy,
Britain and Canada.
Out of 28 such downturns, the current British recession scores in the bottom
three in terms of what the OECD calls the 'output gap' - a measurement of
growth in gross domestic product.
Of the total of 28 downturns considered by the OECD - four for each of the
seven countries - the only two periods which have seen an output gap of a
comparable size to the one now affecting Britain are the current Canadian
recession and the Canadian recession of the early 1980s.
During the 21 periods of downturn which took place in the seven countries
until the mid-1980s, the level of GDP at the trough for each period was an
average of 3 per cent below the trend for the nation concerned.
This indicates that the current British and Canadian recessions are about
twice as deep as the average, using this particular measure of lost output.
According to this measure, the current UK recession is significantly worse
than the other periods of decline in the UK economy since the early 1970s,
which took place around 1971-72, 1974-75 and 1981-82.
The current downturns in Germany, Italy, France and Japan are in each case
shallower than the average for all 28 periods of decline which have involved
the seven nations since the early 1970s.
According to the OECD, the recession in the US which now appears to be
ending is about the same in terms of depth as the average for the periods of
economic decline over the period.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1646</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / OECD Economic Outlook: Budget deficits show significant
worsening
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE world's developed nations should take sterner measures to put their
finances in order and reduce budget deficits, the OECD says.
Across the 24 nations in the organisation, a 'significant deterioration' in
budget balances has taken place in the past three years, with net state
borrowing having increased by about three percentage points of the region's
gross domestic product.
Some nations have markedly increased spending on social security and other
transfer payments while growth in tax income has been held back because of
weak economic activity.
The OECD says individual governments should do more to classify how much
they spend on 'productive' investment that boosts economic activity -
covering areas such as training and infrastructure projects  - as opposed to
social security payments which do little more than place a floor under
people's living standards.
According to OECD calculations, high government borrowing would not be a
worry if the cash gained in this way was spent largely on investment.
However this year only four OECD nations - Japan, Denmark, Finland and
Austria - are expected to spend more on investment than the total they raise
through borrowing on capital markets. In the other countries, a significant
fraction of borrowing is channelled instead to transfers, such as social
security and interest payments.
To cut borrowing, governments should examine whether to charge consumers for
using some state services, while greater competition in services should also
be introduced to increase efficiency.
In the longer term, governments will have to investigate the funding
implications of the rise in numbers of elderly people, which is likely to
push up social security bills.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1647</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / World Bank on Debt: Russian debt move seen as likely to ease
negotiations
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD WATERS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE move by Russia to take on the external debt of most of the other former
Soviet states should eventually make restructuring of the debt easier and
hasten the return of the republics to international creditworthiness, the
World Bank says.
It adds, though, that the difficulties experienced in servicing the Dollars
67bn of debts of the former Soviet Union in the past year are likely to
continue for some time.
This is because of the 'large stock of arrears on FSU (former Soviet Union
debt run up in 1992', and the fact that 52 per cent of the total debt falls
due for repayment over the next three years.
By the end of November, four republics had reached agreement for Russia to
assume responsibility for their share of the former Soviet debts, while
seven more were in negotiation.
'The emerging streamlined arrangement can strengthen the creditworthiness of
all FSU republics, since it will establish a clearer legal status in
negotiations with creditors,' the bank says.
The bank attributes much of the present difficulty to the doubling of
foreign debt in the five years before the Soviet Union broke up, fuelled by
so-called 'perestroika loans' from western government agencies and banks.
Further finance will be needed, though, before the former Soviet states can
shake off this legacy. 'The restoration of external viability and
creditworthiness of FSU republics will require a period of sustained
economic reform which, to be successful, must be adequately financed,' the
bank says.
The bank also points to inadequacies in reporting and monitoring procedures
in Russia and other republics, which have made the management of external
debts more difficult. Most are now moving to adopt better debt-management
policies, making it easier for the authorities to control the growth of
foreign debts.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1648</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / OECD Economic Outlook: 'Sombre' prospects for immediate
growth - The OECD sees high budget deficits as limiting scope to stimulate
economic demand
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER MARSH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SUBSTANTIAL recovery across the world's richest nations has been postponed
once again, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development said
yesterday.
In its latest biannual Economic Outlook*, the OECD said economic expansion
would be held back by the combination of high consumer and business debts,
rising unemployment, tight monetary policies and weak confidence.
The organisation, which represents 24 industrial nations, supports moves
towards lower interest rates across the region. It suggests that the block
on the Bundesbank cutting its credit rates soon - a development which would
open the way to easier monetary policy across Europe - would be removed if
Bonn acted quickly to reduce its financial deficit.
Describing the immediate outlook for growth across the OECD as 'relatively
sombre', the OECD says the scope for governments generally to stimulate
demand by fiscal measures is 'very circumscribed' because of the high budget
deficits in many developed nations. A brighter note is the progress made in
many countries in bringing down inflation, even though this has often been
largely a consequence of extremely weak demand pressures.
Also, growth in world trade has remained fairly high, partly because of the
strengthening in the economies of regions outside the OECD, including
south-east Asia, south America and the former communist nations of eastern
Europe.
The OECD says: 'Over the coming months the negative forces which have slowed
OECD economies are unlikely to dissipate rapidly. Confidence is currently
weak in most OECD countries and is likely to revive only gradually.'
Over the next year, the balance of risks may push the world economy into
another period of only weak growth, the report says. There is a danger that
'continued indebtedness problems and weak confidence will delay recovery and
that German inflation and interest rates will take longer than expected to
ease.'
Across the 24 nations of the OECD, the organisation's economists believe
real economic growth next year will be 1.9 per cent compared with an OECD
estimate of 3 per cent in June. Growth in the OECD this year is expected to
be 1.5 per cent, as opposed to the 1.8 per cent forecast six months ago.
However, putting a more up-to-date gloss on the OECD's forecasts, Mr
Kumiharu Shigehara, the organisation's chief economist, said yesterday that
on the basis of recent economic data he thought growth in the US next year
would probably be half a percentage point higher than in the OECD's formal
projection, while growth in Germany would be half a percentage point lower.
These two developments would cancel each other out, leaving the
organisation's overall prediction for growth across the region in 1993
unchanged. The group has revised down its growth forecasts substantially for
Italy and Britain, where in each case the increase in output next year is
now expected to be roughly half the amount it forecast last June (see
table).
The June forecast for Germany referred only to western Germany and is
therefore not strictly comparable to the current one. In the case of the US,
Japan, France and Canada, growth in 1993 is projected at about two-thirds of
the level forecast six months ago.
Next year is expected to be the third in a row in which OECD growth is less
than 2 per cent. Among the worst affected nations are Britain, Canada,
Finland and Sweden, each of which will have seen their economies shrink in
two years out of three by the end of this year. Unemployment is expected to
climb by the end of next year to 34m, or 8.4 per cent of the OECD labour
force, an increase of 10m jobless people since mid-1990. Fear of job losses
has sapped confidence among consumers, which the OECD says is a big factor
holding back a recovery.
With many countries suffering from weak business activity, 'the question
arises as to whether the stance of macroeconomic policies can be adjusted
somewhat to support demand in the near term', according to the OECD.
The OECD lists several measures under discussion to boost growth:
Lower interest rates. In countries with weak inflation and low demand,
'there would be a case for easing monetary conditions more significantly
(than in the past few years)'. Modest measures to boost state spending.
While the increasing budget deficits in many countries make large programmes
of increased government spending inappropriate, there may be a case for
temporary measures to loosen fiscal policy or focused schemes to spend
taxpayers' cash on investment.
Looser monetary policies in Germany. Lower interest rates across Europe
would be helped if the Bundesbank were to change its policy of keeping
borrowing rates high. Devaluation. While devaluation by some countries, and
Italy and Britain leaving the system, provided a short-term economic boost
by making exports from these nations more competitive, the report warns that
such improvements 'have often been quickly eroded by higher inflation'.
The low demand across the OECD has produced one bright spot in that the
OECD-wide inflation rate is expected to be a weak 3.5 per cent this year,
falling to about 3.2 per cent next year and about 2.5 per cent by the end of
1994 - the lowest rate since 1960.
World trade is projected to increase by 4.7 per cent this year, 4.9 per cent
next year and 6.1 per cent the following year. These numbers assume that the
Uruguay Round of the world trade talks is settled amicably.
*OECD Economic Outlook No 52, OECD Publications, 2 Rue Andre Pascal, Paris
Cedex 16, France, or HMSO. FFr 110, or equivalent price in local currencies.
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
G7
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
Year on year        1991           1992         1993         1994
(percent)             Jun '92        Jun '92      Jun '92
constant prices       forecast       forecast     forecast
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
US                 -1.2   -0.7     1.8    2.1   2.4    3.6   3.1
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
Japan               4.4    4.5     1.8    1.8   2.3    3.1   3.1
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
Germany             3.7*   3.1*    1.4    1.3*  1.2    2.3*  2.9
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
France              1.2    1.3     1.9    2.0   1.6    2.6   2.8
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
Italy               1.4    1.4     1.2    1.5   0.8    2.1   1.7
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
UK                 -2.2   -2.2    -1.0    0.4   1.3    2.6   2.4
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
Canada             -1.7   -1.5     1.3    2.3   3.2    4.3   4.2
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: OECD                                      *West Germany only
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1649</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / OECD Economic Outlook: Inflation unlikely to trouble UK -
Slack in markets expected to restrain price and wage rises
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE UK economy is suffering from so much slack that inflation is unlikely to
be a problem in the foreseeable future, according to the OECD.
The organisation envisages a weak recovery next year, with the economy
expanding by 1.3 per cent after a 1 per cent decline this year. In 1994,
output growth is expected to be higher, at 2.4 per cent.
The pound's devaluation and the three percentage point cut in interest rates
since September 'have removed some obstacles for recovery' but the outlook
is clouded by an unusually high degree of uncertainty, the report says.
Real output is expected to grow 'modestly' in the first half of next year,
reflecting a slow recovery in demand by consumers as the decline in house
prices starts to ease and people gain the benefits from lower borrowing
costs.
After mid-1993 a broadly based expansion in the economy can be expected, as
'confidence improves, the drop in consumer durables spending bottoms out,
the savings rate falls, destocking ends and the measures announced in (last
month's Treasury) Autumn Statement (to boost output) take effect'.
Although the pound's devaluation since Britain left the European exchange
rate mechanism three months ago will push up inflation through higher import
prices, the effects of the devaluation on domestic price and wage setting
'are expected to be damped by considerable labour and product market slack'.
The OECD expects inflation as measured by the deflator in growth of nominal
GDP to be 5.4 per cent this year, falling to 5 per cent next year and 4.1
per cent in 1994.
The OECD outlook for the UK assumes that the government maintains a firm
policy on trying to damp price rises and maintains the credibility of
financial markets.
Unemployment is expected to rise from 10.1 per cent of the labour force this
year to 10.8 per cent next year.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
                       BRITAIN'S ECONOMY
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
                                       1991      1992      1993
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
Gross domestic product                 -2.2      -1.0       1.3
Domestic demand                        -2.6      -0.6       0.6
Private consumption                    -2.1      -0.3       0.7
Govt consumption                        2.8       0.8       1.4
Gross fixed investment                 -9.9      -3.0      -0.6
Exports                                 0.3       3.2       5.8
Imports                                -3.1       6.2       4.0
Industrial production                  -5.3      -0.9       1.0
Current account deficit (Dollars bn)   11.1      22.0      24.0
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
All figures are %. Year on year growth, except where stated.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
Source: OECD.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1650</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / World Trade News: Mixed signals in world steel markets -
Barriers and liberalisation
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID DODWELL and NANCY DUNNE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
STEEL exporters can be forgiven for feeling confused.
On the one hand, the European Community is imposing dumping duties on east
European exporters, and the US is hurling a blizzard of duties at steel
exporters in Europe, Asia and south America.
On the other, negotiations resumed this month on a Multilateral Steel
Agreement aimed at demolishing tariffs, dismantling non-tariff barriers, and
cutting steel subsidies.
Is the industry being liberalised? Or is it headed for conflict and
protectionism? How can the celebrations of US steel-makers over price rises
after the imposition of duties on foreign competitors fail to contradict
aims of free trade in steel? How can this debate occur without reference to
the chronic oversupply of steel that underlies the present conflict?
US trade officials argue there is no contradiction. They say the
countervailing duties announced two weeks ago target past sins -
specifically EC subsidies to European steel makers. The MSA would set a
liberalising programme for the future.
EC officials insist this is disingenuous. The duties, which are expected to
be followed in January by a deluge of dumping actions intended to punish
exporters who allegedly sell at below cost, have come swiftly after the
expiry in April of import restraints that have protected the domestic US
steel industry for most of the past decade.
These restraints, agreed by US trading partners in the guise of 'voluntary'
restraint agreements under threat of anti-dumping and countervailing duty
suits, were imposed on EC member states in 1982 and the rest of the leading
exporting nations in 1984.
'Our impression is that the US is just trying to get rid of imports,' an EC
official said this week.
Some steel industry experts in the US would not disagree. As domestic US
manufacturers have celebrated price increases in recent weeks of up to 5.6
per cent, one producer boasted to the Wall Street Journal: 'It's going to
bode well for domestic steel. . . The foreign people are staying at home
right now.'
Such confidence may be premature, at least for traditional suppliers in
large integrated steel mills. Analysts say the future for the US industry
lies in the mini-mills - high-productivity, high-technology plants - such as
those created by Mr Ken Iverson of Nucor.
Nucor could be said to be the most successful US steel company of the past
two decades. It has pioneered the use of a cost-effective new steel-making
technology called thin-slab casting to become one of the world's lowest-cost
steel manufacturers.
Mr Christopher Plummer, a Pennsylvania consultant with RSI Metal Consulting,
said that in the long run US steel companies had more to fear from the
mini-mills than foreign competition: 'In less than 15 years mini-mills could
be controlling one-third of the US sheet market,' he predicted.
'Before 1988 there were no mini-mills involved in big structural products.
Foreign companies controlled over one-third of the market. Today mini-mills
are virtually dominating the production.'
Perhaps, then, the combined assault of countervailing duties and dumping
actions is intended to buy time for efficient mini-mills to replace
uncompetitive integrated steel mills. All that Mrs Carla Hills, US trade
representative, has said is that she hopes a multilateral steel agreement
would eliminate 'trade-distorting practices that have plagued this
industry'.
However, neither the Multilateral Steel Agreement talks nor the dumping and
subsidy cases are addressing the fundamental issue of overcapacity in the
world steel market.
'Even if demand were high and the industry was at something approaching full
capacity, there will still be downward price pressures,' says Mr Michael
Finger, a World Bank economist.
EC officials agree. While recession has aggravated problems, they see the
high fixed cost structure of the steel industry as forcing producers to
squeeze the last possible tonne of steel out of each plant: only those
plants with high utilisation rates stay profitable.
They nevertheless see problems in an MSA that fails to address the problem
of oversupply. In the EC, new steel capacity tends to be agreed only when
old plants are taken out of production to offset the new.
They are also concerned that if the US duties succeed in shutting out a
large proportion of the 10m tonnes of steel products currently imported
every year, then other countries (including EC member states) will suffer as
exporters target new markets for their output.
As a result, there are likely to be intense foreign pressures on the US to
agree new VRAs giving foreign producers at least limited access to the US
market.
The US steel companies insist they will not succumb to government pressure
to accept VRAs. But because they expect to have difficulty in proving that
imports have inflicted injury - a precondition for the US International
Trade Commission making the recently announced duties permanent - it is
thought they may have no alternative, as long as price floors are set.
All this provides a puzzling backdrop to renewed negotiations aimed at a
trade liberalising MSA. According to one industry lawyer, the US wants to
restart the MSA talks to impose discipline on subsidies in the steel
industry. Under the MSA, 95 per cent of all subsidies would be eliminated.
Waivers could be allowed for environmental purposes, research, worker
assistance and company closures. Last March the US agreed that those
subsidies would be permissible but actionable.
For the remainder of the 24 countries negotiating the MSA, it is the 'but
actionable' that causes concern: 'It is the US threat of unilateral action,
in the form of countervailing duties and dumping charges, that have brought
people to the table,' one negotiator said.
The next meeting on the MSA is pencilled in for February next year, when the
Clinton administration will still be polishing its buttons. Meanwhile, there
are 72 US dumping actions - expected on January 26 - to be contended with.
'Whether MSA talks resume or not, that looks from here like a declaration of
war,' an EC official said.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1651</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / World Trade News: Delay in telecoms directive sought
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By WILLIAM DAWKINS
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   PARIS
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
France will today ask its EC partners to delay applying a directive to
create open competition for public telecommunications equipment contracts
until European suppliers obtain better access to US and Japanese markets,
writes William Dawkins in Paris.
Mr Dominique Strauss-Kahn, industry and trade minister, said the government
had asked the British EC presidency to propose discussion of such a delay at
a meeting today of internal market ministers.
'We cannot open our markets if the countries to which we open do not behave
in a reciprocal way,' he said.
The directive, to take effect from January, will let foreign suppliers bid
on equal terms with Community producers for public telecommunications
equipment contracts.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1652</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / World Trade News: French to fight EC offer on farm trade
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By FRANCES WILLIAMS and REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   GENEVA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
FRANCE yesterday launched a fierce attack on key farm offers by the European
Community in the Uruguay Round of global trade talks, write Frances Williams
and Reuter in Geneva.
Mr Roland Dumas, foreign minister, said the detailed lists of tariffs on
agricultural products and a timetable for their introduction reflected the
recent 'totally unacceptable' EC-US accord.
Accusing the EC's agriculture and trade commissioners of 'disloyalty', he
said the list, submitted to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade,
which supervises the talks, was 'null and void'. The European Commission had
exceeded its negotiating mandate to stay within the bounds of planned EC
farm reforms.
Mr Dumas, who earlier met Mr Arthur Dunkel, Gatt director-general, said no
progress had been made in the Uruguay Round negotiations on non-agricultural
issues necessary to achieve a global and balanced accord. Farm negotiations
should not advance ahead of those on other baskets.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1653</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / World Trade News: Japan urged to open its rice market
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT THOMSON
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
MR Frans Andriessen, the EC external affairs commissioner, yesterday pressed
Japan's government to take a 'political' decision to open the country's rice
market, to ensure the success of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade
negotiations.
Japanese politicians have recently indicated willingness to be 'flexible',
but Mr Michio Watanabe, the foreign minister, yesterday told Mr Andriessen
he could not promise foreign rice would be allowed to enter the country.
'A negotiator should not commit himself unless he is sure that whatever he
promises can be delivered,' Mr Watanabe said. As he spoke, Japanese farmers
held their second day of protests in Tokyo, including a big rally and
another tractor drive through the city's streets.
Mr Andriessen encouraged Tokyo to accept the tarification of rice, replacing
the existing import ban with tariffs. Japanese officials estimate that an
initial tariff on rice is likely to be around 700 per cent, and will insist
that tariff reductions proceed more slowly than on other products.
Japanese officials said they were pleased the EC appeared ready to submit
extensive lists of industrial products and suggested tariff reductions.
Tokyo was angered earlier this year when both the EC and US missed deadlines
for the submission of these product-by-product lists, and there has been
concern that the Uruguay Round could falter on industrial, not agricultural,
issues.
The industrial products issue is of particular concern to Mr Watanabe, who
wrote strongly worded letters of criticism to the US and EC in April and
who, as a faction leader of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party, is likely
to play an important role in any 'political' decision on rice.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1654</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / World Trade News: Nafta to be signed as opponents start
campaign
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NANCY DUNNE
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   WASHINGTON
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
US OPPONENTS of the North American Free Trade Agreement, due to be signed in
Washington today, are about to launch an advertising campaign against it.
Critics of the US-Canada-Mexico deal say it is 'a wrecking ball' aimed at
the US economy and a potential environmental disaster.
The Mexican government wants Nafta passed as soon as possible: it expects a
current deficit of Dollars 20bn this year and sees it as essential to
attract foreign capital.
The Economic Strategy Institute in Washington yesterday recommended
far-reaching changes in the agreement. It wants US textile quotas from other
exporting nations shifted to Mexico in order to prevent job losses in the US
industry.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1655</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / World Trade News: Bank deal aims to lift E Europe trade
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOHN LLOYD
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MOSCOW
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
AN agreement aimed at restoring trade between Russia and east European
states through rapid settling of accounts between their main commercial
banks was signed in Moscow yesterday.
It also marks an attempt to begin their integration into the European
banking system by using the Ecu as the basic unit of account.
Trade between these states, former members of the Comecon trading system,
has largely been conducted by barter in the past two years since the
break-up of the Communist bloc. The volume of trade has plunged to a
fraction of former levels.
Mr Dominique Rambure, a director of the Italian San Paolo Bank and honorary
chairman of the Ecu Banking Association, said yesterday the agreement would
allow the participating commercial banks to clear accounts with each other
within 24 hours. A line of credit would be opened by the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development which would guarantee all banks against
default.
The participating banks are the Russian Foreign Trade Bank, the IBEC Bank
and the International Moscow Bank in Russia; the Bank Handlowy and
Powszechny Bank Kredytowy in Poland; the Komercni and Investicni banks in
Czechoslovakia; the Inter Europa Bank in Hungary; and the Private Bank and
the Bulgarian Post Bank in Bulgaria. All will be linked through the Swift
communications system.
'This will allow these countries to rebuild their payments and trade
relationships which have collapsed. It will give them quick and secure
payment and it will connect them with the European clearing system,' said Mr
Rambure.
The drop in trade between Russia and her former partners was one of the
sharpest on record - around 60 per cent in Russian exports and imports last
year. A further decline in trade has been forecast for this year.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1656</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / World Trade News: E Europeans say west does not understand
local conditions
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW JACK
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
EAST EUROPEANS in joint ventures believe their western partners do not
understand local conditions and lack financial means, a survey by
accountants Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu has shown, writes Andrew Jack. Analysis
of more than 168 joint ventures in six countries reveals considerable
differences in perceptions between western and eastern partners, and between
headquarters and local staff.
Nearly two-thirds of western managers based in eastern Europe would not
recommend joint ventures to new investors, while all of their headquarters'
managers still would.
Eastern partners believed their counterparts had too high and too short-term
expectations for profit. More than a third of western partners admitted
their decision to invest in the east was based on unrealistic expectations.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1657</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Suspect in Carrian affair held in HK
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By SIMON HOLBERTON
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   HONG KONG
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE Hong Kong government yesterday inched closer to a resolution of the 1983
Carrian property scandal when officers of the Independent Commission Against
Corruption last night arrested a key sus-pect on his arrival in the colony.
Mr Lorrain Osman, former chairman of Bumiputra Malaysia Finance Corporation
(BMFC), was extradited to Hong Kong after his 10th appeal was overturned by
the House of Lords on Tuesday - ending his seven year attempt to avoid
trial.
In court today he will face 39 charges of conspiracy to defraud, conspiracy
to steal, theft and false accounting. These charges are in connection with
HKDollars 6bn of loans made to Carrian by BMFC. Carrian was placed in
liquidation in October 1983 with debts of more than HKDollars 10bn.
Mr Osman has used his considerable personal financial resources to avoid
extradition. He had been on remand in a London prison since December 1985 -
making him the longest serving prisoner on remand in British legal history.
His legal representative in Hong Kong said yesterday that Mr Osman feared
for his life. There have been two deaths associated with the Carrian scandal
since it broke in 1983 and the ICAC plans to offer him protective custody.
A Malaysian government inspector sent to investigate the affairs of BMFC was
murdered and his body dumped in a banana grove; in an apparent suicide a
solicitor connected with Carrian was found at the bottom of his swimming
pool with a manhole cover tied to his neck.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1658</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAA9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Japan to slow banks' stock market move
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT THOMSON
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE Japanese government is likely to slow the planned entry of banks into
the securities industry in an attempt to give the country's ailing
brokerages a chance to recover from the Tokyo market collapse.
Negotiations continued last night among Finance Ministry officials on the
details of a reform package to be announced today or tomorrow, but it is
expected that banks will be restricted to the sale and underwriting of
bonds.
The government originally intended that the reforms, due to be introduced
from next April, would allow the banks, through new securities subsidiaries,
to underwrite stocks and play a gradually larger role in stock trading.
However, strong lobbying by brokers, most of which reported large losses in
the first half to September, and by friendly politicians in the ruling
Liberal Democratic party has forced the ministry to slow the reform
programme.
In return for banks' entry into the bond market, Japanese securities houses,
through subsidiaries, are likely to be allowed to enter trust banking and be
given more freedom in dealing in currency products.
Finance Ministry officials insist that they have not abandoned the principle
of deregulation, but that the difficult circumstances in the broking
industry have forced a review of financial reforms.
The slowing of the reform programme could draw criticism from the US and EC,
which have encouraged Japan to remove the barriers between the banking and
securities industry and to provide greater freedom for foreign institutions.
Mr Sakae Kudo, chairman of the Japan Securities Dealers' Association, said
yesterday the securities markets were already too competitive, and reforms
should be delayed until the stock market improved, giving brokers a better
chance of succeeding in new banking businesses.
Allowing banks to enter bond-related business will provide more competition
for the larger Japanese brokers, but will have a limited impact on smaller
brokers, which are heavily reliant on stock commissions for their income.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1659</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAA8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Defence spending likely to be cut
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHARLES LEADBEATER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE Japanese government is close to agreeing the first cut in defence
spending since the second world war, as part of the budget for next year,
which should be finalised within 10 days.
After weeks of intense negotiations a cabinet meeting tomorrow is likely to
approve a cut of about Y600bn (Pounds 3.17bn) in a defence budget of about
Y22,750bn. The cut is a triumph for the powerful Finance Ministry, which
wants to reduce defence expenditure, in order to stimulate the economy by
increasing investment in public works. The budget plan will be unveiled on
December 26. The final negotiations over its contents are taking place this
week.
The cut in spending marks an abrupt change in Japanese policy in the wake of
the cold war and reduced defence expenditure in the US and Europe. During
most of the 1960s and 1970s Japanese defence spending rose by more than 10
per cent a year. In the past decade it has risen by about 5 per cent a year.
The Finance Ministry argues the cuts are justified by the end of the cold
war and a need to reduce expenditure to make up for a sharp fall in tax
revenues brought on by the economic downturn. Public works spending is
likely to rise by about 5 per cent, forming the centre-piece of an attempt
to prevent the economy falling into outright recession.
The defence agency has maintained that the rapid build-up in arms
expenditure in the rest of Asia, particularly in South and North Korea and
China, justifies continued increases in expenditure.
It is likely that overall public spending will rise only marginally, because
the Finance Ministry opposes increased borrowing as a means of financing tax
cuts or higher public spending. Social security and education expenditure
are also likely to be curtailed.
However, spending through the so-called second budget - the Fiscal
Investment and Loan Programme - which is funded by savings deposited through
the postal system, will rise by about 10 per cent.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1660</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAA6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / US-led forces reach Somalia's starving: Julian Ozanne
watches as soldiers accompany food convoys deep into the interior of the
country
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JULIAN OZANNE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
US AND French soldiers yesterday rolled into Baidoa, a lawless central
Somali town at the centre of the starvation zone, and immediately started
escorting food convoys and relief workers battling hunger and disease.
It was the first big thrust by the US-led multinational force into the
hunger-ridden interior since last week's landing in the capital Mogadishu.
An 80 vehicle column of all-terrain vehicles, trucks, armoured personnel
carriers and earth diggers carrying 520 US marines and 142 French
paratroopers arrived in the town at dawn after a slow 18-hour drive along a
rugged bush highway from Mogadishu.
The convoy waited for sunrise before entering the town where up to 90 people
are dying daily from starvation and wild shootings. An American flag
fluttered from the gun mount of an armoured personnel carrier (APC) near the
front of the column as fighter jets swooped across the town.
Cobra and Huey helicopter gunships flew overhead looking for signs of
resistance. So-called 'technicals' - rugged armoured Somali battle wagons -
and gunmen melted from the streets and rubble-strewn alleys.
Curious Somalis emerged from their ramshackle houses of sticks and
corrugated iron and lined the dusty streets waving, smiling and cheering the
foreign troops they hope will deliver them from violent anarchy and looting
which have destroyed their lives and their country.
The marines, dressed in desert camouflage, flak jackets and heavy helmets,
waved back and displayed miniature blue and white starred Somali flags
intertwined with the Stars and Stripes.
The convoy wound its way around the town to the disused airbase, jostling in
the potholed narrow streets with camels, cows and donkey-carts carrying
water drums and sacks of looted wheat in bags marked 'USA' in red, white and
blue. Several cars belonging to journalists, which tried to slip into the
convoy, were rammed by the heavy armoured jeeps trying to stay in formation.
Some French foreign legionnaires, wanted somewhere for unknown offences,
covered their faces with handkerchiefs from the television cameras.
At the airfield, seized by an advance marine team late on Tuesday night, 90
gunmen stood in formation on the apron, surrendered their weapons and handed
the airport over to the force. Marines secured the guns in an abandoned
warehouse and began gathering up Soviet-made missiles, rockets and thousands
of rounds of 30mm anti-aircraft shells lying in the overgrown fields along
the tarmac.
Within 45 minutes seven CH53 transport helicopters, carrying a rifle company
of 170 marines, landed on the runway. The marines took up defensive
positions in the arid scrub land, and within an hour had set up a
camouflaged communications operation and were allowing aid planes carrying
food to land.
Later in the afternoon French and US soldiers escorted a small convoy of
food through the town to an orphanage. The soldiers handed out high-protein
biscuits to 400 orphans.
Aid supremos, like Mr Bill Garvelink of the US office of Disaster Assistant,
flew into the town throughout the day to urgently prepare aid master plans
to reach an estimated 300,000 to 400,000 Somalis in the region.
Assessment missions of nutritionists and doctors were preparing to make
their first trip out of the town for months into the surrounding villages
where they fear they will find a hidden tragedy. Deserted villages and
thousands of graves surrounding the town bear out a recent US report which
said 71 per cent of children under five years old in the area are already
dead.
Aid workers in Baidoa, who have been victims of an aggressive protection
racket, looting and violence, were ecstatic. 'A tremendous sandbag has been
lifted off our shoulders,' said Ms Josie Clevenger, project co-ordinator of
International Medical Corps, a Los Angeles-based charity. 'There is the
sense of relief that at last the violence is over and that now, together
with the military, we can do our job of saving lives.'
The US marines came face to face with the starving people and squalid
conditions of Somalia's devastated interior. 'I didn't think is was going to
be so bad, so dirty, so poor here,' said Captain Bob Castelli, bent over
some maps on the bonnet of a Humvee. 'You can tell people are hurting bad
here and they are much more hungry than in Mogadishu. It's good that we got
here to get the relief supplies moving and get some order in the town.'
Children in rags followed marines around the town on their first foot patrol
and treated them throughout the day like pied pipers. trying to sell the
soldiers cigarettes and mangoes. The patrol passed teenagers and former
gunmen clustered in groups on street corners who have hidden their weapons
but still wear their trademark T-shirts printed with gangland-style phrases
like 'I am the Boss' and 'Here comes the Mafia.'
American troops, briefed to win the hearts and minds of the people, struck
up conversations with Somali teenagers, most of whom were only interested in
asking questions about the sophisticated weaponry of the US army and the
'first world technicals' - the Humvees which are armed with mounted
anti-tank cannons.
Somalis generally welcomed the foreign soldiers. A hasty banner, thrown
across one wall and spelling slightly awry, said: 'We are happy for the
intervention.'
But many also warned about foreign forces trying to disarm gunmen and stamp
out the trade in qat - a narcotic stimulant grown in Kenya but widely used
throughout Somalia. 'If the US soldiers are here to help with relief and
restore order we are very happy,' said Mr Mohamed Arto, a local trader. 'But
if they try to take away our guns and stop the qat coming into the country
they will end up in serious trouble. This is our country and our culture.
They can do anything but attack that.'
In a meeting with aid workers US and French officers said they would not try
to disarm battling clan-based factions outside of secured military zones
unless they threatened either the forces or relief efforts. But they warned
that any 'technical' driving around the streets would be considered as
hostile.
US military officials said the next step of 'Operation Restore Hope' would
be to take control of the unruly southern port city of Kismayo in an
amphibious landing within the next five days.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1661</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAA5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Defence spending likely to be cut
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHARLES LEADBEATER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE Japanese government is close to agreeing the first cut in defence
spending since the second world war, as part of the budget for next year,
which should be finalised within 10 days.
After weeks of intense negotiations a cabinet meeting tomorrow is likely to
approve a cut of about Y600bn (Pounds 3.17bn) in a defence budget of about
Y22,750bn. The cut is a triumph for the powerful Finance Ministry, which
wants to reduce defence expenditure, in order to stimulate the economy by
increasing investment in public works. The budget plan will be unveiled on
December 26. The final negotiations over its contents are taking place this
week.
The cut in spending marks an abrupt change in Japanese policy in the wake of
the cold war and reduced defence expenditure in the US and Europe. During
most of the 1960s and 1970s Japanese defence spending rose by more than 10
per cent a year. In the past decade it has risen by about 5 per cent a year.
The Finance Ministry argues the cuts are justified by the end of the cold
war and a need to reduce expenditure to make up for a sharp fall in tax
revenues brought on by the economic downturn. Public works spending is
likely to rise by about 5 per cent, forming the centre-piece of an attempt
to prevent the economy falling into outright recession.
The defence agency has maintained that the rapid build-up in arms
expenditure in the rest of Asia, particularly in South and North Korea and
China, justifies continued increases in expenditure. Partly to compensate
for the overall cut in the budget, the defence forces are likely to be given
Y140bn to buy two Awacs early warning aircraft from the US.
It is likely that overall public spending will rise only marginally, because
the Finance Ministry opposes increased borrowing as a means of financing tax
cuts or higher public spending. Social security and education expenditure
are also likely to be curtailed.
However, spending through the so-called second budget - the Fiscal
Investment and Loan Programme - which is funded by savings deposited through
the postal system, will rise by about 10 per cent.
The government is expected to reintroduce tax incentives, withdrawn in 1988,
aimed at stimulating the depressed property market. Increases in indirect
taxes on liquor and cigarettes are unlikely in the light of stiff opposition
from retailers, badly hit by the slump in consumer spending.
It seems increasingly likely, though, that the government will consider
cutting taxes next year.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1662</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAA4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Somali clan gunmen kill 10
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BAIDOA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Somali clan gunmen killed 10 people and wounded 10 others at a feeding
centre for the starving in the southern town of Bardere, an aid worker said
yesterday, Reuter reports from Baidoa.
Unidentified armed men attacked the feeding centre on Monday after they
found no food to plunder from relief stores and became angry. 'Some food
warehouses were attacked. When they found nothing they got angry and went on
this wanton rampage,' said Mr James Fennell of the international agency
Care.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1663</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAA3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Yeltsin pins export hopes on China visit
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By Our Foreign Staff
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin of Russia today begins a three-day visit to China
which will underline the two countries' mutual need for good relations
despite the different paths they are taking away from communist ideology.
Mr Yeltsin hopes to win some 20 agreements on industrial and technical
co-operation and trade. Trade is growing and is expected to approach Dollars
5bn this year, of which arms sales to Beijing are a significant component.
His visit is the first by a top Moscow official since Mr Mikhail Gorbachev
received a hero's welcome from pro-democracy demonstrators in Beijing in
1989.
Russia, which has suffered a sharp contraction of export markets, sees
Chinese demand for arms as a way of keeping defence industries going and
retaining jobs. This year, it has sold 24 Su27 high performance fighter
planes, missile guidance technology, rocket engines and MiG-31 interceptors
to Beijing, causing consternation among China's Asian neighbours.
A diplomat in Beijing said: 'The Chinese need to replace just about every
bit of military equipment they've got and Russia is the only country that
will sell it to them.'
China's communist leaders are adopting a pragmatic approach, wooing the new
states of the former Soviet empire and at the same time denouncing the
betrayers of communism.
Mr Igor Rogachev, Russian ambassador to China, said that as nuclear powers
and permanent members of the UN Security Council, the two countries were
important influences on global and Asia-Pacific peace and stability.
Mr Yeltsin is due to meet Chinese premier Li Peng and Jiang Zemin, Communist
Party general secretary.
Asked yesterday why authoritarian China was more successful in its economic
reforms than democratising Russia, Mr Yeltsin said: 'China has been
reforming for 14 years - we started only less than a year ago.' The brusque
reply disguises the fact that many Russian industrialists admire the Chinese
path: Mr Arkady Volsky, the industrialists' leader, has talked warmly of the
Chinese model, while insisting he does not wish to copy its adherence to
communism.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1664</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAA2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Opposition gives Keating's Labor a leg up in the polls:
Conservative reform manifesto played into economically beleaguered
Australian government's hands
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN BROWN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A YEAR after Mr Paul Keating moved into the prime minister's office,
Australia's Labor government should be in its death throes.
Unemployment is at a post-war record of 11.4 per cent, economic growth is
sluggish, and the country is being swept by a wave of politically inspired
industrial unrest.
Yet far from slipping towards inevitable defeat in a general election due
before June next year, the government's popularity has surged in recent
opinion polls, putting Labor within reach of an historic fifth consecutive
victory.
Suddenly, Mr John Hewson, leader of the conservative Liberal/National party
coalition, is facing the prospect of defeat in an election that looked
unloseable a few months ago.
Paradoxically, the roots of the government revival lie in the release in
November 1991 of the opposition's Fightback programme for government  - a
detailed manifesto commitment to wide-ranging economic and social reform.
The proposed mix of labour market deregulation, tariff reductions and tax
reform was carefully designed to present a coherent programme building on
Labor's own reforms since 1983.
The centrepiece was a switch to taxing consumption rather than production by
replacing six taxes, including payroll tax and wholesale sales tax, with a
15 per cent goods and services tax (GST).
At first, Fightback was a success. Mr Bob Hawke, the then prime minister,
appeared confused by the detailed opposition proposals and the government
seemed unable to identify a convincing weak spot.
Fightback helped trigger a Labor leadership battle in December last year
which led to the replacement of Mr Hawke by Mr Keating, a former treasurer
(finance minister), who had languished on the back benches for six months
after failing in an earlier challenge.
Since then, Mr Hewson has been outmanoeuvred by Mr Keating, who has cleverly
focused debate on the alleged inequities of the proposed GST, assisted by
criticism from religious and social welfare groups.
At the same time, Mr Keating has diverted the attention of voters away from
pressing economic problems through uninhibited use of the government's
ability to manage the news.
This technique has been used to prompt anguished debate on emotional issues
such as the abolition of the monarchy, sex on television, the removal of
British symbols from the Australian flag, and exploitation of Aborigines.
The federal government has also been helped by conservative election
victories in Tasmania and Victoria, where conservative governments are
implementing radical changes in labour law.
The reforms have provoked widespread industrial action, in particular in
Victoria, and appear to have caused a backlash against the more restrained
labour market changes proposed by the federal opposition.
However, Labor strategists are well aware that the polls may be misleading.
A federal election is more like a series of regional elections than a
national poll, and Labor is vulnerable to local problems in some states.
The government has hopes of picking up three or four seats in the eastern
seaboard states, and may win two or three seats in Victoria if the
anti-conservative backlash there continues.
But Labor is defending four marginal seats in Western Australia, where its
prospects could be damaged by the impending trial of a former premier and a
difficult state election in February.
In South Australia, up to five marginal Labor seats could be in danger
because of the unpopularity of the state Labor government and changes in
electoral boundaries.
Mr Keating implicitly acknowledged these problems last month by ruling out
an election before Christmas.
On the face of it, delay looks like a dangerous strategy against a
background of economic growth of about 2.1 per cent a year, compared with a
required rate of about 4 per cent if unemployment is to be significantly
reduced.
But if the polls are right, the electoral impact of slow growth and
continued high unemployment may be diminishing, perhaps because of
'compassion fatigue' among the 89 per cent of voters who are in work.
If the trend continues, Mr Keating may be tempted to plump for a quick
election, possibly as early as mid-February. Labor's pollsters and
advertising advisers were called in last week to advise the prime minister
on timing.
Mr Hewson is expected to try to recapture the initiative tomorrow by
announcing modifications to Fightback, including exempting food from the GST
and postponing cuts in unemployment benefits.
Surveys suggest that such changes would weaken opposition to Fightback and
make it more difficult for the government to continue to divert attention
from the failures of its economic policies.
Nevertheless, Mr Keating has shown that it is too early to write off the
government. Labor may not win the election, but it no longer fears a
landslide defeat. That is more than many Labor MPs expected when the prime
minister took office a year ago.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1665</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAA0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Israel to bail out IMI
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HUGH CARNEGY
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   JERUSALEM
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE ISRAELI government yesterday agreed to bail out the financially stricken
Israel Military Industries in an attempt to keep afloat one of the mainstays
of the country's big state-owned defence industry, which has been hard hit
by falling world demand for military products.
The cabinet voted to back a recovery plan for IMI - best known as the maker
of the Uzi sub-machine gun - which includes an injection of Shk750m (Pounds
190m) in government funds and a 2,500 cut in the present 7,500-strong
workforce. Previously, the government had pumped Shk250m into IMI to staunch
losses which approached Dollars 250m (Pounds 164m) last year on sales which
fell 20 per cent to Dollars 520m.
Aside from IMI, the government is also being asked by Israel Aircraft
Industries, the country's biggest company, for more than Dollars 150m in
emergency aid to help it cope with falling sales.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1666</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAAZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / UN soldiers captured in Cambodia
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By VICTOR MALLET
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BANGKOK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
KHMER ROUGE guerrillas have seized 21 United Nations peacekeepers in central
Cambodia in the second such incident this month, the UN Transitional
Authority in Cambodia said last night.
'We don't think they are in any kind of danger and we're confident they will
be released shortly,' Mr Eric Falt, the Untac spokesman, said in the
capital, Phnom Penh.
The captives, still held last night in Kompong Thom province, include 15
Indonesian soldiers, four military observers - from the US, China, France
and Senegal - and two Cambodian interpreters.
On December 1, a Khmer Rouge guerrilla unit in the same province held six
military observers for three days after they penetrated Khmer Rouge
territory by driving up a river in inflatable boats. They were released
unharmed.
The Khmer Rouge was one of four Cambodian factions to sign a peace accord in
Paris last year which paved the way for the UN's Dollars 2bn (Pounds 1.3bn)
peacekeeping operation, but it has repeatedly flouted the accord.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1667</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAAYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Brazil economy minister Krause resigns office
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTINA LAMB
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   RIO DE JANEIRO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
BRAZIL'S economy minister, Mr Gustavo Krause, resigned yesterday. This first
big upset to the government of President Itamar Franco heightened the
country's economic instability and provoked fears of a return to state
interventionist policy.
Mr Krause, whose job was taken over by Planning Minister Paulo Haddad,
decided to quit after Tuesday night's presidential decree suspending the
privatisation programme for three months - a decision Mr Franco took in a
meeting attended by none of the economic team.
The third economy minister in two years, Mr Krause was criticised for
lacking experience and he survived only two months. His departure had been
predicted since Mr Franco rejected a document outlining government economic
strategy prepared by Mr Krause and Mr Haddad. The president criticised their
insistence on maintaining high real interest rates to contain inflation -
now 25 per cent a month.
The departure of Mr Krause and the suspension of privatisation suggests that
those within the government favouring free-market policies are losing out,
and is heightening fears of a return to more a state interventionist policy
and abandonment of the modernisation programme.
However, at a news conference in Braslia, Mr Haddad said the government
remained committed to free market reforms and rejected any plans to control
prices or wages. But Mr Fernando Gentil, president of ING Bank, described
the resignation as 'at the very least a detour in Brazil's path towards
modernisation.'
Yesterday the central bank had to intervene heavily to contain a rush on
dollars and gold and the price of Brazilian debt on the secondary market
fell to just 25.5 cents in the dollar - the lowest in Latin America except
for Peru.
Although Mr Franco has reiterated his commitment to privatisation and issued
a new timetable of sales, investors fear the suspension shows his true
colours.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1668</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAAXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Christopher top candidate for secretary of state
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JUREK MARTIN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   WASHINGTON
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
WITH his economic 'summit' out of the way, President-elect Bill Clinton is
expected to announce further cabinet appointments as early as today.
Mr Warren Christopher is considered the most likely choice as secretary of
state, while Mr Les Aspin, the Wisconsin congressman, is now rated the
front-runner for the defence post.
It is becoming increasingly obvious Mr Clinton himself is making the
selections, using his own network of contacts and relying on one-on-one
interviews, rather than following the recommendations of his transition
team.
The choice of Mr Christopher to run foreign policy would be no surprise,
given his closeness to the president-elect and his experience as deputy
secretary of state in the Carter administration. His expertise in the Middle
East, sharpened by his leading diplomatic role in trying to free the US
hostages from Iran, is of obvious value.
Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey had also appeared to be a viable
candidate for the position. General Colin Powell, chairman of the joint
chiefs of staff, reportedly hit it off with Mr Clinton when they met last
month, but has said he is happy to stay in the military. His term in his
present position expires next September.
Inside the White House, Mr Anthony Lake, now a university professor but
another long-time Clinton adviser and State Department veteran under Mr
Carter, is said to have the inside track for national security adviser.
Mr Aspin is a reigning congressional defence expert. Like Mr Clinton, he
went to Oxford and opposed the Vietnam war but is more conservative than
many Democrats over cutting the defence budget.
Mr Mike Espy, the black congressman from Mississippi, now apparently leads
the field to become secretary of agriculture. Mr Henry Cisneros, former
mayor of San Antonio, has let it be known he will not compete for the Texas
Senate seat vacated by Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the Treasury secretary-designate,
presumably on the grounds that he is assured of the housing portfolio.
Mr Tim Wirth, outgoing senator from Colorado, is still considered the
likeliest energy secretary, with former Governor Bruce Babbitt of Arizona
said to be in line for the interior job.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1669</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAAWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Sluggish recovery in US economy
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By AP-DJ
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   WASHINGTON
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Moderate increases in industrial production and housing starts, and a
decline in building permits, yesterday offered further evidence of a
sluggish recovery of the US economy, AP-DJ reports from Washington.
Broad-based gains pushed industrial production up a seasonally adjusted 0.4
per cent in November, following a revised 0.5 per cent increase in October,
the Federal Reserve said.
The Commerce Department reported that housing starts rose by 1.5 per cent to
a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 1.242m units in November. Building
permits fell by 1.5 per cent to a seasonally adjusted rate of 1.122m units.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1670</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAAVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Big deal at Little Rock: Economic summit solved no problems
but it was a tour de force by Clinton
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL PROWSE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE two-day economic 'summit' in Little Rock that many feared would be a
public relations disaster was a personal triumph for Mr Clinton.
In 19 hours of televised debate he demonstrated his mastery of an
extraordinary range of complex issues; indeed, as the tireless moderator, he
seemed to have a better grasp of the minutiae of most topics than many of
the invited experts.
As one participant put it, Mr Clinton combined 'the leadership qualities of
the class president with the expertise of the class nerd'. He also showed a
keen wit. When Mr Robert Kuttner, an economics columnist for New Republic
Magazine, lapsed into almost obsequious praise, describing the conference as
'magical' - the 'defining moment' of his presidency, Mr Clinton shot back:
'I hope it is not all downhill from here.'
However, Mr Clinton's economic teach-in did not resolve any of the economic
problems facing his administration. It ended, as it began, with the
president-elect committed to two potentially incompatible goals: a
substantial increase in investment spending and a big reduction in the
long-term budget deficit.
His analytical capacity and communication skills are certainly no guarantee
of good policies. But after a series of intellectually unimpressive
presidents, his abilities should not be underestimated.
Americans yearn for presidential leadership, and a president's ability to
get things done on Capitol Hill depends in large measure on the public
esteem he commands and his ability to forge a consensus on policy
priorities. The positive media coverage of the conference will enhance his
authority in economic negotiations with Congress.
Mr Clinton, and Vice President-elect Al Gore, may also be beginning to
change the public mood. President George Bush lost the election in part
because people felt a sense of helplessness about the future: after four
years of stagnation the American dream of ever rising prosperity seemed in
doubt.
Mr Clinton's ability to discuss deep-seated problems, calmly, candidly and
without an obvious ideological bias seemed to reassure delegates and
phone-in participants alike. It suggests he will head a 'problem-solving'
administration.
The quality of debate was enhanced by the diversity of participants.
Businesses of all sizes were strongly represented: indeed their
contributions seemed greatly to exceed those from the unions or overt
left-wingers. And some of the most interesting points were made by
successful female executives.
Mr Clinton, for example, seemed bowled over by Ms Sheryl Handler, president
of Thinking Machines Corp of Massachusetts, who argued that federal
government, as the economy's biggest purchaser, should use its market power
creatively.
Instead of always seeking the lowest bid, she said, government should become
a 'smart customer', demanding greater inventiveness as well as cost
efficiency in its suppliers. It should become an active force promoting
higher standards and aspirations in the private sector.
The scope of the conference, moreover, demonstrated Mr Clinton's broad
vision of economics. This was not a narrow discussion of fiscal and monetary
policy but a broad debate encompassing education and training, health care,
urban poverty, the role of government, the environment and technology
policy.
In nearly all sessions, Mr Clinton ensured the focus remained firmly on
long-term challenges. The 20-year 'conversation about America' he has held
with close friends has now become a national affair.
For hours on end, Mr Clinton wrestled publicly with what he described as his
administration's most important economic decision: the relative weight to
place on deficit reduction on the one hand and higher investment in
education, training and infrastructure on the other. At one point, he
suggested that resources raised from tax increases and spending cuts should
be evenly split between them. This was roughly the solution he advocated in
his campaign plan 'Putting People First'.
At the closing news conference, Mr Clinton said he had not yet decided
whether a fiscal stimulus was needed next year - it would depend on how the
economic data looked next month. But in what amounted to hours of economic
testimony, he seemed doubtful of the merits of a traditional stimulus. He
wants to get on with tackling long-term challenges, such as reforming the
health care system.
The heart of the economic plan to be unveiled next month is likely to be a
controversial attempt to switch the emphasis of federal spending from
consumption to investment. But if this is to be consistent with the deficit
reduction Mr Clinton also promises, it will require either quite substantial
tax increases or a swingeing attack on current government spending,
including sharp curbs on entitlement programmes such as health care and
pensions.
Mr Clinton has the intelligence to design a programme; the question is
whether he has the toughness to push the unpopular elements through
Congress.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1671</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAAUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Argentina close to finance for debt deal
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By STEPHEN FIDLER, Latin America Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ARGENTINA looks set this week to secure the necessary financing to back its
Dollars 31bn (Pounds 20.3bn) bank debt reduction agreement now being signed
by commercial bank creditors.
The agreement requires Dollars 3.2bn of finance to be provided for
guarantees, or 'enhancements', for the concessionary bonds which banks will
exchange for their old loans.
Yesterday, the board of the InterAmerican Development Bank agreed a Dollars
350m loan to encourage reform of the Argentine investment sector, Dollars
75m of which will go toward enhancements. The board is expected to agree
another Dollars 400m loan on Friday to finance enhancements.
In addition to Dollars 742m of Argentina's own resources, the International
Monetary Fund is expected to provide Dollars 945m, the World Bank Dollars
745m and the Japanese ExIm Bank Dollars 800m for enhancements.
The Dollars 400m loan will be the first loan by a multilateral bank entirely
used to back a debt reduction deal, and will take new IADB credits to
Argentina to over Dollars 1bn, making Argentina the largest recipient of new
IADB commitments in 1992.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1672</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAATFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Industrial protests increase in Poland
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTOPHER BOBINSKI
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   WARSAW
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
INDUSTRIAL PROTEST grew in Poland yesterday as more than half the country's
coal miners went on strike and railway workers in Silesia, the country's
industrial heartland, threatened to disrupt transport of freight, writes
Christopher Bobinski in Warsaw.
Steel unions meet today to consider whether to join the protests, which aim
to force the government to address the region's industrial restructuring
needs. The strikers, led by Solidarity and supported by other local unions,
are demanding that energy price rises this year and next be fully
compensated with wage increases.
The region accounts for 70 per cent of Poland's rail freight traffic and
strike leaders see selected stoppages as a means of putting pressure on the
government. But pithead coal stocks and power station reserves are high,
giving the government a temporary advantage.
It has yet to respond to the strikers' demands, Solidarity said yesterday.
The strikes started on Monday with a two-hour national token stoppage by
Solidarity in support of the wage rises. By yesterday afternoon 45 of
Poland's 70 coal mines had stopped, as the stoppages spread spontaneously.
Coal miners won significant pay increases after intermittent strikes in the
summer and their wages this year have risen in real terms by 2 per cent
against a 5 per cent real incomes drop throughout manufacturing industry.
Forecasts see real wages staying at this year's levels in 1993.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1673</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAASFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Albania knocks on Nato's door
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BRUSSELS
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Albania, warning that war will spread through the Balkans, applied yesterday
to join Nato, but got only a lukewarm response, Reuter reports from
Brussels.
Nato secretary-general Manfred Worner said Albania's application would be
considered 'in due course'.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1674</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAARFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Portugal lifts capital controls
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By AP
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   LISBON
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
The Bank of Portugal yesterday announced it was immediately lifting
restrictions on capital movements, two weeks ahead of schedule, AP reports
from Lisbon.
The lifting of controls allows foreigners to operate in Portugal's
short-term money market and enables domestic banks to lend escudos to
non-residents, said Mr Vasco Pereira, director of the central bank's foreign
department.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1675</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAAOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / West split on using force in Bosnia
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT MAUTHNER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   GENEVA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE US yesterday called for 'more aggressive measures' by the international
community against the Bosnian Serbs, but other countries opposed military
intervention in the Bosnian conflict.
In Paris, a French junior foreign minister, Mr Georges Kiejman, said the US
was proposing pre-emptive bombing of Serb targets in an effort to halt the
slaughter of Bosnian Moslems, but France and Britain opposed such a move.
They backed interception and, if necessary, destruction of Serb aircraft
violating the UN Security Council's ban on flights over Bosnia. Mr Douglas
Hurd, UK foreign secretary, did not deny such measures were being discussed
at the UN and elsewhere, but stressed no agreement had yet been reached.
Mr Pierre Beregovoy, French prime minister, said yesterday he backed the use
of force if necessary but it was vital the EC and UN continued to act
together. He told parliament: 'The French government does not rule out any
solution to bring the massacres to an end.'
Mr Lawrence Eagleburger, secretary of state in the outgoing US
administration, addressing the 29-nation conference on the former Yugoslavia
in Geneva, made no mention of a pre-emptive bombing proposal. But he
specifically referred to the US and other governments' recommendation that
the Security Council authorise enforcement of the 'no-fly' zone in Bosnia
and re-examine the arms embargo against Bosnia-Hercegovina.
He said it was essentially the Serbs who had broken the promises made at
last August's London conference on the former Yugoslavia, which included
commitments to ensure unimpeded delivery of humanitarian aid, to lift the
siege of cities, to halt all military flights over Bosnia, to place all
heavy weapons under UN monitoring and to shut down all detention camps.
'It is clear the reckless leaders of Serbia, and of the Serbs inside Bosnia,
have convinced themselves the international community will not stand up to
them and will be forced eventually to recognise the fruits of their
aggression.'
Mr Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen, the co-chairmen of the Geneva peace conference
on the former Yugoslavia, counselled caution on military measures to enforce
the ban on flights and came out firmly against a lifting of the arms embargo
in favour of the Bosnian Moslems.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1676</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAANFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Craxi's political fate to be decided today
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT GRAHAM
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   ROME
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE political fate of Mr Bettino Craxi, the Italian Socialist leader, is
expected to be decided today at a meeting of the party's executive called to
consider the implications of his alleged involvement in the Milan corruption
scandal.
Mr Craxi was served notice on Monday he was under investigation by Milan
magistrates for alleged corruption and illegal financing of the Socialist
Party. He has declared his innocence in combative tone, but a growing body
of the party feels his leadership is deeply compromised.
The main problem the executive faces is the choice of successor. Prof
Giuliano Amato, prime minister, is understood to be reluctant to accept, as
this would probably oblige him to leave office and so force a change of
government. Other candidates like Mr Claudio Martelli, the justice minister,
do not have sufficient support.
If Mr Craxi resigns, the party might opt for an interim leadership.
Uncertainties surrounding the future of the Socialists, key members of the
four-party government coalition, helped push the lira down further
yesterday. It was being traded at L901-L902 against the D-Mark.
The Italian Bankers Association backed a half-point cut in lending rates by
the end of the month, after government criticism of the high rates charged
to industry.
Doctors and medical staff yesterday staged a one-day strike, closing all but
emergency health services in protest at government plans for a radical
shake-up of the system.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1677</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAAMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / US wants war crime trials
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By FRANCES WILLIAMS and LAURA SILBER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   GENEVA, BELGRADE
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
MR Lawrence Eagleburger, US secretary of state, said yesterday Serbian
political and military leaders should be tried for war crimes in Bosnia and
Croatia.
He said Mr Slobodan Milosevic, the Serbian president, Mr Radovan Karadzic,
the Bosnian Serb leader, and General Ratho Mladic, the Bosnian Serb military
commander, would have to answer for crimes against humanity committed by
forces for which they were responsible. 'A second Nuremberg' awaited the
practitioners of ethnic cleansing, he said.
'They ought, if charged, to have the opportunity of defending themselves by
demonstrating whether and how they took responsible action to prevent and
punish the atrocities,' Mr Eagleburger said.
Addressing foreign ministers at a special meeting of the international peace
conference on former Yugoslavia in Geneva, Mr Eagleburger said the US was
supplying details of war crimes, including the names of the individuals who
committed them and the leaders who may have ordered them, to the UN War
Crimes Commission.
The Commission, meeting in Geneva this week, is charged with sifting the
evidence for future prosecutions. Mr Eagleburger called earlier this week
for an international war crimes tribunal to bring perpetrators to justice.
The naming of President Milosevic to a possible war crimes investigation
reflects the growing frustration of the international community about its
failure to end the bloodshed in Bosnia.
A western diplomat said the statement 'made clear Serbia has a choice. No
one has satanised the Serbian people. But the policies of the regime in
Belgrade are responsible for Serbia's isolation and international
sanctions.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1678</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAALFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Russia 'at start of the road to reform'
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOHN LLOYD and LEYLA BOULTON
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MOSCOW
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
MR Yegor Gaidar, the former Prime Minister of Russia, said yesterday he was
'not too pessimistic about the future' and that Russia was 'at the start of
a long road to reforms.'
Speaking at the Institute for the Problems of the Transitional Period, of
which he has become director, he confirmed in an interview with the
Financial Times he has asked his ministers to stay in Mr Chernomyrdin's
team, 'as long as they are certain they can continue with reforms. I think
they should be there some months. There are dangers of hyperinflation, and
of some efforts to change the course of privatisation. But I think the main
lines have been set down and they will continue.' Asked why President Boris
Yeltsin had not continued to back him as premier after the Congress of
People's Deputies vote on Monday, Mr Gaidar thought, burst out laughing and
said: 'I don't know. I think it was the terrible pressure from the Congress.
You can only take so much of it.'
Mr Anatoly Chubais, the deputy prime minister in charge of privatisation,
said that 'understanding my responsibilities for continuing the
privatisation programme, I am prepared to continue', echoing other leading
cabinet members. He warned that 'the central question is to avoid
hyperinflation', and proposed that a 'top expert' like Mr Boris Feodorov, at
present Russia's representative at the World Bank, should join the
government as an inflation-fighter.
The struggle over Mr Yeltsin's most solid achievement from the Congress, the
agreement to hold a referendum on April 11 on a new constitution, is already
under way. A draft of the outline of the constitution on which the Russian
people will be asked to vote is in circulation, and shows that if Mr Yeltsin
wins assent, the Russian parliament will be reduced to a single-tier body
rather than the division between the twice-annual Congress and permanent
Supreme Soviet as now. This would entail immediate new elections after the
referendum, timed for April 11. The draft also makes federal law explicitly
superior to that of the autonomous republics.
The new Supreme Soviet would be the 'single representative and legislative
organ of the Russian federation,' retaining its bicameral system of Chambers
of the Republic and of Nationalities. The President would be 'head of state
and the highest executive in Russia, leader of the executive and
representative of the Federation in internal and external relations'.
The new Supreme Soviet would have the right to legislate and have right of
veto over the prime minister and the foreign defence, interior and security
ministers, but loses its pre-eminence over the president and has few rights
in economic policy. The right to private property is in the constitution, as
is the proposal that 'economic relations are constructed on the basis of
social partnership between the individual and the state, the workers and
management, producers and consumers'. The state will 'regulate economic life
in the interests of the individual and society'.
Yeltsin to China, Page 4;
Bank deal on trade, Page 5
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1679</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAAKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Euro assault fended off
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW HILL and AP
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   STRASBOURG, COPENHAGEN
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
MEMBERS of the European parliament have been waiting nearly six months to
abuse the British prime minister. Yesterday they got their chance. And they
were not going to let it drop simply because Mr John Major had done a deal
at the Edinburgh summit.
As Mr Major quickly learned, changing the opinion of the parliament is like
trying to turn round an oil tanker: once MEPs have got up momentum, no
amount of deft helmsmanship will stop them.
Speaking on behalf of the British presidency of the EC, Mr Major outlined
the achievements of last weekend's summit and urged the Community to 'lift
its sights' towards an overall Gatt deal, and the 'healing of the division
across the heart of our continent'.
Not good enough, said MEPs, and gave the chief representative of the
most-heckled EC presidency in European history one of the stormiest
receptions ever granted to a visiting head of government.
Edinburgh deal or no Edinburgh deal, some deputies were not prepared to
write off the alleged high-handedness and self-interest of the preceding
months of British presidency. In the words of Mr Jean-Pierre Cot, who leads
the dominant group of socialist MEPs, Mr Major was trying to play two roles
 -the civilised Dr Jekyll and the villainous Mr Hyde, with 'heavy-handed'
emphasis on Mr Hyde.
But success at Edinburgh has left Mr Major smugly impervious to such
attacks. He warned MEPs not to boss around their elders and betters in
Britain. Deputies from right and left have backed a resolution calling on
the British parliament to ratify the Maastricht treaty before July next
year, but the British prime minister was adamant Westminster would ratify in
its own time - or at least by October 1993.
British MPs now seem to have an unlikely ally in Mr Jacques Delors,
Commission president.
'Time is on our side,' Mr Delors told the Parliament yesterday. 'What
difference will six months make, provided at the end of (next) year we all
come together to realise the ideals of the Community's founding fathers?'
Nearly two-thirds of Danes would support the Maastricht treaty with the
exemptions Denmark was granted at the weekend EC summit, a poll showed
yesterday, AP reports from Copenhagen.
The survey in the Jyllands-Posten newspaper showed 59 per cent of the 900
people interviewed would approve the treaty. It said 22 per cent would
reject it and 19 per cent were undecided.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1680</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAAJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Europe unprepared for VAT changes
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHARLES BATCHELOR
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
FOUR out of 10 European companies are unprepared for the new European value
added tax (VAT) regime which comes into force on January 1, according to a
survey by accountants Arthur Andersen.
Some 74 per cent of the companies questioned claimed to be ready for the
changes but closer examination showed that many did not have a full
understanding of what was involved and that far fewer were really ready.
From January customs border controls will be abolished and companies with
customers or suppliers in other European Community countries will compile
their own VAT information and trade statistics. Business organisations have
criticised the new system as too complex.
About 38 per cent of companies have collected the VAT numbers from fewer
than half of their customers while a similar number have supplied their VAT
numbers to fewer than half of their suppliers. This could prove costly
because companies which do not provide their VAT numbers to suppliers will
be charged VAT.
Few companies had made any effort to co-ordinate their response to the VAT
changes throughout their European operations. The survey found that 35 per
cent had not begun to make any changes when the survey was carried out early
this month.
Italy emerged as the best prepared country, followed by Spain and the UK.
The French thought they were the best prepared but 80 per cent of businesses
had fewer than half the VAT numbers they needed and 68 per cent had not made
any changes. UK companies said their most serious problem was adapting their
computers.
VAT and 1993: Is Europe Really Ready? Arthur Andersen, 1 Surrey Street,
London WC2R 2PS. Free.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1681</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAAIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / West divided on using force in Bosnia
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT MAUTHNER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   GENEVA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE US yesterday called for 'more aggressive measures' by the international
community against the Bosnian Serbs, but other countries opposed military
intervention in the Bosnian conflict.
In Paris, a French junior foreign minister, Mr Georges Kiejman, said the US
was proposing the pre-emptive bombing of Serb targets in an effort to halt
the slaughter of Bosnian Moslems, but that France and Britain opposed such a
move.
Instead, France and Britain supported the interception and, if necessary,
the destruction of Serb aircraft which violated the United Nations Security
Council's ban on flights over Bosnia. Mr Douglas Hurd, the British foreign
secretary did not deny that such measures were being discussed at the UN and
elsewhere, but stressed that no agreement had yet been reached.
Mr Pierre Beregovoy, the French prime minister, said in Paris yesterday he
backed the use of force if necessary but he added it was vital that the EC
and the UN continued to act together.
Mr Beregovoy told parliament: 'The French government does not rule out any
solution to bring the massacres to an end.'
Mr Lawrence Eagleburger, Secretary of State in the outgoing US
administration, addressing the 29-nation conference on the former Yugoslavia
in Geneva, made no mention of a pre-emptive bombing proposal.
But he specifically referred to the US and other governments' recommendation
that the Security Council should authorise enforcement of the 'no-fly' zone
in Bosnia and re-examine the arms embargo against Bosnia-Hercegovina.
Mr Eagleburger said that it was essentially the Serbs who had broken the
promises made at last August's London conference on the former Yugoslavia,
which included commitments to ensure unimpeded delivery of humanitarian aid,
to lift the siege of cities, to halt all military flights over Bosnia, to
place all heavy weapons under UN monitoring and to shut down all detention
camps.
'It is clear that the reckless leaders of Serbia, and of the Serbs inside
Bosnia, have somehow convinced themselves that the international community
will not stand up to them now and will be forced eventually to recognise the
fruits of their aggression and the results of ethnic cleansing.'
Both Mr Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen, the two co-chairmen of the Geneva peace
conference on the former Yugoslavia, counselled caution on military measures
to enforce the ban on flights and came out firmly against a lifting of the
arms embargo in favour of the Bosnian Moslems.
Mr Vance recognised that breaches of the Security Council's no-fly zone
resolution needed to be examined. But he emphasised that UNPROFOR, the UN
protection force in the former Yugoslavia, had not detected any use of
fixed-wing aircraft in support of combat operations in Bosnia-Hercegovina
since the resolution was passed two months ago. Nor could it supply any
confirmation of allegations that helicopters had been used in an offensive
role.
In deciding whether to employ military measures to enforce the flight ban,
the Security Council had to take into account the risk of retaliatory action
against UN troops and aid workers.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1682</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAAHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Major 'misled EC partners over HDTV'
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LIONEL BARBER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BRUSSELS
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
MR John Major, UK Prime Minister, is facing charges that he misled his EC
partners after Britain this week blocked funding for a Brussels-backed
strategy to market high-definition technology to the European public.
The UK veto at a meeting of EC telecoms ministers on Tuesday astonished
France, the Netherlands, and the European Commission, which thought Mr Major
had signalled he was ready to drop opposition to spending Ecu500m (Pounds
400m) on HDTV over the next five years.
Mr Jacques Delors, European Commission President, has written to Mr Major
reminding him of the 'understanding' which both reached on HDTV during last
weekend's EC summit at Edinburgh.
EC officials yesterday complained Mr Major had at worst broken his word, or
at best been 'slippery' in his dealings with Mr Delors, President Francois
Mitterrand of France, and Mr Ruud Lubbers, Dutch premier, the plan's chief
supporters.
The row over HDTV pits Britain, with its distaste for Brussels-backed
industrial policy, against the continental desire to support national
champions, in this case Philips of the Netherlands, and Thomson of France.
Both Philips and Thomson have invested millions in the D2-Mac and HD-Mac
technology. The UK argues these could be overtaken by more advanced digital
TV technology being developed in the US.
During the Edinburgh summit, both Mr Mitterrand and Mr Lubbers tried to
persuade Mr Major to agree to a firm commitment to HDTV funding in the final
summit declaration.
But Mr Major resisted, saying this was 'detail'. He pointed to the upcoming
meeting of telecoms ministers in Brussels, according to Dutch and EC
officials. These words were enough to persuade some delegations, including
the Dutch, that Mr Major had shifted ground. 'He gave the impression of
movement, but he did not give a solid commitment,' said one Dutch official.
At Tuesday's meeting in Brussels, Mr Tim Sainsbury, UK industry minister,
opposed the Commission plan and offered a 'compromise'.
This involved Ecu80m funding, plus a review of all HDTV technology and
digital technology by spring next year; but it was rejected by all 11
partners who reaffirmed their commitment to press ahead.
The EC funding would go to consortia for satellite broadcasting, as well as
to producers for conversion of programmes for use in high definition TV
sets. Money may also go to other widescreen TV services such as Pal Plus,
and for modifying studios making programmes for broadcasting using HDTV
technology.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1683</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAAGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Post-cold war Nato works its way into its new role: Not far
from Sarajevo, a unit once ranged against Moscow deploys its resources as a
peacekeeper
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID WHITE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
AT A municipally owned spa hotel at Kiseljak, not far from Sarajevo, Nato is
working its way into a role for which it was never intended.
The Hotel Dalmacija, an unsuccessful project built for the 1984 Winter
Olympics, has become the headquarters for United Nations military operations
in Bosnia-Hercegovina. The organisation and equipment have mostly been
transferred from Monchengladbach, the base of Nato's Northern Army Group
(Northag), a command set to close down next year as part of the alliance's
post-cold war restructuring.
The 420 military staff squeezed into the hotel include British, Dutch and
Belgians straight from Northag's mobile HQ, which was designed as a back-up
in an all-out east-west war - in case the main headquarters was destroyed.
For German constitutional reasons, Germans at the HQ could not be sent to
Bosnia. In their place are Americans, French, Spaniards, Danes, Portuguese
and Norwegians. Apart from two token officers representing Ukrainian and
Egyptian troops based in Sarajevo, it is a totally Nato affair.
This is a new departure for Nato, which decided only six months ago to make
its resources available for peacekeeping. At a meeting today in Brussels,
Nato foreign ministers are due to strengthen that commitment in support of
the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe or the UN.
They will also discuss practical steps - from fact-finding missions to
training and deployment plans - to enable Nato to respond quickly when its
help is sought.
Bosnia is the first instance of direct Nato involvement - through the
headquarters and the use of its Awacs early-warning aircraft - alongside
that of individual Nato allies in a UN operation.
Deployments to Bosnia were preceded in July by the dispatch of a Nato
warship flotilla to the Adriatic, alongside another sent by the Western
European Union. The moves followed months of sterile debate about the
relative roles of the two organisations in European security.
Nato's anxiety not to be outdone was, one French diplomat commented, 'a
little bit ridiculous'. The WEU had organised maritime patrols before, in
the Gulf. But when it came to ground operations, even the French had to
recognise that only Nato was competent.
The nature of the UN plan for safeguarding aid supplies in Bosnia, which
meant deploying troops while a war was still going on, demanded
well-organised command and control. The US, which had agreed to provide
logistics and medical support although not combat forces, was brought into
the headquarters operation providing vital access to US intelligence.
It is significant that the mainstream Nato allies have been brought together
with the French. The headquarters is drawn largely from the integrated
military structure, which France withdrew from 26 years ago. But the UN
commander in Bosnia is French, Major General Philippe Morillon. Spain, the
other ally formally outside the integrated Nato command, provides his
deputy, Brig Gen Luis Martinez Coll.
The chief of staff is a Briton, Brigadier Roddy Cordy-Simpson. It is a sign
of the significance Britain regards this mission as having for the alliance
that he is destined to be the next commander of the British armoured
division in Germany, the heart of the UK's contribution to Nato.
Maj Gen Morillon, for his part, formerly commanded the 1st French armoured
division in Germany, one of the cornerstones of the planned Franco-German
Eurocorps. Bitter argument in Nato over this scheme, which the US saw as
undermining the alliance, has been miraculously smoothed over in recent
weeks.
Paris and Bonn have made clear to the satisfaction of other allies -
although operational details are still being worked out - that the corps
will be available to Nato's supreme commander in Europe, either for European
defence or for peacekeeping or humanitarian missions.
Peacekeeping, a job Nato would never have been thought suited for during the
cold war, is taking on growing importance in alliance planning. A French
official said Nato's primary role of guarding against aggression from the
east was 'less and less plausible, and maybe not enough to guarantee its
cohesion'.
While France maintained its independent stance within Nato, 'for
peacekeeping we are all on the same footing', he said. France favoured
setting up a planning cell of all 16 allies, in effect bringing it back into
Nato military planning. It was ready to work with the staff of Shape
(Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe) as long as other members
understood there was no question of Shape itself taking a military
initiative in situations like the former Yugoslavia.
'On a practical level, the French are back,' he said.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1684</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAAFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Stock &amp; Currency Markets
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
 -----------------------------------------------------
STOCK MARKET INDICES
 -----------------------------------------------------
FT-SE 100: 2,732.8 (+14.9)
Yield 4.48
FT-SE Eurotrack 100 1,036.62 (-1.52)
FT-A All-Share 1,303.34 (+0.6%)
FT-A World Index 139.56 (+0.2%)
Nikkei 17,268.71 (-212.03)
New York:
Dow Jones Ind Ave 3,255.18 (-29.18)
S&amp;P Composite 431.52 (-1.05)
 -----------------------------------------------------
US CLOSING RATES
 -----------------------------------------------------
Federal Funds: 2 15/16% (3 3/16%)
3-mo Treas Bills: Yld 3.271% (3.281%)
Long Bond 102 9/32 (101 3/32)
Yield 7.428% (7.443%)
 -----------------------------------------------------
LONDON MONEY
 -----------------------------------------------------
3-mo Interbank 7 5/16% (7 1/4%)
Liffe long gilt future: Dec 100 17/32 (Dec100 1/4)
 -----------------------------------------------------
NORTH SEA OIL (Argus)
 -----------------------------------------------------
Brent 15-day (Feb) Dollars 18.25 (17.95)
 -----------------------------------------------------
Gold
 -----------------------------------------------------
New York Comex (Dec) Dollars 337.9 (334.5)
London Dollars 337.05 (335.05)
 -----------------------------------------------------
STERLING
 -----------------------------------------------------
New York:
Dollars 1.575 (1.567)
London:
Dollars 1.577 (1.568)
DM 2.4525 (2.4575)
FFr 8.3825 (8.4)
SFr 2.2025 (2.21)
Y 193.75 (194.5)
Pounds Index 80.5 (80.4)
 -----------------------------------------------------
DOLLAR
 -----------------------------------------------------
New York:
DM 1.55705 (1.5675)
FFr 5.322 (5.3575)
SFr 1.399 (1.41)
Y 122.98 (123.95)
London:
DM 1.555 (1.567)
FFr 5.315 (5.3575)
SFr 1.397 (1.4095)
Y 122.9 (124.05)
Dollars Index 64.7 (65.0)
Tokyo open Y 123.18
 -----------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1685</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAAEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Half IBM's 25,000 staff cuts to fall on European plants
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN CANE, PETER BRUCE, JAMES BUXTON, WILLIAM DAWKINS, CHRISTOPHER
PARKES, HAIG SIMONIAN, LOUISE KEHOE and RONALD VAN DER KROL
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ALMOST half the 25,000 job cuts planned for next year by International
Business Machines, US computer group, are expected to fall in Europe, the
company's single largest market.
IBM's European subsidiaries employ about 100,000 people. The company said
yesterday that under the restructuring programme announced on Tuesday about
12,000 jobs would go in Europe, half in marketing and administration and
half in manufacturing and development.
Mr John Akers, IBM chairman, told analysts in New York that the company's
European business had declined 'precipitously and unexpectedly' since the
beginning of October, a collapse which has clearly shaken the company's
senior executives.
Manufacturing sites at risk of contraction or closure include the
semiconductor plants at Corbeil-Essones in France and Sindelfingen in
Germany, the mainframe plants at Montpellier in France and Valencia in Spain
and the printer plant at Jarfalla in Sweden. Forced redundancy is no longer
being ruled out anywhere.
IBM is expected to deal with overcapacity at some plants by sharing
manufacture - for example, with Siemens of Germany in semiconductor memories
 -or by building products on a contract basis for other companies.
Yesterday, country managers were starting discussions, expected to take
several months, to agree the necessary cuts.
Many were predicting, initially, job losses which far underestimated the
totals demanded by Mr Akers on Tuesday.
Business units such as IBM PC, the company's personal computer arm, will
have full authority over the plants manufacturing their product and will be
able to cut jobs or close facilities without reference to country managers.
Responses from individual European subsidiaries yesterday reflected a
measure of confusion following the announcement from headquarters.
Germany: IBM Deutschland said it planned 2,500 redundancies in 1993 after
cuts of 2,000 this year. No closures were yet planned.
France has lost 2,400 staff this year and plans to lose another 1500 in
1993. There are no plans for plant closures.
The UK intends to lose 1,000 jobs next year, the same total as in 1992. The
Greenock personal computer plant in Scotland, which employs 2,200 people, is
thought to be safe as demand for its products is strong.
Italy is losing about 800 people a year through natural wastage and hopes to
contain shrinkage to roughly the same level next year. No plant closures or
compulsory envisaged.
The Netherlands: No job losses are expected in addition to a programme which
should see staff fall from 5049 to 4230 by the end of 1995. There are no
manufacturing plants.
Spain No decision on cuts have yet been taken.
Lex, Page 20
Share price falls, Page 21
 ------------------------------------
         IBM JOBS IN EUROPE
 ------------------------------------
Germany                      30,000
France                       19,316
UK                           14,909
Italy                        14,082
Netherlands                   5,049
Spain                         4,561
Sweden                        3,948
Denmark                       2,821
Switzerland                   2,450
Benelux                       2,229
Norway                          993
Finland                         975
 ------------------------------------
Source: IBM end of 1991
 ------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1686</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAADFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Ford of Europe to shed 10,000 jobs next year: UK and Germany
worst hit - Renault and VW to cut workforces
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN DONE and CATHERINE MILTON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
FORD, the US carmaker, is to reduce the workforce of its European automotive
operations by 11 per cent, cutting more than 10,000 jobs by the end of 1993
in a further heavy blow to employment in the European motor industry.
The sharpest reductions will be in the UK, where the workforce has already
been more than halved in the last decade, and in Germany. They are part of
restructuring moves aimed at staunching Ford of Europe's mounting losses.
The company said in Detroit last night it would take a one-time Dollars 419m
(Pounds 266m) after-tax charge as a result of the European job cuts.
Mr Harold Poling, Ford group chairman, said this charge and additional
one-off charges relating to US accounting changes would result in a net loss
from worldwide operations for the whole of 1992. Additional accounting
charges in line with those of other big US companies include a Dollars 440m
write-off related to 1992 and a separate Pounds 7.5bn charge.
Car and truckmakers in Europe are under increasing pressure from declining
sales, overcapacity and intensifying competition from Japanese carmakers.
Yesterday, Renault Vehicules Industriels, the loss-making French commercial
vehicle maker, said it planned to cut its workforce and heavy job losses are
expected at Volkswagen. In contrast, Toyota, the leading Japanese car
producer, opened its first European car plant in the UK at Burnaston, near
Derby.
Ford said it planned to reduce the workforce of its European automotive
operations, excluding Jaguar, to 83,000 by the end of 1993 from the present
level of 93,000. The workforce has already been cut by 19 per cent from
115,000 in 1990.
About 80 per cent of the latest job cuts will be made in the UK and Germany,
with each operation equally affected. The salaried workforce in Europe will
be reduced by 14.5 per cent from 17,550 to 15,000 by mid-1993, while the
hourly-paid workforce will be reduced from 75,200 to 68,000 by the end of
1993.
Some 1,180 hourly-paid jobs in the UK and 1,500 in Germany are to be
eliminated by April as a result of cuts in production capacity, with the
rest to go through improved efficiency measures by the end of 1993.
About 1,200 salaried jobs are to be cut in the UK, mainly at Ford's Dunton
engineering operations and the Warley headquarters, both in Essex. A further
1,000 salaried jobs in the UK have already been eliminated by using excess
volunteers to the earlier redundancy programme launched in September. A
further 1,350 salaried jobs will be cut in Germany, mainly in Cologne.
Responding to the UK job losses Mr Jimmy Airlie, chief Ford negotiator and
executive council member of the AEEU electrical and engineering union, said:
'Three months ago, Ford announced compulsory redundancies and said they were
cutting lay-off pay from 100 per cent of basic to 60 per cent. Today there
are no compulsory redundancies and they have reinstated lay-off pay in
full.'
Mr Jack Adams, deputy general secretary of the TGWU general union, said: 'If
one Ford worker is made compulsorily redundant next year, we shall ballot
our members with a recommendation for industrial action.' Ford's UK
workforce has already fallen from a peak of 80,000 in early 1980 to 33,000
by the end of this year, an average reduction of more than 3,600 a year.
With new car sales forecast to decline further next year Ford is cutting
production capacity sharply in the UK and Germany. Capacity is being
increased at Genk in Belgium for production of a new model, while Valencia
in Spain, Ford's most cost-effective plant in Europe, largely escapes the
cuts.
Fiesta output at Dagenham in the UK will be reduced by 18 per cent to 740 a
day and production of Fiestas and Scorpios at Cologne will be cut by 23 per
cent to 1,020 cars a day. Capacity will also be reduced at Halewood in the
UK and Saarlouis in Germany.
Further cuts in the workforce will follow in later years as a result of
other measures announced yesterday.
Mr Bill Fike, president of Ford of Europe, said the company would
concentrate on the design, manufacture and sale of cars and light commercial
vehicles.
Ford's European operations have collapsed into loss in the second half of
this year 1992 after struggling back into profit in the first six months.
from record losses last year. The European automotive operations suffered a
third quarter loss of Dollars 479m (Pounds 304m). in the third quarter.
In yesterday's other developments:
Volkswagen, the leader of the west European car market, said it had fallen
into loss in the last quarter of this year. VW is expected shortly to
announce further restructuring, including heavy job cuts. Renault Vehicules
Industriels said it was planning to cut 1,348 jobs, or 8 per cent of its
workforce, in France.
Page 9
Toyota predicts Pounds 400m exports
Page 21
Medicine replaces champagne for Ford
Page 25
Ford's Dollars 8bn write-offs Page 26
Citroen's new model
Volkswagen cutbacks
Editorial Comment Page 18
Lex Page 20
World stocks Page 35
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1687</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAACFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Ofgas demands British Gas be split in two
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID LASCELLES, Resources Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
OFGAS, the gas industry regulator, yesterday demanded the break-up of
British Gas into two wholly separate businesses, claiming that nothing less
would bring effective competition to the gas market.
In a submission to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission, Ofgas called for
the removal of British Gas's transport and storage arm from the trading arm
which buys and sells gas. The new transport and storage business, which
would include the national gas pipeline network, would be transferred into a
new company under separate ownership and management.
The report drew a sharp response from British Gas. Mr Robert Evans, the
chairman, said last night: 'While the gas business is under review it is
totally inappropriate for public statements of this nature to be made. We
shall continue to discuss this matter with the MMC.'
Ofgas's demand is the culmination of a long-running and frequently
acrimonious battle by Sir James McKinnon, the gas regulator, against what he
sees as British Gas's dominant position in the gas market.
Last summer British Gas requested the MMC inquiry in the hope of heading off
Sir James's attacks. But it proposed to put the transport and storage
business into a separate division rather than selling it off.
Although Ofgas has hinted it wants a break-up, yesterday's report, prepared
by Mr Greg McGregor, the director of competition and tariffs, is the first
time it has laid out clear demands.
The report says: 'We recognise that the break-up of a large, complex,
integrated business such as British Gas is not a simple matter and therefore
see the need for transitional arrangements. However, we believe that all
structures short of full separation should be seen as a transitional phase
within the context of a commitment to separation.' The report says so long
as British Gas owns the pipeline network it will be able to discriminate
against companies wishing to use it. Even if 'Chinese walls' were set up to
reinforce management independence, it could acquire information about its
competitors' business by watching their shipments.
Ofgas denounces British Gas's plan for a divisional hive-off as 'a paper
separation' which would not resolve the company's inherent dilemmas.
Anything short of complete break-up would mean that 'conflicting interests
will have to be resolved sometimes to the disadvantage of independent
suppliers', it said.
British Gas wins Argentine deal, Page 21
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1688</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAABFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Retailers set to defy Sunday trade ruling
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NEIL BUCKLEY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE European Court of Justice threw the retail trade into confusion
yesterday, as it ruled laws regulating Sunday trading in England and Wales
did not clash with European trade laws and were enforceable.
But many retailers said they would go ahead with plans to open this Sunday -
the last before Christmas. They joined with MPs and both sides in the Sunday
trading debate in calling for the speedy introduction of new legislation to
replace the 1950 Shops Act.
'The government should bring forward proposals on Sunday trading as a matter
of urgency so that the present real mess can be cleared up without delay,'
said Mr Tony Blair, shadow home secretary. The Keep Sunday Special campaign
group welcomed the decision. Mr Bill Connor, deputy general secretary of the
shopworkers' union Usdaw, said it was 'good news for shopworkers under
pressure to work on Sundays'.
Retailers including supermarket chains J. Sainsbury, Asda and Tesco and B&amp;Q,
the DIY chain, said they would open this Sunday, although some said they
would seek legal advice about future Sunday trading.
The Shopping Hours Reform Council, which proposes partial deregulation of
Sunday trading, played down the ruling, saying it had been 'made politically
irrelevant by the government's plans to introduce new legislation on
shopping hours'.
It added that it expected many local councils would not be prepared to spend
time and money enforcing a dying law. Even some of the councils that have
most actively enforced the law in the past said yesterday they would wait
until the ruling had been ratified by the House of Lords. This was in spite
of a statement from Sir Nicholas Lyell, the attorney-general, that local
councils could continue to issue summonses or seek injunctions
The European court was ruling on three separate cases referred to it by
English courts seeking verification of the Shops Act.
It rejected retailers' arguments that limited hours reduced their need to
import goods from EC countries, resulting in a barrier to trade that
contravened Article 30 of the Treaty of Rome.
MPs are due next month to debate a private member's bill sponsored by Mr Ray
Powell, Labour MP for Ogmore, which would allow only limited Sunday opening.
This is seen as unlikely to become law, but Mr Kenneth Clarke, the home
secretary, plans to present an 'options' bill allowing MPs to choose between
total or partial deregulation or limited Sunday opening.
Ruling fails to produce open-and-shut case, Page 8
Retail sales fail to lift, Page 9
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1689</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAAAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / World News in Brief: Libel law changes
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The government plans a reform of the libel laws designed to allow many cases
to be settled without a jury. The result is likely to be cheaper litigation
and smaller damages awards.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1690</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLRBYAGOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Assembly for Bahrain
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BAHRAIN
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE EMIR of Bahrain is to set up a consultative assembly to give people a
greater say in the running of the Gulf island state, Reuter reports from
Bahrain.
The Bahraini announcement is the latest move by conservative Gulf states to
involve citizens more directly in the running of their countries.
It follows similar moves by Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states but falls
short of allowing a full-fledged elected parliament as Kuwait did earlier
this year.
Speaking on Bahrain's National Day, Sheikh Isa bin Sulman al-Khalifa said:
'Bahrain's government and people are adapting to the new era of changes,
just as they did under more difficult circumstances in the past.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
International Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1691</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLRBYAGNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Israel to keep afloat arms manufacturer
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HUGH CARNEGY
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   JERUSALEM
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE ISRAELI government yesterday agreed to bail out the financially stricken
Israel Military Industries in an attempt to keep afloat one of the mainstays
of the country's big state-owned defence industry, which has been hard hit
by falling world demand for military products.
The cabinet voted to back a recovery plan for IMI  - best known as the maker
of the Uzi sub-machine gun  - which includes an injection of Shk750m
(Dollars 289m) in government funds and a 2,500 cut in the present
7,500-strong workforce. Previously, the government had pumped Shk250m into
IMI to staunch losses which approached Dollars 250m last year on sales which
fell 20 per cent to Dollars 520m.
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the prime minister, told ministers who protested at the
scale of lay-offs redundancies that the only alternative he would consider
was to liquidate the company.
The crisis in the defence industry is a serious economic and political
problem for the Labour-led government. As well as sucking in government
money, the decline in military sales, a mainstay of Israel's exports, has
held back growth at a time when the government is having to cope with the
burden of mass immigration from the former Soviet Union. There is already
record unemployment of more than 11 per cent of the workforce.
Aside from IMI, the government is also being asked by Israel Aircraft
Industries, the country's biggest company, for more than Dollars 150m in
emergency aid to help it cope with falling sales. It plans to cut its
workforce of 17,000 by at least 1,500. Raphael, a developer of weapons
systems run by the defence ministry, is also mired in losses.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
International Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1692</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLRBYAGMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Afghan chief resists move
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   KABUL
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
AFGHANISTAN'S interim president, Mr Burhanuddin Rabbani, said yesterday, a
day after his tenure expired, that he would only transfer power to a council
of elected national representatives, Reuter reports from Kabul.
'We have a joint leadership decision that whenever the Hal-o-Aqad council is
held, the affairs of the nation will be handed over to it, he said in an
interview. Most other mujahideen leaders have demanded that he step down
immediately and have warned that he may be trying to delay the Hal-o-Aqad in
order to cling to power.
The Hal-o-Aqad of nationwide representatives is to choose Afghanistan's
first elected president since the Soviet invasion in 1979.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
International Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1693</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLRBYAGLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Germans warn over far-right party ban
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BONN
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
MAINSTREAM German politicians cautioned yesterday against banning the
far-right Republican party, under investigation on suspicion of being
anti-democratic, Reuter reports from Bonn.
Several state interior ministers said they hoped the investigation announced
by the government would help major parties win a public opinion battle with
the Republicans, the strongest of several small rightist parties. But they
warned an outright ban, like ones Bonn imposed recently on two smaller
rightist groups, would only drive members underground or into other
far-right organisations.
'The issue is simply that we confront the Republicans, democratically for
now, and make clear to many citizens what forces are at our work within the
Republicans,' said Mr Friedel Lapple, interior minister of tiny Saarland
state.' That does not mean I think the party should be suppressed.'
In 1989, the Republicans won a surprise 11 per cent in April state elections
in Baden-Wurttemberg and 8.3 per cent in Berlin borough council polls in
May. The party is more established than two other groups banned by Bonn in a
crackdown on rightist violence since a firebombing killed three Turks in
Molln in November.
Germany unveiled a new computer system yesterday to help accommodate the
huge influx of refugees from eastern Europe and the Third World. The DM2m
system, in operation on April 1, is designed to distribute asylum-seekers
more quickly between crowded refugee hostels.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
International Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1694</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLRBYAGKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / World News in Brief: Egypt reassures tourists
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak, trying to reassure tourists worried about
attacks by Moslem militants, said security forces had crushed the movement.
A British tourist was killed recently and five Germans injured.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
International Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1695</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAF8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Survey of European Finance and Investment - Switzerland (4):
The global market is the real challenge / Banking, the big three
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER MONTAGNON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ON THE surface, it has not been a particularly good year for Switzerland's
big three banks. The recession in the domestic economy has continued, which
will necessitate further heavy loan loss provisions for 1992. And two of
them, Credit Suisse and Swiss Bank Corporation, have seen their debt
downgraded by Moody's rating agency.
Look a little deeper, though, and the picture becomes less negative. Neither
the recession nor the liberalisation of the financial market in recent years
has upset the position of the major banks at home. The real challenge, as
before, remains that of tackling the international market.
Admittedly, the Swiss economy stubbornly refuses to recover, but the impact
of recession varies from region to region. It has been harshest in the
French-speaking west part of the country, and closely associated with the
property market.
Its impact on the banks has thus been felt most keenly by smaller regional
institutions. If anything, the large banks have benefited. Their grip on the
domestic market has strengthened as the sector has restructured.
Mr Robert Studer, chairman of the Union Bank of Switzerland (UBS), says 150
banks have disappeared in the last 4 1/2 years.
And Mr Georges Blum, who is due soon to take the top position at Swiss Bank
Corporation (SBC), adds: 'The retail market for the big banks will increase
even further. Because of the difficulties of certain local banks, many
customers will be forced to spread their risks and will work even more with
the big banks.'
As for financial liberalisation, which has seen the abolition of both fixed
commissions for equity trading and the foreign bond issue cartel, the impact
on the big banks' market share has been minimal, mainly thanks to their
large distribution networks.
Seen from this perspective, the decision by Moody's to withdraw the top AAA
rating from Credit Suisse and SBC seems perverse. By international
standards, the banks are well-capitalised, solid institutions.
Moody's cited the weakness of the Swiss economy as one reason for its
action; though, in the case of SBC, it also pointed to the size of its
exposure to such risky clients as the late Mr Robert Maxwell and Omni
Holding, the collapsed Swiss conglomerate controlled by Mr Werner Rey.
Neither bank admits to any material impact on its business from the
downgrading. SBC's Mr Blum even claims it has helped impose greater internal
discipline on credit control. Nonetheless, the fact that UBS is both the
only one of the big three to retain the prized AAA rating and to forecast
higher profits this year suggests that Moody's differentiation is not
entirely baseless.
Last month, SBC said it expected earnings to be little changed this year on
the SFr1.03bn (Pounds 471m) earned in 1991. Credit Suisse said it expected
net profits to be comparable with last year's SFr848m.
It is perhaps a measure of Credit Suisse's lagging position in the Swiss
market - where it is very much the junior player among the big three - that
it has also long been the highest-profile player in the international
market. Unlike the other two banks, it has also chosen a decentralised
structure, whereby the group's various operations are separate entities in
their own right under the umbrella of a holding company, CS Holding.
The structure serves to emphasise the investment banking thrust of the
group's international strategy. According to Mr Rainer Gut, CS chairman, the
group's ambition is to be perceived as a top flight investment bank, like JP
Morgan or Bankers Trust. That requires an Anglo-Saxon style investment
banking culture.
'You can't integrate the commercial bank into the investment bank,' he says.
'You will kill one or the other.'
If this approach undeniably fosters a high degree of entrepreneurialism, it
also appears to be a striking admission that being Swiss does not on its own
offer any particular advantage in the international marketplace. The various
entities have to compete in their own right in their individual markets.
Critics say it is also a structure that is harder to control. It was also
expensive to implement, because of tax costs on the issue of new shares. In
theory, concentration on investment banking should also make for more
efficient use of capital.
But there were also some anxious moments in this respect when the Swiss
authorities decided the entire group should be subject to Switzerland's
particularly stringent bank capital requirements.
At one stage, CS was expected to resolve this problem by floating 20 per
cent of Credit Suisse separately on the domestic stock market, a plan which
was regarded with mixed feelings by some shareholders who felt they were to
be sold something they thought they already owned.
In the event, the return to profit at First Boston, in the US, helped render
the flotation unnecessary. The group's spat with the supervisory authorities
is, however, a reminder that it sails closer to the wind where local capital
requirements are concerned than the other two large banks. This policy, says
one analyst, may again prove painful if the dollar rises sharply over the
next 12 months or so.
SBC, by contrast, has been more actively involved in international
commercial lending than the other two banks. But it is still living with the
legacy of a decentralised past, in which individual general managers had
considerable discretion over lending decisions. This resulted, as Moody's
pointed out, in a chapter of accidents which have left the bank less time to
concentrate on its international strategy.
Analysts believe, however, that Mr Blum will bring a much firmer hand to the
running of the bank than Mr Walter Frehner, the outgoing chief executive. Mr
Blum, himself argues, that the bank now already exercises strong central
control over credit risk and has largely shed its decentralised 'federal'
approach of the past.
In the international arena, SBC has taken a quantum leap forward with the
acquisition nearly two years ago of the derivative business of the O'Conner
Partnerships in Chicago.
Not only is the contribution to profits from derivatives now rapidly
increasing - as is also the case with CS Holding's Financial Products
subsidiary - but Mr Blum also sees it as an entree to other forms of
business. 'It gives us a very good platform for corporate America,' he says.
UBS has been more cautious about developing a high profile in derivatives -
a symptom, some say, of its slowness to exploit the strength of its balance
sheet in international markets. Though it has capitalised on its high rating
 -for example, by earning fees from credit enhancement business - the
traditional strength of UBS lies in its strong portfolio management
business. UBS also insists on rigorous centralised control of risk, a policy
which Mr Studer believes would be harder to pursue under the type of
decentralised structure preferred by CS Holding.
Besides, he argues, the universal approach allows for a team effort to
provide the corporate customer with the service he actually needs. As long
as the bank can maintain critical mass in international wholesale markets,
it is also in a strong position to transfer products and skills from one
part of the world to another.
The temptation for a bank in the position of UBS might have been to use its
AAA rating and Japanese banks' withdrawal from international business to
make a determined attempt to raise its international market share. That its
approach is more cautious may mean fewer rewards in future, but it also
means less risk. In these uncertain days, quality of earnings counts for a
lot.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
              SWITZERLAND'S TOP BANKS: 1991 (Dollars m)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                Tier One   Capital/
                                  One      assets     Pre-tax
                                capital   ratio (%)   profits   Assets
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1   Union Bank of Switzerland    13,131     7.14       1,225   183,911
2   Swiss Bank Corporation        9,262     6.07       1,005   152,564
3   CS Holding (Credit Suisse)    7,033     4.32       1,115   162,661
4   Swiss Volksbank               1,617     4.72          66    34,298
5   Zurcher Kantonalbank          1,332     3.76          75    35,460
6   Banque Cantonale Vaudoise       603     6.12          56     9,858
7   Banca della Svizzera Italiana   562     7.68          55     7,318
8   Cantonal Bank of Berne          527     3.14          11    16,788
9   Union Bancaire Privee           479     7.21          69     6,651
10  Luzerner Kantonalbank           466     4.74          24     9,833
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
 Source: The Banker, September 1992
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page II
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1696</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAFIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Bagri sees wider horizons for
LME - The incoming chairman is eager to enhance the London Metal Exchange's
international status
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KENNETH GOODING
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MR RAJ Bagri takes over as chairman of the London Metal Exchange in January
at a time when several important issues have to be resolved - among them the
question of whether the time is ripe for the exchange to move aggressively
to win copper business away from the New York Commodity Exchange.
Although he is no revolutionary (as you would expect of a man of 62 who has
been associated with the LME management since 1973) Mr Bagri insists that,
if the exchange is to enhance its international status - as he intends it to
 -'there can be no no-go areas'. It needs strategically-placed delivery
points for its metals all over the world.
This means Mr Bagri would like to see changes in the US, where
LME-authorised warehouses do not stock copper, and in Japan, where they are
restricted to storing only primary aluminium.
The first US warehouses started operating less than a year ago and copper,
which is traded in sterling in the LME 'ring', was excluded so as not to
challenge the New York Commodity Exchange's copper contract. This is a
dollar contract and occasionally presents arbitrage opportunities to LME
traders. However, recent turbulence in currency markets caused a change of
heart among London-based traders so the LME copper contract will shortly
switch to from sterling to dollars. This eliminates the main reason for
excluding copper from US warehouses.
But Mr Bagri does not believe the LME should challenge Comex head-on. 'At
the end of the day it will be for the users of and dealers in metals in the
US to decide whether they feel their best interests will be served by having
LME warehouses (for copper) in that part of the world.'
He says 'frank discussions' will take place between the LME and US users of
the exchange, but no pressure will be brought to bear. 'I do not rule out
the possibility of copper in US warehouses - or any other part of the world
 -but this is not something we want to thrust on people.'
He hoped, however, that consensus could quickly be reached to allow copper
into LME warehouses in Japan.
On another 'hot' topic - the question of whether ring-dealing members of the
exchange are getting a raw deal compared to other members - Mr Bagri says he
does not want to pre-judge the study the LME board has asked to be carried
out. Nevertheless, 'on the face of it there is probably some merit in what
the ring-dealing members have been saying. They say they are being asked to
carry a greater share of the burden of running the exchange, supporting the
exchange and carrying on the business of the exchange, but returns are not
commensurate with risks being taken and facilities provided.
'If this is true, we will certainly have to address ourselves to the
situation because, if we want to maintain our pre-eminence as a price
reference for the international metals market, we need a healthy market, and
we need good training practices, we need good, qualified people on the ring,
and we need reliable floor members. That means the ring-dealers must be
happy.'
Mr Bagri suggests there is no suitable alternative at present to the LME's
'open outcry' trading system and he is not worried about the recent fall in
the number of ring-dealing members, caused primarily by the introduction of
new types of associate broker members who do not sit in the ring.
He says it is much more important to have a good cross-section of the metals
industry represented in the ring. 'Whether the right number is 16 or 22 I
can't say. I think it is much better to have a good, fully-committed,
fully-financed ring membership of, say, 17 or 18, rather than 20 to 25
members which include quite a lot of weaker members. But I accept the fact
that below a certain minimum number it would be difficult for us to run the
type of market which we are running.
'But I honestly don't think we are running that risk. I think that, just as
some people in the last few years have found it uneconomical or
uninteresting to remain ring members, similarly, a number of people will
find that, considering the size of the market and the volumes, and taking
full advantage of their own strengths, they can make a very good go of ring
membership. So I don't think the traffic will be one way only.'
Mr John Wolff, the outgoing chairman, suggested recently that the time had
come to debate brokers' commissions, which had been steadily eroded over the
past 20 years. He pointed out that 'now we are trading ever further forward,
it means that in some cases brokers are not actually paid commission for two
years and three months after they have executed a contract'.
Mr Bagri says you can't blame users for getting the best deal possible from
brokers and the market. 'But they may have begun to recognise the law of
diminishing returns has already set in and from a longer term point of view
it is in the interests of the users of the market that they ensure they are
paying adequately for the services they utilise because otherwise they will
be net losers in the long run.'
Nevertheless, he suggests 'the days of setting minimum commissions are long
gone'.
Then there is the urgent issue of the LME's base. Its lease on the present
premises at Plantation House in the City of London runs out in 1994 and a
decision has to be made by the middle of next year. Mr Bagri, without
actually saying so, gives the impression he would prefer to stay put. He
says: 'If I was the owner of Plantation House I would do everything possible
and try desperately hard to try to keep us here'.
Even so, the LME is looking at alternative sites. 'I do not believe in
change for change's sake but we have an obligation to get value for money
for our membership,' he adds.
Mr Bagri is certain about one thing - the LME will not move in with another
exchange or other exchanges in spite of invitations to do so. 'Our judgment
so far is we are better off being independent. I have a feeling that people
don't expect the LME to be within a big conglomerate of markets - that's
what I hear from my international contacts and what I hear from the market
place. We are better off maintaining our individual position, particularly
in view of the very special nature of our activities and the way users of
the market expect us to act.'
The first part of Kenneth Gooding's interview with Raj Bagri appeared on
December 10.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 28
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1697</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAE7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: Citroen expects new model to
help it regain former market share
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By WILLIAM DAWKINS
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   PARIS
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
CITROEN, the French carmaker which forms part of the Peugeot group,
yesterday predicted that next year its newest model would help it more than
regain the French market share it lost in 1992.
Citroen, which yesterday presented its new Xantia, a sleek-looking upper
medium-range saloon, has seen its French market share slip this year by 0.8
percentage points to 11 per cent. Mr Jacques Calvet, group chairman,
yesterday said Citroen would recover its share of the national market to 13
per cent or 13.5 per cent in 1993.
The Xantia's arrival on the market next March comes at a time when the
French car industry is in a creative period, with a series of new models.
They include the arrival over the past year of the Renault Safrane, top of
the executive car market, to be followed next month by Renault's Twingo, an
innovative small car of strikingly cheerful design.
Mr Calvet said Citroen had gained European market share, despite its setback
in the French market this year.
It will have sold 766,300 vehicles overall in the 17 countries of western
Europe in the 12 months to the end of December, representing a 5.7 per cent
rise in car sales in a market down by 1 per cent.
Mr Calvet predicted that the European car market would shrink by 4 per cent
next year, in line with most other industry estimates.
He expected Citroen's European market share to rise from 4.5 per cent to 4.8
per cent this year. Over the same period, the proportion of Citroen's
production sold outside France will rise from 64 per cent to 67 per cent.
Citroen's world production this year will, however, show a small decline,
from 811,891 vehicles in 1991 to 790,700, due to the company's continuing
campaign to reduce stocks.
Renault Vehicules Industriels, the truckmaking subsidiary of Renault,
yesterday confirmed a recent union announcement that it would lose 1,348
jobs next year, out of its current workforce of 16,874. The group cited as
reasons the deep recession in the European truck market and its strategy of
improving productivity.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 26
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1698</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAE0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: Dutch insurer in venture with US
group
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD LAPPER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
NCM Holding, the Dutch trade credit insurer, yesterday announced a joint
venture with The Fidelity &amp; Deposit Companies, a leader in the US domestic
bonding and insurance industry.
The new insurer, Maryland-Netherlands Credit Insurance, will underwrite
commercial export credit risks.
Maryland-Netherlands will be chartered as a composite insurer and will file
for licences in all 50 states.
F&amp;D will hold 51 per cent of the new company.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1699</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAESFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: Snia BPD advances shake-up by
merging subsidiaries
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HAIG SIMONIAN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MILAN
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
SNIA BPD, the chemicals, bio-engineering and synthetic fibres subsidiary of
Italy's Fiat group, yesterday moved a step further in restructuring its
operations with the merger of two quoted subsidiaries.
Snia Technopolimeri, a stock market-listed operation which specialises in
plastic films for packaging, is to be merged into Caffaro, the group's
chemicals subsidiary, which is also quoted. The combined concern will have
sales of around L645bn (Dollars 460m), double that of its two components
individually.
The announcement of the deal comes shortly after EniChem, the chemicals
subsidiary of the state-owned Eni energy and chemicals group, announced
plans for a major shake-up of its operations. The parent company will take
charge of a number of formerly independent operating units.
Incorporating the 10 subsidiaries involved should also produced considerable
cost savings, estimated at up to L200bn a year.
After the changes, EniChem, which currently has a holding company structure,
will directly control a group with 16,000 employees and sales of around
L6,500bn.
IRI, the Italian state holding company, is to take temporary control of the
defence and aerospace interests of Efim, the state-owned group put into
voluntary liquidation in July, pending a full takeover.
The agreement seals an announcement by the Italian government that the two
activities, comprising predominantly the Oto Melara defence unit and the
Agusta helicopters concern, would be 'rented' to IRI's Finmeccanica unit for
up to six months.
A price will be negotiated during the 'rental' period, to start on January
1. Both units are likely to be incorporated in Finmeccanica's listed Alenia
aerospace and defence subsidiary.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1700</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAERFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: Nokia cuts its forestry links
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   STOCKHOLM
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
NOKIA, the Finnish electronics group, is selling all its shares in Jamont,
Europe's second-largest paper tissue company, in a deal worth at least
FM550m (Dollars 108m).
The disposal means the group is severing its last ties with forestry, the
industry on which it was founded 127 years ago.
The buyers of the 13.4 per cent stake are James River, the US paper group,
and Italian investment company Cragnotti &amp; Partners. They will gain full
control of Jamont as they own 86.6 per cent of its shares through Jamont
Holdings.
Nokia says the sale will release a profit of some FM200 to FM300m for
investment in its core mobile telecommunications and electrical activities.
The final price will depend on Jamont's 1992 profits and currency factors at
the year-end.
The immediate trigger for the sale was the expiry of an option agreement at
the end of this year, although Nokia had signalled its desire to leave the
paper business some time ago.
Under the original joint venture agreement of 1989, when Jamont was set up
by Nokia, James River and Italy's Ferruzzi, the Finnish group's paper
activities essentially became a portfolio investment.
A year later, it sold a 50 per cent stake in Jamont-Nokia, one of the two
companies established under the joint venture, and was left with a holding
of just 13.4 per cent in Jamont. That sale was concluded for FM559m.
Jamont, with expected 1992 sales of Ecu1.2bn (Dollars 1.5bn), has some 14
per cent of the European tissue market, trailing Scott of the US with 18 per
cent.
Nokia also said its Nokia Cables and Machinery subsidiary was setting up a
joint stock company near Tallinn in Estonia with Harju KEK. Nokia will
upgrade Harju Elekter's cable-making lines to enhance the Estonian group's
export possibilities.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1701</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAEOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: Austrian banks see rising bad
debts
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By IAN RODGER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   ZURICH
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE Austrian economy has been a rare star performer among industrialised
countries in the past year. But bleak announcements this week from the
country's two largest banks, Z-Landerbank Bank Austria and Creditanstalt
Bankverein, make clear that the good times have come abruptly to an end.
Creditanstalt, which in July looked forward to a better second half, said
yesterday it would slash its annual dividend by 60 per cent to Sch6 per
share and eliminate the staff bonus to build reserves for rapidly mounting
bad loans.
Bank Austria would not comment on its dividend plans, but forecast a 6 per
cent slump in its pre-tax profits for the year to about Sch1.9bn (Dollars
172m) and provisions of close to Sch5bn.
Mr Guido Schmidt-Chiari, chairman of Creditanstalt, said the sudden
deterioration of the finances of small and medium size companies in Austria
'came as an unpleasant surprise to all banks'.
He said three years of a very strong currency and high real interest rates
were taking a heavy toll. A record number of business failures was expected
this year.
In some cases, there were extraordinary factors at work. Textile and
clothing producers were being badly hit by European Community association
agreements with eastern European countries that came into effect this year
and discriminate against non-EC producers.
The forest products industry was suddenly facing tougher competition as a
result of devaluations in Scandinavia and sluggish demand in its principal
export market, Italy.
Mr Rene-Alfons Haiden, chairman of Bank Austria said: 'Inland credit risks
have grown in all areas, and I fear that the situation will be worse next
year.'
The Creditanstalt dividend cut shocked investors, and the ATX index of 18
leading shares on the Vienna Borse, fell 1.7 per cent to 738.77, its lowest
point since August. Creditanstalt preferred shares dropped Sch14 to Sch421
and the ordinary shares were off Sch11 to Sch460.
The cut was particularly surprising in the light of the bank's forecast of
roughly unchanged pre-tax profit of Sch2.1bn for the year and a 10 per cent
rise in operating profits to Sch3.2bn. 'We had a long discussion about it,
but my feeling is that we are not living in a period for half-measures,' Mr
Schmidt-Chiari said.
The cut will save Sch355m and the elimination of staff bonuses another
Sch200m. The bank has set a preliminary figure of Sch800m for provisions
compared with last year's Sch577.7m. It made clear that provisions for
foreign borrowers would be lower this year.
Mr Haiden said he expected Bank Austria to make an operating profit of
Sch2.9bn-Sch3bn, down from Sch3.31bn. Earlier, the bank, which will seek
London and New York listings for its shares next year, said its pre-tax
profits would fall to Sch1.9bn from Sch2.05bn in 1991.
Both banks are cutting costs and eliminating excessive marketing practices
in the domestic market. Creditanstalt said it expected the payoff to begin
to appear next year, and was budgeting for higher profits for 1993.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1702</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAEMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: Share swap in Spanish oxygen
producer
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER BRUCE
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MADRID
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
BANESTO, the Spanish bank, is to take a 1 per cent stake in the French
industrial gas group, Air Liquide, after a share swap, announced yesterday,
which will leave the French group in almost complete control of Spain's
largest oxygen producer, Sociedad Espanola de Oxigeno.
Under the deal, Banesto's industrial corporation, which has a stake of 24.9
per cent in SEO, and Bestinver, an investment vehicle controlled by the
Entrecanales construction family, which has a further 9.06 per cent of SEO,
will transfer these shares to Air Liquide.
The French group already has 58 per cent of the Spanish group. Under the
agreement, Banesto will receive 0.99 per cent of Air Liquide's stock from
Airliquide's US arm, ALIC. The stock is worth about Dollars 87m. Bestinver
will receive 0.36 per cent of Air Liquide, also from ALIC, worth about
Dollars 31m.
It remains unclear whether Banesto intends to hold on to its Air Liquide
stake.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1703</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Owners Abroad links with Thomas Cook
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD GOURLAY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
OWNERS Abroad, the UK's second largest tour operator, yesterday signalled
further consolidation within the European holiday market by announcing a
tie-up with Thomas Cook Group and its German parent, LTU Group.
Thomas Cook will secure a 10.3 per cent stake in an enlarged group while
Owners Abroad will have additional access to the Thomas Cook chain of retail
outlets. Owners Abroad will also invest Pounds 20m in fixed-rate loan notes
in Thomas Cook.
The announcement places a new dimension on months of speculation that a bid
was imminent for Owners Abroad. In October the company said it had received
an approach from a potential purchaser.
City observers said the alliance with Thomas Cook and the powerful LTU
travel group was like a shot across the bow of the predator, believed to be
Airtours, the UK's third largest tour operator.
Owners' shares initially reacted to the deal by falling, as the likelihood
of a full bid appeared to recede. But they recovered to close down only 1p
at 87p as it became apparent that the tie-up with a group of Thomas Cook's
stature could strongly improve its competitive position. Mr Christopher
Rodrigues, chief executive of Thomas Cook, described the deal as three joint
ventures or partnerships reinforced by the swap of shares and the loan
notes. In addition to the increased links between Owners' tour operation and
Thomas Cook retail, the groups' aircraft fleets and tour operations would be
amalgamated.
The three partnerships, he said, would enhance operating profits by Pounds
14m in the year ending October 1994 - half of which would be retained by
Owners Abroad and half by Thomas Cook and LTU. On the retail side, there
would be joint marketing of Owners Abroad holidays. Mr Rodrigues said Thomas
Cook was likely to expand the retail outlets by nearly a third to more than
440.
Owners Abroad reported pre-tax profits down in the year to October from
Pounds 31.6m to Pounds 25.5m on sales of Pounds 772m. The total dividend is
to increase from 3.2p to 3.5p.
Earlier this year LTU bought 90 per cent of Thomas Cook. Westdeutsche
Landesbank, which owns 34 per cent of LTU, bought the other 10 per cent and
Airtours bought the Pickfords travel agency chain from NFC, the transport
group.
Lex, Page 20; Details, Page 22
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1704</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFADSFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / The Lex Column: Owners Abroad
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Airtours may have made an informal approach earlier this year for rival tour
operator Owners Abroad but the Germans have now firmly laid out their towels
on the beach.
In seeking a 10 per cent stake in Owners Abroad, the German LTU Group aims
to secure its strategic position in the UK package holiday market following
its recent acquisition of the Thomas Cook travel agency. But LTU also
envisages considerable operating benefits from pooling its German chartered
airlines and tour operations with those of Owners in the UK.
As for Owners, the proposed deal brings a useful cash injection and access
to the 340-outlet Thomas Cook chain. This will allow it to achieve the
vertical integration which has become the latest rage for tour operators.
Such a low-risk diversification may be particularly appreciated by Owners'
shareholders given their company's distinctly patchy acquisition record.
But the deal also has clear defensive implications - not least in diverting
attention from a pretty dismal set of annual trading figures. It is of
course possible that the move may flush out a hostile bid from Airtours.
Either way, Owners' shareholders should be happy enough to sit tight.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1705</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFACQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Members back merger of public-service unions
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID GOODHART, Labour Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE three-way merger between Britain's main public-service unions has been
overwhelmingly backed by the members of three unions.
About 550,000 out of a possible electorate of 1.5m voted and by a margin of
four to one endorsed the creation of Unison, which will function from next
July.
Unison - formed out of Nalgo, which predominates in local government, and
Nupe and Cohse, both with their roots in the health service - will be the
largest union in Britain, underlining the extent to which union membership
is now concentrated in the public sector.
Mr Alan Jinkinson, the Nalgo general secretary who will lead the new union
until February 1996, said yesterday: 'This is a historic day for our three
unions and for Britain's cash-starved public services.' Mr Rodney
Bickerstaffe, the current Nupe leader, is expected to take over as leader
when Mr Jinkinson retires.
Unison is breaking new ground among larger unions by having 44 out of its 67
executive seats reserved for women and 13 of those reserved for women on low
pay. About two thirds of the merged union's members will be women.
One of the strongest arguments put by supporters of the merger was that a
radical union shake-up was required as a response to the changes in the
health service and local government, especially the decentralisation of
bargaining.
Cohse and Nupe, which are both affiliated to the Labour Party, will merge
their political funds. Nalgo, which is not affiliated, will continue to have
a separate political fund.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 12
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1706</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFABUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Birmingham council cuts 3,000 jobs
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW ADONIS, PAUL CHEESERIGHT and LISA WOOD
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BIRMINGHAM City Council, England's largest local authority, yesterday
announced 3,000 redundancies in a package of cuts needed to keep within
government capping limits for next year.
The redundancies, which come on top of 1,000 jobs lost through natural
wastage in the last year, affect 6 per cent of the council's workforce.
Redundancies will be compulsory if insufficient volunteers come forward.
Sir Richard Knowles, Birmingham Labour leader, said the council's
'horrendous financial position' brought about by the government's 'unfair'
assessment of the city's spending needs made the redundancies unavoidable.
'The government's action strikes at the heart of the Birmingham economy,
which has already suffered disproportionately as a result of the
government-inspired recession,' he added.
Birmingham's present spending is capped at Pounds 879m for 1993-94. The
council claims it is being allowed to spend only 0.73 per cent more than
last year because the government has overestimated by Pounds 15m the amount
it actually spends on further education - which is being taken over by
central government.
Other city authorities also claim to have been penalised by overestimates of
current spending on further education. Since most are already spending at
their capping levels, the implications are serious for next year's budgets.
Sheffield has announced 800 redundancies and Coventry indicated yesterday
that it would have to shed about 1,000 posts to keep within capping limits.
Birmingham faced the unpalatable choice of cutting services or slashing its
extensive capital programme. Last year capital financing costs absorbed
Pounds 264m, or 17 per cent, of the city council's revenue spending of
Pounds 1.56bn.
The main capital projects throughout the 1980s were the National Exhibition
Centre, the International Convention Centre and the National Indoor Arena.
The Trades Union Congress yesterday urged the government to tackle rising
unemployment, Lisa Wood writes.
The call came as the Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development
forecast that the UK would have the biggest increase in unemployment among
leading industrial nations in the first half of the 1990s. The official
unemployment total for November will be published today.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1707</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAA7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Deals put in doubt by Kenyan poll
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL HOLMAN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NAIROBI
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
ONE OF Kenya's main opposition parties warned yesterday that questionable
projects involving British and other foreign companies would be reappraised
if it won this month's general election.
The warning came as the political temperature of Kenya's tense election
campaign rose a further notch.
Police given orders to shoot to kill in the trouble-torn Rift Valley
Province, and election observers again criticised the for its conduct of the
election process.
In separate letters to the British High Commissioner and the Japanese
ambassador, Mr Robert Shaw, a senior official in the Ford (Kenya) party
listed five projects and a loan agreement involving state-owned
corporations.
Although this is not the first time some of the projects listed have been
the subject of speculation, the opposition claims to have gathered more
evidence.
In his letter to Sir Kieran Prendergast, the British high comissioner, Mr
Shaw stressed that a Ford (Kenya) government 'will honour all Kenya's
honestly incurred international obligations'.
But independent auditors would be asked to investigate alleged 'complicity
in corruption by external financiers as well as the executors of the
projects', the letter continued.
Editorial comment, Page 18
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1708</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAA1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Deals put in doubt by Kenyan poll
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL HOLMAN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NAIROBI
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
ONE OF Kenya's main opposition parties warned yesterday that questionable
projects involving British and other foreign companies would be reappraised
if it won this month's general election.
The warning came as the political temperature of Kenya's tense election
campaign rose a further notch. Police given orders to shoot to kill in the
trouble-torn Rift Valley Province, and election observers again criticised
the for its conduct of the election process.
In separate letters to the British High Commissioner and the Japanese
ambassador, Mr Robert Shaw, a senior official in the Ford (Kenya) party
listed five projects and a loan agreement involving state-owned
corporations.
Although this is not the first time some of the projects listed have been
the subject of speculation, the opposition claims to have gathered more
evidence.
In his letter to Sir Kieran Prendergast, the British high comissioner, Mr
Shaw stressed that a Ford (Kenya) government 'will honour all Kenya's
honestly incurred international obligations'.
But an independent firm of auditors would be asked to investigate alleged
'complicity in corruption by external financiers as well as the executors of
the projects' the letter continued.
Meanwhile the government's conduct of the run-up to the December 29 general
election has again been criticised by international monitors.
The Washington-based International Republican Institute yesterday expressed
'fears that the process has been significantly compromised by the government
on behalf of the ruling party'.
In its preliminary report the institute expresses concern about
'government's centralised and systematic manipulation of the administrative
and security structure of the state,' including use of 'substantial monetary
resources'.
Earlier this week the Commonwealth observer group warned that the election
was being jeopardised by nomination 'irregularities' that have led to 17
candidates of the ruling Kanu party being returned unopposed.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1709</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAAQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / German warning on party ban
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BONN
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Mainstream German politicians cautioned yesterday against banning the
far-right Republican party, under investigation on suspicion of being
anti-democratic, Reuter reports from Bonn.
Several state interior ministers said they hoped the investigation announced
by the government on Tuesday would help major parties win a public opinion
battle with the Republicans, the strongest of several small rightist
parties. But they warned an outright ban, like ones Bonn imposed recently on
two smaller rightist groups, would only drive members underground or into
other far-right organisations.
Germany unveiled a new computer system yesterday to help accommodate the
huge influx of refugees from eastern Europe and developing countries. The
DM2m (Pounds 823,000) system, in operation from April 1, is designed to
distribute asylum-seekers more quickly between crowded refugee hostels. It
allows officials immediate access to information on how many beds are
available in each of Germany's 16 federal states, which take refugees based
on a quota system.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1710</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLQCFAAPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921217
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 DEC 92 / Ireland parties in coalition talks
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TIM COONE
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   DUBLIN
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
IRELAND'S Fianna Fail and Labour parties yesterday began exploring the
possibility of forming a coalition government, following parliament's
failure on Monday to elect a new prime minister, writes Tim Coone in Dublin.
Leaders of both parties disagree about who should lead such a coalition,
however. Since the general election three weeks ago in which no party
emerged with a clear Dail majority, the three main opposition parties, Fine
Gael, Labour and the Progressive Democrats, were considered to be the most
likely to form the new government.
Labour's insistence that there should be a centre-left policy programme and
that its leader, Mr Dick Spring, should be prime minister, has been rejected
both by Fianna Fail and by the main opposition Fine Gael party.
Mr Albert Reynolds, the outgoing prime minister, who now heads a caretaker
minority government, held exploratory meetings with Mr Spring earlier this
week and the two parties have exchanged policy documents.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1711</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAGBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Spastics Society criticises Tecs
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LISA WOOD, Labour Staff
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE Spastics Society yesterday criticised the standard of training provided
to disabled people by the Training and Enterprise Councils.
A report based on a survey of 138 organisations involved with disabled
people said most Tecs had failed in their responsibility to ensure suitable
high-quality training for disabled people.
Mr Brian Lamb, the society's head of campaigns, said: 'Tecs have not met the
training needs of disabled people and the gap between the rhetoric of what
was supposed to be on offer and the reality is enormous.'
Tecs, in their contracts with government, have to take account of the
training requirements of 'special needs' clients. The society criticised the
present funding regime for failing to recognise the extra costs that may be
involved in training a disabled person.
Cuts in provision had had a disproportionate effect on disabled people and
fundamentally undermined the Tecs' abilities to carry out government
policies aimed at targeted groups, the society said.
Wasted Opportunities, Spastics Society, 12 Park Crescent, London W1N 4EQ.
Pounds 4.95.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1712</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAGAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Lawyers offer deal to avert legal aid cuts
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT RICE, Legal Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BARRISTERS and solicitors in England and Wales offered yesterday to accept a
legal-aid pay freeze next year if the Government withdrew proposals outlined
in the Autumn Statement to cut legal-aid eligibility.
The offer was made by the Law Society, the Bar and the Legal Aid
Practitioner's Group in response to indications from the Lord Chancellor
earlier this month that he would welcome 'suggestions on how the legal-aid
budget might be contained otherwise than I proposed'.
Lord Mackay's plans, including a reduced level of disposable income that
applicants can earn before being entitled to free legal aid, were attacked
by lawyers and consumer organisations as a severe limitation on access to
justice.
The Law Society estimates that 10m people will become ineligible for civil
legal aid.
Lord Taylor, the Lord Chief Justice, said falling eligibility was a 'blot'
on the justice system.
The society, in a letter to Lord Mackay, called on the government to
withdraw the proposed cuts in eligibility and start urgent discussions on
substitute measures.
Lawyers believe ways can be found to contain costs within public-expenditure
targets that will be less damaging to the public.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1713</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAF9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: PM 'would not block UN effort'
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RALPH ATKINS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE prime minister expressed reservations yesterday about the enforcement of
the no-fly zone over Bosnia, although he indicated that Britain would not
block such a move by other countries at the UN.
Mr Major, who earlier reviewed Britain's stance on Bosnia at a meeting with
cabinet colleagues, said enforcing a no-fly zone might hamper humanitarian
efforts and threaten UK troops. He added: 'We have never ruled out a
possible need to enforce the zone.'
In the Commons, Mr John Smith, the Labour leader, said that while
appreciating concern about the possible effect on humanitarian aid and the
safety of UK troops, there was a growing feeling in this country and the
international community that 'there is little point in having a no-fly zone,
which can be defied with such impunity'.
The prime minister stressed that 'other measures' were under consideration.
Downing Street said these included stronger sanctions and 'international
expressions of disgust' at Serbia's actions. Breaking telecommunications and
diplomatic links with Belgrade is one possibility.
Officials have also been examining the possibility of suggesting an end of
the blanket UN embargo on arms shipments to the region.
In spite of pressure from some Tory MPs and the Labour leadership, the
government wants a full discussion with allies before escalating action in
Bosnia. Several cabinet ministers are arguing strongly against commiting
more British troops in the region.
However, at a private meeting with Tory backbenchers, Mr Malcolm Rifkind,
defence secretary, hinted that Britain might be prepared to send troops
under UN auspices to Macedonia or Kosovo.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1714</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAF7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Ballot threat at London Transport
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
UNION leaders representing London bus crews say they will ballot members
over industrial action in the new year if London Transport refuses to allow
workers to remain in the company pension scheme.
The union said it fears staff will suffer when 11 subsidiary companies of
London Buses are privatised at the end of next year.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1715</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAF6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Jubilee Line talks disappoint minister
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
MR STEVE NORRIS, minister for transport in London, said yesterday he was
'disappointed' that agreement had not yet been reached between the
government and the private sector on funding for the Jubilee Line extension.
He emphasised in the Commons that there was 'good faith' on both sides in
the negotiations. Mr Norris was responding to MPs' concern over the future
of the plan to extend the London Underground line south-east to London's
Docklands.
He said: 'One of the stumbling blocks is that we are now dealing with a
desperate bunch of people . . . American banks, Canadian banks, European
banks . . . I hope to be able to have happier news in due course.'
The 11 banks backing the scheme are pledged to provide Pounds 400m of the
Pounds 1.8bn total cost with the government providing the rest.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1716</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAF5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Brazil sets back sale of state companies
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTINA LAMB
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   RIO DE JANEIRO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
PRESIDENT Itamar Franco has temporarily suspended Brazil's privatisation
programme to 'review the rules' in a move many investors are interpreting as
the new government's first real step away from modernisation.
The shock decision comes two days after neighbouring Uruguay voted heavily
against privatisation. It has sparked fears of a return to a more
nationalist policy and contradicts the government's promise to go ahead with
all sales scheduled until March.
Although Mr Franco insisted the programme would continue and set new dates
for sales in March and April, the main Sao Paulo index fell 4.3 per cent.
The price of Brazilian debt on the secondary market also dropped - from 28
cents on the dollar to just 26.5 cents within an hour, almost half what it
was six months ago.
Mr Franco is a past critic of privatisation and the programme has been in
doubt since taking office in September after Congress removed his
predecessor, Mr Fernando Collor. He has already cancelled one sale.
The decision means delaying six scheduled sales, including next Tuesday's
auction of the National Steel company (CSN), which would have been the
largest privatisation to date, valued at Dollars 1.6bn. It follows
allegations that CSN directors were benefiting personally from the sale.
Yesterday the company president was sacked. The sale is now scheduled for
April 5.
The Privatisation Commission has been given five days to elaborate new
rules. These are expected to include a new 30 per cent minimum cash
requirement.
Mr Franco said the object of the review was 'to protect the national wealth
of the Brazilian people' and insisted the programme was 'irreversible'.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1717</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAF4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / World Trade News: Vodafone moves into Australia
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DANIEL GREEN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
AUSTRALIA has awarded an operator's licence for a mobile telephone network
to a group owned by Vodafone of the UK. Called Arena GSM, it becomes the
third licence-holder for Australia, one of the world's fastest growing
markets.
Arena GSM is paying ADollars 140m for the licence and intends to invest
another ADollars 400m in the project. It beat off three other shortlisted
companies: Singapore Telecom and local operators Matrix Telecommunications
and Voxson.
The new service is scheduled to start by next October and must be available
to 80 per cent of the population by the end of 1996, according to the terms
of the licence.
The latter also requires Australian interests to control more than half of
Arena GSM by 2003. Arena GSM will be competing against existing
licence-holders, Optus Communications and the state-owned Australian and
Overseas Telecommunications Corporation.
The infrastructure for the new network is likely to be supplied either by
Ericsson or Sweden or Finland's Nokia.
Vodafone - see Lex
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1718</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAF2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / World News In Brief: Chelsea Football Club
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Chelsea Football Club's Stamford Bridge ground has been sold by debt-ridden
Cabra Estates to the Royal Bank of Scotland for an undisclosed sum. The club
has been granted a 20-year lease and an option to buy the west London
stadium.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1719</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAF1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / International Company News: Amoco exploration directed
overseas
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN FRIEDMAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
AMOCO, the Chicago-based energy group, yesterday offered further evidence of
the trend in the US oil and gas industry towards keeping a tight rein on
capital spending and directing more funds to projects outside the US.
Amoco said it planned to spend Dollars 3.2bn on capital investment and
exploration next year, a budget that is largely unchanged on the spending
level authorised for this year.
Some Dollars 1.85bn of this amount will be devoted to exploration and
production, of which 70 per cent, or some Dollars 1.3bn, will be outside the
United States. Last year, the company spent Dollars 1.275bn on exploration
and production overseas.
A growing number of US oil and gas companies have decided recently redirect
exploration efforts away from the US. This trend results partly from
congressional and local restrictions on drilling offshore of Florida and
California and the coastal plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in
Alaska.
Last July, Amoco announced cost-cutting plans to take an Dollars 800m
restructuring charge in the second quarter and to reduce its workforce by
8,500 employees, or 16 per cent, by the end of next year. In the first nine
months of this year, Amoco's net income was Dollars 222m, against Dollars
1.33bn in the same period of last year.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 28
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1720</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAF0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / International Company News: Vodaphone wins Australian
licence
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN BROWN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE Australian government yesterday awarded a licence to operate a third
mobile telephone network to a consortium led by Vodafone, the UK
telecommunications group.
Mr Bob Collins, the communications minister, said the Arena GSM consortium
would pay ADollars 140m (USDollars 96.6m) for the licence, which attracted
offers from four consortia.
The Arena consortium comprises Vodafone and two Australian companies, AAP
Telecommunications and Exicom. The main competitor for the licence is
believed to have been a consortium led by Singapore Telecommunications.
The government said the Arena offer would create about 5,000 jobs. Arena is
believed to have promised to direct research and development spending to
Australia to help develop the local telecommunications industry.
Arena will compete with mobile services offered by Australia Telecom, the
government-owned carrier, and Optus, a consortium owned by BellSouth of the
US, Cable &amp; Wireless of the UK, and Mayne Nickless, the Australian transport
group.
Australia Telecom and Optus have provided competing analogue mobile services
since July, but will switch to group special mobile (GSM) digital services
next year.
All the bidders for the third licence offered to use digital technology from
the commencement of services. But Arena is thought to have won partly
because of its experience in operating GSM in Europe.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 28
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1721</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: BBA buys rest of US offshoot
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
BBA GROUP, which serves the automotive, industrial and aviation markets, has
conditionally agreed to acquire the outstanding 20 per cent minority
shareholding in IGH, its US subsidiary, as part of an overall settlement of
all litigation with the original vendors.
Shareholder approval will be sought because the vendors are currently
directors of IGH.
BBA acquired the 80 per cent of IGH in May 1989 for a consideration of
Dollars 51.6m (Pounds 30.7m). The acquisition arrangements included
provisions for the vendors to receive an earned pay-out of Dollars 15m based
on the results of IGH for the two years ended June 30 1990 which has not
become payable.
During the course of 1991 actions were brought against BBA and certain of
its subsidiaries' directors and its employees in a New York Federal Court by
the vendors. The damages claimed were in the sum of Dollars 300m.
The settlement details mean that when added to the consideration BBA paid
for the original 80 per cent of IGH this gives an aggregate acquisition cost
to BBA for 100 per cent of IGH of Dollars 72.6m.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1722</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: US expansion for Bemrose
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Bemrose Corporation, the security and promotional printer, is expanding in
the US through an interest in Lite-R-Line, distributor of nail clippers, pen
knives, and emery boards as promotional gifts.
Bemrose Yattendon, the 50 per cent owned US associate, has paid Dollars
1.45m (Pounds 928,000) for the assets and goodwill of Lite-R-Line from
London International Group. Sales for 1992 will approach Dollars 2m.
For 1991, Bemrose Yattendon contributed Pounds 957,000 to group profits, a
rise of 67 per cent. In the first half of this year profits were a further
41 per cent ahead of 1991.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1723</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Scottish tourism suffers 1% fall
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JAMES BUXTON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE Scottish tourist industry suffered a 1 per cent fall in turnover in real
terms in the 1992 season, the Scottish Tourist Board said yesterday. The
industry's turnover was Pounds 1.7bn.
Spending by visitors from England was down 9 per cent at Pounds 740m, while
spending by visitors from overseas was up 6 per cent at Pounds 540m. Scots
spent Pounds 370m on tourism in their own country, an increase of 2 per cent
in real terms.
Mr Ian Grant, the board's chairman, said Scotland had suffered from the
effect of the recession on English people, who may have been taking fewer
holidays.
He believed Scotland would receive more visitors from the US next year after
the recovery in the value of the dollar against sterling.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1724</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Engineers are 'more gloomy on prospects'
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JAMES BUXTON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SCOTTISH engineering companies have become more gloomy about their prospects
in the past three months, the latest survey by Scottish Engineering says.
Eighteen per cent of companies said they were more optimistic than three
months earlier while 38 per cent said they were less optimistic, with 44 per
cent unchanged.
The survey shows that orders for electronics companies have improved and
companies in all sectors, except for small ones, have achieved a rise in
export orders.
Capital investment is generally decreasing except in the electronics and
heavy engineering industries. Employment is falling across the industry,
except for electronics, where it rising slightly.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1725</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / World News in Brief: Lamplugh kidnap charge
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Frenchman Anthony Bourgois,20, was charged in Oxford with trying to kidnap
Elizabeth Lamplugh, whose estate agent sister, Suzy, vanished six years ago.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1726</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / World News in Brief: Sackings in India
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
India's federal government sacked three state governments ruled by a
pro-Hindu party. The move, which follows communal rioting sparked by the
razing of a mosque, means direct rule from New Delhi for Madhya Pradesh,
Rajasthan and Himachal Pradesh.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1727</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFSFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Observer: Underground
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
A missing piece has been returned to the French corporate chess-board.
Francis Lorentz, hero of many battles at state-owned computer-
maker Bull, has found a new job. Now 50, the tenacious mountaineering
Alsatian has been chosen as the boss of the RATP, the troubled Parisian
metro network.
Six months ago, Lorentz was booted out of loss-making Bull after having
clashed with former Prime Minister Edith Cresson over whether to allow the
Japanese electronics group NEC to take a minority stake in Bull. Although he
won the NEC battle, it made him enemies in the public administration and
scarcely strengthened his job security.
It's as well that Lorentz likes a challenge because that is precisely what
he will get at the RATP, not least in negotiations over metro drivers'
working conditions. They were the bone of contention behind last month's
resignation of ex-chairman Christian Blanc, after drivers' strikes forced
millions of Parisians to walk home through spectacular traffic jams.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1728</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Observer: Currency quiz
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
A cry for help from Goldman Sachs no less. David Morrison, the company's
chief international economist, is worried that no one is going to be able to
solve his Christmas quiz and thereby win two jeroboams of champagne.
These are the questions: Which currency would President-elect Clinton be
least likely to draw on if reminiscing on his days at Oxford? Which eastern
currency detached itself in early November and would prove useful in
attempting to win the football pools but, ironically, not in France? In
response to which event this year did a European foreign minister declare:
'If you can't join them, beat them?'
In the event of a tie, the overall winner will be the producer of the best
completed limerick, the first two lines of which are as follows: 'There once
was an old central banker, whose currency filled him with rancour. . . '
Answers to Morrison by tomorrow night. Telephone 071-774 1000; fax 774 1181.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1729</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Observer: Changing times
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
What are we to make of the government's decision to find a new public
relations and marketing adviser for the sale of its next tranche of BT
shares? With the reappointment of S G Warburg and Linklaters &amp; Paines, it
looked as if the government intended to use the same old team of advisers.
However, it has replaced Dewe Rogerson, the undoubted pr king of the
privatisation world, with Brunswick, a relative upstart in the business. It
seems that the Treasury simply wanted a change. But in the candyfloss world
of the pr merchants, it will be seen as a big blow for Dewe Rogerson.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1730</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Observer: Dispatched
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
One of the most emotive issues in Germany at the moment is whether or not
its troops can be sent abroad on UN peace-keeping missions without violating
the country's constitution. The government is anxious to send medics and
engineers to Somalia but the opposition Social Democratic party seems to be
firmly against sending German troops without amending the constitution.
Hence it comes as something of a surprise to learn that German troops,
albeit only a few of them, were secretly dispatched last year to the Middle
East during Operation Desert Storm. It is understood that former east German
Nationale Volksarmee officers, who had just been integrated into the west
German Bundeswehr, were sent to the desert to give the Americans the
low-down on the Iraqis' Scuds. Their former employer had after all been one
of the biggest users of the Soviet missiles.
If German soldiers can help beat the Iraqis, surely they should be allowed
to help save the Somalis.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1731</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Observer: Economic goals
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Could Chelsea football club's surge up the premier league table be a welcome
economic omen?
It sounds implausible, but if an observation made by Prime Minister John
Major in a recent book holds true, the Blues' revival may be just the tonic
the economy needs. Writing in 'We'll Support You Evermore' - an anthology of
paeans to various soccer clubs by celebrated fans - the prime minister
recalls how in the mid-1970s 'Chelsea's problems seemed to mirror the
country's'.
'As Britain turned to the International Monetary Fund to bail out our
economy, so Chelsea had to go cap in hand to its bankers . . . The upturn in
Chelsea's fortunes in the 1980s was, like Britain's recovery, long overdue
and extremely welcome,' comments Chelsea's famous fan.
Does the relationship still hold? Time will tell. But the cognoscenti will
note that Chelsea's lowest ebb this season was reached when Paul Elliott,
one of its star players, was seriously injured - just 10 days before Black
Wednesday.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1732</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Foreign Affairs: Grievous national harm - Recognition of
minority rights can be a prelude, or an alternative, to frontier changes
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By EDWARD MORTIMER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
By coincidence, this week has seen two big steps forward in the struggle to
establish the rights of minorities in a world of nation states. In New York,
the UN General Assembly adopted a declaration 'on the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities'; and in
Stockholm, the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe appointed
Mr Max van der Stoel, a former Dutch foreign minister, as its first high
commissioner on national minorities.
The processes leading to both steps have been infuriatingly slow. The UN
declaration was originally drafted as long ago as 1978. The CSCE first
alluded to national minorities in the Helsinki Final Act of 1975, but at
that time only to say that those European states on whose territory such
minorities existed would respect the right of their members to equality
before the law, would afford them the 'opportunity for the full enjoyment of
human rights and fundamental freedoms' and would 'protect their legitimate
interests in this sphere'.
Not until June 1990, after the fall of communist regimes in central and
eastern Europe, did CSCE recognise the right of people belonging to
minorities 'freely to express, preserve and develop their ethnic, cultural,
linguistic or religious identity and to maintain and develop their culture
in all its aspects, free of any attempts against assimilation at their
will'. A year later, a CSCE meeting reached the daring conclusion that
'issues concerning national minorities, as well as compliance with
international obligations and commitments concerning the rights of persons
belonging to them, are matters of legitimate international concern and
consequently do not constitute exclusively an internal affair of the
respective state'.
The experts at the meeting went on to list a number of measures by which
some of the participating states had obtained positive results 'in an
appropriate democratic manner'. They said cross-frontier contacts between
people sharing a common ethnic or national origin, cultural heritage or
religious belief should be encouraged, and promised to exchange information
and statements of policy on the subject, 'on a voluntary basis'. But that
was about as far as it went, until this March when the Netherlands put
forward the idea of a high commissioner, which was finally adopted at the
Helsinki summit in early July.
Everyone knew that Mr van der Stoel, a veteran human rights campaigner who
recently served as UN special rapporteur on Iraq, was waiting in the wings.
And by this summer almost everyone could see that the problem was an urgent
one, with ethnic conflicts coming rapidly to the boil all over the Balkans,
central Europe and the former Soviet Union. I fondly imagined Mr van der
Stoel would leap straight into action, taking up (for instance) the
situation of the Hungarian minority in Slovakia, and that of the Russian
speakers left behind in the Baltic states. But the wheels of multinational
diplomacy grind exceedingly slow. He could not even be appointed until the
52 participating states got together again at foreign minister level.
Meanwhile five precious months had been lost.
One of the saddest ironies in the whole affair is that the state that had
been most actively pushing the minorities issue, both at the UN and in CSCE,
was Yugoslavia. It was Yugoslavia that produced the first draft of the UN
declaration back in 1978, and Yugoslavia that pressed tirelessly for CSCE to
take up the subject, against strong French, American and Soviet
reservations. As recently as August 1991, Yugoslavia submitted one of the
most comprehensive national responses to the questionnaire sent out by the
UN sub-commission on the prevention of discrimination and protection of
minorities.
In his progress report submitted last July the sub-commission's special
rapporteur, Mr Asbjorn Eide, remarked that 'leaving aside the issue of
Kosovo, it might appear that the solutions found in Yugoslavia were very
sophisticated, comprehensive and aimed at a degree of national and ethnic
pluralism unparalleled anywhere in the world'. And he drew the obvious moral
that 'it would be excessively legalistic and naive simply to compare
national legislation with regard to minorities on the assumption that
perfect models could be found which could prevent the eruption of violent
conflict'.
Indeed, the Yugoslav tragedy provides excellent arguments for anyone seeking
to bury the whole issue of minority rights. The late Marshal Tito may have
been a communist dictator, but in national terms his policies were admirably
pluralist. Instead of imposing a unitary state or a single national identity
on his fellow citizens, he organised them into six separate republics and
recognised an even larger number of nationalities.
The trouble was, of course, that republics and nationalities did not
perfectly correspond. Many Serbs live outside the Serbian republic, Moslems
had no republic of their own, and Albanians were divided between Serbia and
Macedonia.
That was hardly Tito's fault. His arrangements broadly corresponded to
historical and demographic realities, which provided (one might think) good
reason for keeping the country together.
But once the iron frame of communism began to loosen, populist leaders
exploited national passions, and the structure fell apart. Serbian leaders
suppressed the rights Tito had accorded to Albanians in Kosovo. Slovenian
and Croatian leaders did what they could to weaken the federal
in-stitutions, fearing they would be used as instruments of Serb domination;
when Serbia res-isted, they proclaimed independence. Serbs in Croatia and
Bosnia-Hercegovina took up arms rather than be separated from Serbia, only
to be told by the international community that they had no right to alter
'existing' frontiers, although they had never thought of these frontiers as
international.
After that experience, any state might reasonably argue that it would be
signing its own death warrant by recognising different nationalities among
its citizens, and more especially by recognising any autonomous territorial
entities. Yet the tide of history seems to be running the other way. States
are actually more willing than in the past to admit the existence of
national minorities and to codify their rights. In Europe, they have even
appointed Mr van der Stoel as an official international busy-body to
interfere in these highly sensitive matters.
Why? Because the fall of communism has called in question all forms of
purely authoritarian rule. It has become apparent that simple suppression of
dissent does not work; that strongly held political grievances will in the
end make themselves felt, and, for good or ill (usually in practice for a
mixture of both), the feeling of national identity is one of the strongest
human emotions. Once people believe that they belong to a different nation
from their rulers, it is all too easy for nationalist leaders to persuade
them to see all their grievances through that prism. The more their national
identity is denied or suppressed, the more convinced they are that
independence is the only solution.
But since in so many places national groups live intermingled, independence
is seldom possible without bloodshed. Each national group that escapes from
minority status takes with it a small minority that has to be either coerced
or displaced. Thus even large nations which cared little for minorities in
the past find themselves taking an interest in new minorities of their own
kith and kin, on the other side of new frontiers. And everyone starts to
think how much better it would be if frontiers did not have to change,
because minorities were properly treated within existing states.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1733</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Letter: UK's old enthusiasm for training needs to be
rekindled
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Sir OSCAR DE VILLE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, Peter McGregor's letter about training (December 12) makes an important
point.
Training in industry after the second world war was carried out in many
companies with enthusiasm and vigour. There were training-within-industry
programmes sponsored by government; part-time release for young people to
have one day's study a week; well-established apprenticeship schemes on a
new 'sandwich course' basis; together with the benefits from 'productivity
reports' on US practice in operator training, supervisor training and
management development. By the 1950s these were a minimum for most
industrial companies, where so many ex-service personnel had themselves seen
the effectiveness of military training. This was certainly the case at Ford.
Some of that work will have been sustained and improved upon. But it is
tragically true that for 20 years or so when we in British management were
distracted by industrial relations problems and by transient educational
fashions those earlier standards were often allowed to lapse.
Fortunately there is a new management awareness of the need to re-establish
training as a priority, and this government has done much to that end. But
we lack a clear national pattern, and that old enthusiasm has yet to be
rekindled.
Oscar De Ville,
Bexton Cottage, 18 Pound Lane,
Sonning on Thames,
Berks RG4 0XE
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1734</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Letter: Speculative questions
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr BRIAN TAYLOR
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, Thank you for providing your readers with the articles 'Behind the ERM
crisis' (December 11 and 12). Although I read the FT regularly, I am
apparently illiterate when it comes to understanding the huge markets which
can pump billions through the system in a few hours.
Does the FT know why Britain lost Pounds 10bn defending its currency while
the French, you report, 'made an estimated FFr1.2bn in profit at the
speculators' expense'? Who are these speculators, and where do they get
their money from?
A principle of democracy is involved in these questions. If readers like
myself do not understand the mechanics of currency movements, how can we
control politicians who deal in huge sums at our expense?
Brian Taylor,
6 Fenners Lawn,
Gresham Road,
Cambridge
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1735</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Letter: Ignore critics and enjoy the show
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr GORDON BENTLEY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, What surprises me is that Mr Carter (Letters, December 12) is
surprised] In my experience theatre-goers are unlikely to be disappointed if
they ignore convention and buy tickets only to shows which have received a
critical 'right-hander'.
My next excursion will, if I can obtain two tickets, be to the Royal Opera
House. Are there any Clement Crisp devotees out there sufficiently
apprehensive to send me theirs?
Gordon Bentley,
Woodland Cottage,
Green Lane,
Langley,
Maidstone, Kent ME17 3JW
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1736</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Letter: Strength not only issue
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From P A LEANDRO
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, The recent Standard &amp; Poor's report on the financial strength of some
UK life offices continues the debate on this difficult and complex topic.
Lots of commentators, including many from the actuarial profession, have
counselled caution when using such surveys. One particular point seems to
have been missed by the compilers of such surveys. High levels of free
assets are equated with strength, which is judged to be good by
policy-holders. In my view this is not necessarily the case. It may be that
high levels of free assets are the result of under-declaration of past
policy-holders' bonuses and of penal surrender values. In this situation
high levels of free assets may have been bad for the policy-holders. The
point is that financial strength is not the only issue.
P A Leandro,
Barnett Waddingham
&amp; Company,
consulting actuaries,
11 Tufton Street,
London SW1P 3QB
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1737</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Letter: Doubts over US aims in Somalia
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr MOHAMOUD ABDI
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, The declared objective of the massive US military intervention in the
war-torn and starving Somalia is a humanitarian one. In the Gulf war the
purpose of the US military intervention was that of protecting Saudi Arabia
from 'Iraqi aggression' and it ended with the destruction of Iraq and the
redrawing of its border with Kuwait. There is a real concern among the
Somalis that what looks like a benevolent American occupation of Somalia is
in fact the thin end of a wedge that will ultimately divide the country into
north and south.
It is advisable for the US to stick to its humanitarian intentions, and
confine its military intervention to the areas where there is a need for
them and not send troops north of Belet Weyne. Spreading troops into
relatively peaceful northern and north-eastern regions will be seen as a
sign that this is an army of occupation with more sinister objectives.
Mohamoud Abdi,
editor,
ALIF,
19 Berenger Tower,
Worlds End, London SW10 0EF
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1738</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Letter: Currency value based on edict not a stable measure
of wealth
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From T ROBINSON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, Recent comparison of chocolate bars with currency (Observer, December
8, and Letters, December 10) reminds me, if memory holds, that the original
FT article in 1981 sought seriously to examine the problem of maintaining a
standard measure of wealth over the passage of time, given the unreliability
(ie a tendency to inflation) of fiat money.
'Hours-worked' was one method explored; eg if the average industrial
wage-earner needs to work fewer hours now to buy a given product than he did
10 years ago he may reliably be considered better off, irrespective of the
number of pound notes in his pay packet.
An alternative to 'hours-worked' was the Mars Bar, since it represented a
constant basket of basic commodities: cocoa, sugar, paper etc. Though
humorous, it parallels Prof Hayek's proposals for competing currencies based
on convertibility against fixed baskets of a wide selection of staples.
When ERM is exposed, in the same week, as inherently flawed, both by Mr
Samuel Brittan and Herr Schlesinger, should we try to patch it up or seize
the opportunity to institute a completely new, and extra- (not supra-)
national monetary system? For, any monetary system which depends on value
ascribed simply by the edict of governments to currencies, which
intrinsically have zero value, is itself inherently flawed.
The values of such currencies are legal and economic fictions based solely
on confidence in the economic credentials of the governments concerned. With
electoral self-interest, parties, personalities and policies changing year
by year - and even hour by hour - common sense and history tell us the
system cannot, long term, provide a stable measure nor store of wealth. Yet,
like fruit and nut cases, we persist in believing in the black magic of the
system.
T Robinson,
13 Shenstone,
9-11 Culmington Road,
Ealing, London W13 9NL
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1739</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Survey of The Baltic Basin States (11): Staunch ally in
coldest times - Denmark was an early champion of Baltic freedom from Soviet
rule
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HILARY BARNES
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MR UFFE Ellemann-Jensen, the Danish foreign minister, stuck his neck out to
help and encourage the efforts of the Baltic states to win back their
independence from the Soviet Union in 1990-1991, when the issue was still
very much in doubt.
His efforts generated an enormous fund of goodwill. The result is that there
are now very close and intensive contacts between Denmark and the Baltic
republics, at government, business and private levels. As a Swedish
businessman said, 'Wherever you go in the Baltic states you constantly run
into Danes.'
Interest in the Baltic states is not to the exclusion of activities
elsewhere, however. Poland ranked as Denmark's 14th largest export market in
the first nine months of this year, with trade at DKr2.2bn, slightly more
than exports to countries such as Austria, Greece and Portugal and much
larger than with any other East European country.
In the former East Germany, activity by Danish building firms is so high
that the phrase 'the yellow peril' has acquired a new meaning: it refers to
the yellow licence plates on Danish commercial vehicles.
At the time when the Baltic republics were still struggling for
independence, in 1990-91, Mr Ellemann-Jensen re-established contacts at
government level with the Baltic countries for the first time since 1940
(Denmark never withdrew its 1921 recognition of the Baltic states as
independent republics).
He ensured that they were present, unofficially, at the conferences which
led to the establishment of the CSCE, and the Danish government financed the
establishment in Copenhagen in December 1990 of a joint information office
for the three countries.
Popular support for the Baltic peoples was manifested by a collection
organised by the Copenhagen newspaper Politiken for the establishment of a
Danish cultural centre in Riga, which was opened in early 1991. The Danish
government doubled up the private collection. When, following the failed
coup in Moscow in August, 1991, the Baltics were finally able to declare
their independence, Denmark was the first country officially to re-establish
diplomatic relations with the Baltics.
Denmark's eager support for Baltic independence cooled relationships with
the Soviet Union to a level rarely reached during the cold war years, said
Mr Christian Hoppe, section head at the Ministry for Foreign Affairs in
Copenhagen. But it earned Denmark a place in the hearts and minds of the
Baltic peoples.
The symbolic high point of the new relationship was the visit to all three
Baltic states by Queen Margrethe and her consort, Prince Henrik, accompanied
by Mr Ellemann-Jensen, in August 1992. The Queen received an ecstatic
welcome. Mr Ellemann-Jensen took the initiative which led to the
establishment in March 1992, of the Council of the Baltic Sea States - a
milestone in cooperation in the region, as it was the first meeting of all
the states bordering the Baltic Sea.
Official plans to assist the redevelopment of the countries of East and
Central Europe were first made in 1989, when a total of DKr820m was
allocated for bilateral and international initiatives in Poland and Hungary
in 1990-91. A new programme was agreed in 1991, increasing the sums involved
to DKr2.1bn a year for the period 1992-94, with priority given to the Baltic
states, Poland and the St Petersburg region.
The government now has nine programmes in operation for support to East
Europe. They include a DKr60m 'democracy fund' (which is being used to teach
the Baltics how institutions are organised in a democratic state),
investment funds, an investment insurance fund, project finance funds, an
environmental improvement fund, and special export credit guarantees, as
well as contributions to Nordic, European and international initiatives.
Denmark's position at the entrance to the Baltic is seen by the Danes as
providing it with important opportunities as the former Communist countries
develop.
Mr Poul Nyrup Rasmussen, leader of the Social Democratic Party, shares the
enthusiasm now felt widely in Denmark about the importance of infrastructure
investments in Danish ports.
The reasoning was that the sea is by far the most efficient means of
transport to and from these countries, where it will take years to bring the
road network up to a satisfactory standard. The port of Copenhagen, which
has Denmark's only freeport, is publicising itself as 'the gateway to the
Baltic.'
Copenhagen, the Danes point out, is the first western port of call for
shipments using the Trans-Siberian railway, the western terminus of which is
Tallinn, Estonia.
The enthusiasm of both official Denmark and Danish business for establishing
links with the three Baltic republics has to do with other factors than
goodwill.
There is a feeling that a small country such as Denmark, with a
small-enterprise culture, can benefit by co-operating with other small
countries, even if their markets will always remain small. But when it comes
to actual investment, the big slices go to Poland and East Germany.
The government-supported Investment Fund for East and Central Europe, which
puts money into joint ventures between Danish and East European companies,
has 20 joint ventures up and running in Poland, four in Latvia, two in the
St Petersburg region and one in Lithuania (the fund does not support
investments in Germany).
Among some of the more outstanding Danish projects in the area are the
development by GN Great Northern and Teledanmark, the state
telecommunications group, of optical fibre cable links between Denmark and
Poland and Denmark and St Petersburg, and a north-south link through Poland,
which will be extended through Czechoslovakia and Hungary and a link
eastwards will be designed to hook-up the Baltic republics.
The St Petersburg link will eventually cross the continent to Russia's
Pacific coast, Japan and Korea.
One of the most successful joint ventures was established in Poland in 1990
by Nordisk Wavin, a plastic pipes manufacturer. The Polish company employs
almost 400 people.
Dansk Olie og Naturgas, the state oil and gas group, is helping the Baltic
republics with planning work for building up a natural gas distribution
network.
House of Prince, a division of Skandinavisk Tobacco, has gained control of
Latvia's state tobacco company, with 400 employees, and sees this is a
platform for future sales expansion in the region.
Danish civil engineering consultancy firms, which have a strong
international reputation, are involved in a variety of projects in east
Europe.
One of the smaller consultancies, Knudsen &amp; Sorensen, of Copenhagen, has
established a strong position in the Baltic republics.
One of its most intriguing projects is a plan for redeveloping tourist
facilities on the coast of Lithuania, a popular holiday resort for German
and Scandinavian holidaymakers in the inter-war years.
'Thomas Mann, the author, and Hermann Goering, Hitler's henchman, used to
have summer houses there,' says Mr Christian Bluhme, the managing director.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1740</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Survey of The Baltic Basin States (12): Hopes for Hanseatic
revival - Hamburg, Europe's biggest port, gets a new role
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By QUENTIN PEEL
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
IT WAS back in 1987, when local election fever was building up in the
northern German Land of Schleswig-Holstein, that Mr Bjorn Engholm, leader of
the Social Democrat opposition, hit on the idea of the 'new Hansa.'
His idea was to revive something of the great old Hanseatic trading
tradition, which linked the northern German ports like Bremen, Hamburg, and
Lubeck in a commercial empire stretching around the Baltic Sea.
It was not simply an idea of promoting trade, says Dr Werner Jann, director
of the Schleswig-Holstein government's Denkfabrik (think tank) in Kiel.
Behind it lay a conviction that Schleswig-Holstein was locked into a pattern
of thinking that it was on the periphery of real Europe, picking up the
scraps of trade and investment from the wealthy economic crescent running
from southern England, through the Benelux countries, the Ruhr and southern
Germany to northern Italy.
'Mr Engholm was the one who brought these north European contacts much more
into the public eye,' Dr Jann says. 'It was against a much broader
background. He asked the question: 'What will happen when the European
single market comes about?'
'There was a danger that Europe would orientate itself much more towards its
rich heartland, the famous banana curve from London to Milan. What was going
to happen in the north?
'Mr Engholm said we should try to define an independent identity as a
region. It was no good just wringing our hands and saying: 'We are so far
away.' What we needed was the inspiration of the Baltic region as a region
of the future.'
That was all before it became apparent that eastern Europe was going to open
up both politically and economically, making the ambition of a great
increase in pan-Baltic links suddenly more realistic, and more attractive.
Mr Engholm went on to win the 1988 election in Schleswig-Holstein. Today, as
national leader of the SPD, he is the most likely challenger for the German
chancellorship. One of his first acts in Kiel was to set up the Denkfabrik,
with the task of putting practical flesh on the bones of his idea.
The result was a study proposing a whole range of future links in the
economy, science and research, culture and the environment. 'Our aim was not
just to promote government-to-government contacts, but to get the whole
private sector involved in greater co-operation,' says Dr Jann. 'We
suggested that chambers of trade and industry had greater common interests,
and universities.'
Thus, for example, the chambers of commerce in Schleswig-Holstein and south
Sweden have set up a 'co-operation exchange,' and the city chambers of Kiel
and Gdansk, in Poland, have signed a co-operation agreement. A BaltChamber
has been established to represent the entire region.
Another joint initiative came from Mr Pehr Gyllenhammar (the head of Volvo)
and Mr Engholm, to set up the North European Club, a regular forum of
business leaders from the region. Its aims are to investigate and promote
improvements in transport and communication infrastructure, scientific
collaboration, environmental management, and cultural and youth exchanges.
The club is now seeking to find new business leaders from the emerging
economies of eastern Europe as members - still few and far between.
In the whole exercise, Schleswig-Holstein is co-operating closely with
neighbouring Hamburg, the great port which adds a whole new dimension of
services to attract Scandinavian investors - whether they choose to set up
in the city itself, or in the cheaper hinterland. Indeed, Hamburg itself is
setting up a big East European trade centre, to exploit its new position as
a link between east and west.
This summer, Mr Engholm took a trip to Gdansk, Kaliningrad and Tallinn to
underline the east European side of his Baltic commitment, signing
co-operation deals with each authority along the way. In Poland, for
example, he signed an agreement to give Polish agricultural specialists six
months training and practical experience in Germany.
In Kaliningrad, Mr Engholm promised not to allow the promised Via Baltica -
the trunk road planned to run from Hamburg via Rostock and Gdansk to Tallinn
and St Petersburg - to bypass the Russian enclave. The whole area, he
agreed, desperately needed better communications to develop into a centre of
Baltic co-operation.
As for Estonia, where co-operation is already well advanced,
Schleswig-Holstein agreed to found and support a new economic academy, and
both sides agreed to expand the existing freight ferry service between Kiel
and Tallinn to include passengers.
Quite apart from promoting better communications for its Baltic partners,
Schleswig-Holstein needs them at home.
There is an urgent need for a new link across the Elbe at Hamburg, to
prevent that city from being a bottleneck instead of a facility to
north-south trade. At the same time, even more grandiose plans for a fixed
link across the Fehmarn Belt, cutting the travelling time between Copenhagen
and Hamburg to two hours by high-speed train, are well advanced. The
ambition is to have in place a privately-financed rail link, possibly with a
road link as well, by the year 2003.
All efforts at co-operation, it must be said, have yet to show real
achievement in terms of trade and investment flows. Schleswig-Holstein is
less involved in regional trade than most of the other littoral states: in
overall trade, just 19 per cent of the Land's external ties in 1990 were
with other Baltic states - Finland has about 47 per cent. 'All these things
take time to work through,' says Dr Jann. 'One single big contract could
change the whole picture.'
Given the planned enlargement of the European Community to include Sweden,
Norway and Finland, Mr Engholm and his colleagues are convinced that the
position as a poor northern cousin in Germany is about to change. He no
longer sees the EC internal market as a threat, but as an opportunity.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1741</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Disputes over employees' terms threaten council tendering
plans
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW ADONIS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
LEGAL confusion is threatening the government's plans to extend competitive
tendering in local government, according to companies and councils involved.
The problem concerns the status of employees' terms and conditions when
contracts change hands.
At least two local authorities have had their tendering plans thrown into
disarray in the past week by disputes over the law on the transfer of
'undertakings' - agreements covering staff terms and conditions.
Private contractor Initial Cleaning Services said last night that the
uncertainty could 'completely destroy the government's marketing, testing
and competitive tendering programme, unless it is resolved soon'.
Mr Rodney Brooke, secretary of the Labour-run Association of Metropolitan
Authorities, said: 'Local councils are between the devil and the deep blue
sea. If they seek to transfer undertakings, they risk government penalties;
if they don't, they risk being sued by their employees.'
The Institute of Directors said it was 'deeply concerned about the current
confusion'. It wants the government not only to clarify the existing
position, but to seek to change the 1977 European Community directive on
employees' acquired rights.
The government insists that 'as a general rule' regulations on undertakings
do not apply to local authorities in spite of recent court decisions. It
believes that new employers do not inherit the terms and conditions of
employees who used to do the job for the local authority. However, several
local authorities have been given conflicting legal advice and believe that
new contracts must respect former employees' rights.
Oswestry district council, in Shropshire, is about to take the government to
court on the issue. It is challenging an Environment Department instruction
that it should put its refuse collection out to tender again because it
included a transfer of undertakings clause in its original contract.
Dyfed county council, in south-west Wales, was last night faced with
reinstating 950 staff it made redundant last month following a dispute over
transfer of undertakings.
Council challenge, Page 8
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1742</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Russian leaders strive to reassure on reforms: Chernomyrdin
to put industry's needs first
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOHN LLOYD
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MOSCOW
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
MR BORIS YELTSIN, the Russian president, and Mr Viktor Chernomyrdin, his new
prime minister, strove to reassure the west yesterday that the country's
economic and democratic reforms remained on course.
Mr Chernomyrdin also made clear, however, that he would put industry's needs
at the top of his agenda and would continue controls on energy prices.
Mr Yeltsin, in talks with Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany, who is visiting
Moscow with a government team, claimed he had succeeded in protecting the
reform process in the past two weeks of stormy conflict with the Congress of
People's Deputies.
Mr Yeltsin said: 'Of course both congress and the president were obliged to
make certain compromises, but in politics that is an ordinary occurrence.'
Mr Yegor Gaidar, the former acting prime minister, who yesterday disappeared
from public view after his comment that he was going to catch up on some
sleep, told ministers they should stay in place if they believed further
reform in their areas was possible.
German officials said Mr Chernomyrdin appeared determined to reassure Mr
Theo Waigel, the finance minister who heads the German team discussing
Russian and former-Soviet debt issues, about his role in the reform process.
'I was a member of the government not merely as a supporter but as an active
participant in working out the (reform) programme. I can confirm I will
carry on this course,' he was quoted as saying.
Two of his six fellow ministers attending the talks were Mr Alexander
Shokhin, deputy prime minister in charge of foreign economic relations, and
Mr Andrei Nechayev, the economics minister - both friends and colleagues of
Mr Gaidar.
'I am convinced they are all of the same opinion,' Mr Chernomyrdin said of
the ministers.
Talks on a debt rescheduling package with the Paris Club of creditor
governments would go ahead in Paris this week, he said, with Mr Shokhin
leading the Russian side.
Later, at a press conference, he said: 'I gave you no reason to claim that
the course of reforms will be changed.' However, although he refused to
specify his policies, the tenor of his remarks differed from that of Mr
Gaidar.
He said the chief issue was to stop the decline in industry and a certain
amount of finance would be needed for that - relegating the possibility of
hyperinflation to a category to be 'thought about'. He said he was a
'confident' supporter of controlled energy prices, although coal prices
would rise in the future.
Mr Gaidar's government had also controlled energy prices and Mr Gaidar had
said he would not raise them for some time.
The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank have pressed for prices
to rise in fairly rapid stages to world levels to reduce the subsidies paid
and encourage energy saving.
The prime minister said he would not freeze prices or wages - although he
added a 'yet' for the latter - and said he was for all kinds of property,
but did not favour a 'landslide privatisation' of farms.
Diplomats and officials of the international financial institutions in
Moscow said they believed Mr Chernomyrdin would continue reforms in his own
manner - but by giving priority to industry he made hyperinflation worries
greater than before.
Russia: the future of reform Page 2
Banks face hard currency challenge Page 29
Russian problem may hit grain prices Page 30
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1743</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Boeing, Airbus boosted by Dollars 4.1bn contract
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PAUL BETTS, Aerospace Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A Dollars 4.1bn (Pounds 2.6bn) order for US Boeing and European Airbus
airliners from the Californian aircraft leasing company International Lease
Finance Corporation yesterday gave a boost to the civil aircraft industry.
The bulk of the package of 82 firm aircraft orders went to Boeing, which
secured orders for 53 airliners. But Airbus, which clinched firm orders for
28 aircraft, also won the first firm commitment from ILFC for its new
125-seater A319 jet which it hopes to launch next year.
Airbus said the decision to launch the A319 programme would hinge on the
consortium winning sufficient commitments from other airline customers in
the next few months.
McDonnell Douglas, the other big US commercial aircraft manufacturer now
trailing Boeing and Airbus in the market, won only one firm order from ILFC.
The Dollars 4.1bn package announced by ILFC, the second largest aircraft
leasing company after GPA of Ireland, is one of the biggest single orders to
be announced in the current two-year air transport industry recession. It is
unlikely, however, to ease the immediate strains in the market with airlines
continuing to seek to defer or cancel earlier orders.
ILFC, a subsidiary of AIG, the US insurance group, appears to have decided
to take advantage of bargain prices for new aircraft and engines at a time
when its financially pressed rival GPA is in the midst of negotiations with
its bankers and with manufacturers to defer orders.
The move will provide some relief for the big aircraft and engine
manufacturers and their suppliers. Rolls-Royce said it would supply Dollars
160m worth of engines to power some of the aircraft ordered by ILFC. The US
General Electric group won contracts worth Dollars 1bn for engines to power
51 airliners.
ILFC ordered aircraft from the entire range of Airbus jets including the
wide-body A300, A310, A330 and A340 as well as the narrow-body A320 and
A321. Six A319s were also ordered. Apart from the 28 firm Airbus orders, it
took eight additional options for Airbus jets.
The Boeing orders include its latest wide-body, the 777, as well as the
747-400 jumbo, the 767, the 757 and the 737.
Mr Steven Udvar-Hazy, ILFC's president, said he hoped the orders 'will be a
sparkplug to return confidence to the airline industry'.
US stocks, Page 37
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1744</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAFBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Mercy mission
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
A 70-vehicle convoy of US Marines and French troops leave the Somali capital
Mogadishu for the starvation-ravaged town of Baidoa. The intervention is
part of a security operation to ensure relief for up to 2m Somalis at risk
of death by starvation.
Report, Page 4; Observer, Page 21
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1745</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAE9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / The Lex Column: Electricity
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The regional electricity companies have notably failed to gain ground since
the regulator last week ruled in favour of the dash for gas. Southern
Electric has an interest in three gas-fired power projects, yet its shares
have fallen since Professor Littlechild went public. Since Southern's
interim figures yesterday were nothing but solid, the obvious conclusion is
that the good news was already in the price. Having drawn the scope of his
inquiry so tightly, Professor Littlechild was indeed less likely to come
down hard on Southern for backing gas. The nagging concern, though, is that
the sector has only cleared the first hurdle of an arduous regulatory
course.
The government's energy review could still override the regulator's
conclusions. That would make Professor Littlechild's position difficult, to
say the least. Assuming the white paper leaves the regional companies
unscathed, a review of electricity supply is not more than a few weeks
behind. With the more important distribution review due to start in the
autumn and only a sketchy outline of the regulator's thinking on the table,
the market might be forgiven for keeping the champagne on ice.
Since Professor Littlechild is investigating the generators' prices both in
the proposed supply contracts and in the electricity pool, National Power
and PowerGen still look more exposed. The promise of 12 per cent dividend
growth from the regional companies this year and yields comfortably above
the market average allow for a fair degree of risk. If too many regulatory
chickens come home to roost, though, Welsh Water's decision to take profits
on its South Wales Electricity holding yesterday may look rather canny.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1746</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAE8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / The Lex Column: UK economy
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Yesterday's economic data leave plenty of room for argument about what is
actually happening to the economy. Manufacturing output in October was
better than the market expected, retail trade in November, as measured by
the Confederation of British Industry survey, worse. There is less room for
uncertainty about November's producer price data. Input prices jumped a
seasonally-adjusted 2.4 per cent, their largest monthly gain for 16 years.
It is, of course, impossible to be sure how much devaluation effect is yet
to be felt on input prices, but the pace of acceleration since August's 0.7
per cent fall clearly contradicts the claim that Black Wednesday would have
minimal inflationary impact. How long it will take for producers to pass on
the extra costs is equally uncertain. Margin pressure may be alleviated by
lower unit labour costs, but industry's patience is likely to be thin. A
slightly disturbing feature of yesterday's figures is the 0.6 per cent rise
in output prices of food, drink and tobacco. It looks as though
manufacturers are already preparing to pass on green pound devaluation costs
before they are fully felt next year.
Today's retail sales figures may shed more light on the real economy,
especially since survey data have erred on the side of pessimism recently.
It would be rash, though, to set too much store by the manufacturing output
data. The monthly figures are erratic. Taking the last quarter as a whole,
manufacturing output has fallen 0.2 per cent, which hardly constitutes a
recovery. Indeed the nagging worry remains that incipient inflation may
limit the government's ability to inject life into a disappointing recovery.
That would do little for the equity market from the middle of 1993 when the
authorities will also be issuing gilts hand over fist.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1747</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAE6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / London Stock Exchange: Tate deal hinted
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER JOHN, JOEL KIBAZO, CHRISTOPHER PRICE and STEVE THOMPSON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
HINTS that Tate &amp; Lyle was negotiating with PepsiCo over new sweetener
contracts sent Tate's shares forward smartly late in yesterday's trading
session. Analysts said Tate had confirmed yesterday that it is supplying
PepsiCo, although it had refused to give any details on the new
arrangements.
Some observers speculated that, with the intense price war in the sweetener
market continuing, any new contract prices would probably have been tightly
squeezed, and that volume levels could be affected by the recession and the
poor US summer.
However, others said that Tate, which has been making a spate of
presentations, had declared itself confident of maintaining sweetener volume
levels this year. The shares, steady for most of the session, ended 5 1/2 up
at 397 1/2 p.
Views on Cadbury
Cadbury-Schweppes shares were attracting widely differing views yesterday as
County NatWest downgraded the group and moved it to its sell list, while
Smith New Court opted to change from seller to buyer. The food manufacturer
has been hosting a number of presentations recently, a factor which has
undermined the shares as some brokers have been said to have found little to
be enthusiatic about.
After seeing the group yesterday, County moved from a buy to a sell,
slimming its earnings per share figure for this year and trimming its
profits estimate for next year by Pounds 4m to Pounds 382m. The house blamed
continuing weakness in the European soft drinks market.
UBS Phillips &amp; Drew was also said to be selling the stock yesterday.
However, Smith said it had heard nothing from Cadbury to change its view
that the shares were 'within 5 per cent of a good buy', particularly for
long-term funds. The stock fell 11 to 441p.
Water placing
The placing of Welsh Water's 14.9 per cent stake in South Wales Electricity,
with the former taking a Pounds 17m profit on its investment, was the
trigger for a steep rise in Welsh Water shares. South Wales Electricity
stock, on the other hand, fell sharply as lingering hopes disappeared that
the 15 per cent stake could have been used as a platform for a takeover bid.
The stake, comprising 15.1m shares, was placed jointly by County NatWest and
Cazenove, via a series of agency crosses executed at 460p a share.
Welsh Water acquired the bulk of its shareholding during the first few
trading sessions following privatisation of the regional electricity
companies in December 1990, adding the rest early in the following year. The
water company hoped to forge links with its fellow Welsh utility with a view
to cost savings but was rebuffed.
South Wales Electricity slipped 8 to 473p on 31m traded, while Welsh Water
closed 16 higher at 529p, albeit after extremely thin turnover of 391,000
shares.
Rumours abounded in Hillsdown as the shares advanced, closing 10 in front at
122p. One version had the food group warding off a bid, another that a
company would make a statement today on recent volatility in the shares.
Neither story found much credibility with analysts, who suggested that
rumours often circulated ahead of Hillsdown's closed period.
The world's biggest mining group, RTZ, fell 18 to 623p after a profits
forecast downgrade by Smith New Court.
Smith cut its profits estimate for 1993 by Pounds 40m to Pounds 50m from
Pounds 490m and its earnings per share prediction by 4p to 45p.
The implications of a meeting hosted by Swedish pharmaceutical group Astra
hit Glaxo and the shares closed a net 19 lower at 791p.
Astra presented data which suggested that the use of its drug Losec,
combined with an anti-biotic, had managed to wipe out ulcers in trial
patients for at least 20 months. Analysts said it was too early to argue
that Glaxo's anti-ulcer drug Zantac, which accounts for half of the group
profits, would be badly affected.
Wellcome receded 3 to 1021p in spite of a confident annual statement.
Grim news from Petrofina and Total continued to overshadow the oil sector,
but BP managed a small midsession rise before easing back to close unchanged
at 224p after reports that it may have made an oil discovery west of the
Shetland Islands.
The rumoured discovery would be the second in the area since Amerada Hess
about a year ago. Lack of official confirmation of the find was attributed
to the 14th oil licensing round due to take place next year.
BZW's buy recommendation continued to drive Burmah Castrol shares higher,
with the stock closing a further 15 up at 693p on 1.1m traded. BZW cited
Burmah's ability to achieve 5 per cent per annum real earnings per share
growth and its strong cash flow. 'The shares deserve a premium rating and we
see fair value at 750p to 800p,' said BZW's oil team.
Shares in Channel tunnel operator Eurotunnel were hit early in the session
and were down 17 at 323p, the day's worst, after TML, the tunnel's
constructor, said talks about cost overruns had once again broken down.
Bargain hunting and reports from the company that an arbitration ruling on
the dispute may be possible in the second half of next year helped the stock
recover some of the ground lost. The shares closed a net 11 off at 329p
after trade of 1.3m shares.
Vodafone ran up 8 to 417p after the Arena GSM consortium, led by Vodafone,
won the third licence to operate a mobile phone network in Australia.
The 17 per cent rise in profits at Sanderson Electronics had been discounted
and the shares dropped sharply to close 46 off at 226p. Profit-taking was
also evident in Electronic Data, which retreated 35 to 475p.
Recent high-flyer Tadpole Technology recorded another see-saw session. The
shares, which were placed at only 65p two weeks ago and spiralled upwards to
touch 240p early on Monday before coming under persistent selling pressure,
fell a further 13 to 166p yesterday.
Electronic component issues were strongly supported amid hints of a couple
of broker buy recommendations, Diplomasurging 17 to 382p and
Electrocomponents 11 to 364p.
Another profits downgrading, this time from County NatWest, depressed
English China Clays, leaving the shares to close 15 lighter at 400p.
Gestetner hardened a penny to 150p, with Inchcape, 3 firmer at 498p, once
again mentioned as a bidder for the office and photographic equipment
distributor.
In motors and engineers, Kwik-Fit moved 5 ahead to 101p, as speculation that
retail group Kingfisher would soon launch a bid for the motor repair company
returned. Siebe appreciated 5 to 404p, a closing five-year high. Also wanted
were Charter Consolidated and GKN. The former moved forward 18 to 570p,
while GKN gained 4 to 433p.
Talk that a buyer was sniffing around Hammerson sent the 'A' shares forward
23 to 277p, although analysts were generally dismissive.
Franco-British paper group Arjo Wiggins Appleton continued to attract
profits forecast downgrades. Yesterday it was SG Warburg which hit the
shares by turning seller, moving its 1993 estimate to well below the market
consensus and cutting back its dividend estimate. The house believes Arjo
will make Pounds 125m next year. The shares fell 9 to 132p.
Specialist printing group Wace plunged 25 to 52p after announcing a profits
warning and Pounds 37m write-down. Hoare Govett cut to a loss of Pounds 34m
for 1992 against a previous profits forecast of Pounds 15m. For 1993, the
house came down by Pounds 8m to a profits estimate of Pounds 11m.
Queens Moat Houses retreated 2 1/2 to 37p after one of its joint brokers,
BZW, reduced its forecasts.
The stores stocks were depressed, the CBI survey doing the damage to
sentiment. Burton stood out, up 4 1/2 to 66 1/2 p with 12m traded, as talk
of poor trading was considered overdone.
A squeeze helped P &amp; O jump 17 to 476p. A shortage of stock was also
reported in Associated British Ports, where the shares closed 18 up at 348p.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1992
NEW HIGHS (64).
AMERICANS (4) Bell Atlantic, Bowater Inc., Lowe's, Varity, BUILDING
MATERIALS (1) Wolseley, BUSINESS SERVICES (2) ISS-INTL. Serv. B, Serco,
CONTRACTING &amp; CONSTRUCTION (1) Sheriff, ELECTRICALS (2) Denmans, Jones
Stroud, ELECTRICITY (1) Scot. Power, ELECTRONICS (7) Diploma, Electrocomps.,
Farnell, Micro Focus, Misys, Sage, Tunstall, ENGINEERING GENERAL (3) Carclo,
Halma, Siebe, FOOD MANUFACTURING (2) Nestle (Br), Do (Reg), HEALTH &amp;
HOUSEHOLD (1) UniChem, INSURANCE COMPOSITE (1) Royal, INSURANCE LIFE (2)
Britannic, Refuge, INVESTMENT TRUSTS (12) Abtrust Prfd. Zero Pf., Drayton
Blue Chip, EFM Inc. Zero Pf., Flmg. Emrg. Mkts., Flmg. Inc. &amp; Cap. Zero Pf.,
Gartmore Scot. Zero Pf., Jupiter Euro. Zero Pf., M &amp; G Inc. Zero Pf.,
Majedie Invs., River Plate Zero Pf., Scot. Natl. Zero Pf., TR Tech. Stppd.
Pf., MEDIA (7) CIA, City of Lon., EMAP, Flextech, News Intl., Telegraph,
Watmoughs, METAL &amp; METAL FORMING (1) Tinsley (E), MISCELLANEOUS (2) Birkby,
Danka, OIL &amp; GAS (2) Burmah, Shell 7pc Pf., OTHER FINANCIAL (2) Caledonia,
Cattle's, OTHER INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS (1) Charter Cons., PACKAGING, PAPER &amp;
PRINTING (3) Bowater, Dorling Kindersley, Ferguson Intl., PROPERTY (2)
Slough 6pc Cv. '03, Waterglade, STORES (2) Burton, GUS, TEXTILES (1)
Dewhirst, TRANSPORT (1) Tibbett &amp; Britten, WATER (1) East Surrey.
NEW LOWS (30).
BUILDING MATERIALS (1) Needler, BUSINESS SERVICES (3) BNB Res., Comac, Lep,
CONGLOMERATES (2) Goode Durrant, Reece, HEALTH &amp; HOUSEHOLD (1) Crown
Eyeglass, HOTELS &amp; LEISURE (2) Farringford, Zetters, INVESTMENT TRUSTS (2)
German Smllr. Co's Wts., Lon. &amp; Strathclyde, MEDIA (4) Birkdale, Chiltern
Radio, TV-am, Yorks. Tyne-Tees, MISCELLANEOUS (1) Pittard Garnar, MOTORS (2)
ERF, Volkswagen, OIL &amp; GAS (2) Lasmo Ops., Oceonics, PACKAGING, PAPER &amp;
PRINTING (2) Sappi, Wace, STORES (1) Colorvision, TEXTILES (1) Campari,
TRANSPORT (1) TIP Europe, MINES (5) Anglo Amer. Coal, Deelkraal, Durban
Deep, Hartebeest, Invernia West.
Other market statistics, Page 29
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 40
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1748</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAE5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / London Stock Exchange: Futures and options trading
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOEL KIBAZO
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Strong two-way business in stock options led to a rise in turnover in the
traded options market, reversing the recent dull performance of the sector,
writes Joel Kibazo.
Total volume in the traded options reached 40,297 contracts, a significant
jump from Monday's poor 16,634 lots. Trading in the FT-SE 100 option,
however, was poor with a mere 6,762 lots dealt against 7,283 on Monday. The
Euro FTSE option saw 3,005 contracts traded.
It was the stock options that generated the majority of the day's volume.
Amstrad led the league table with business amounting to 9,654 contracts by
the close. Most of the day's activity was centred on the June 93 calls and
puts.
This was followed by Asda, in which 5,005 lots were transacted. Dealers
spoke of a buyer of the April 60 calls and a seller of the April 50 puts.
Tesco was also active, business reaching 2,728 lots, as was Grand
Metropolitan on 2,025.
In stock index futures, trading in the December contract on the FT-SE was
said to have been featureless. Having opened at 2,720, it retreated to the
day's low of 2,713 at 9.30am before recovering to attain the day's high of
2,730 at around 11.30am. It finished at 2,721, off 10 from the previous
close but at a four-point premium to the underlying cash market. Volume in
the December contract came to 7,638 lots, and in the March contract it
reached 3,786.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 40
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1749</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAE4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / London Stock Exchange: Second line issues take the lead
again
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE TAIL wagged the dog to some effect in the UK stock market yesterday,
when buoyant demand for stocks in the FT-SE Mid 250 Index helped the blue
chip shares withstand a bout of nervousness ahead of the expiry on Friday of
the current futures contract on the FT-SE 100.
Investors were clearly unsure at first whether the stock market had run its
course for this year, and early trading saw the Footsie down 11 points to
2,710.4; some London-based houses remain convinced that 2,700 will prove to
be the year-end reading.
But solid demand for the second line issues kept the FT-SE Mid 250 Index
firm throughout to show a gain on the day of 12.5. The FT-SE 100 rallied, in
spite of some distaste for a gloomy distributive trades' survey from the
Confederation of British Industry (CBI) and news of a sharp rise in UK
manufacturing input prices last month. At mid-session the index edged into
positive territory, showing a 1.5 net gain.
The final reading put the FT-SE Index at 2,717.9 for a loss on the day of
3.9 points. Traders regarded this as a creditable performance, since
London's late recovery was restrained a little by an early decline of 10.54
Dow points on Wall Street following a gloomy statement from IBM.
The erratic performance in the Footsie largely reflected hurried switching
between the blue chips and the Footsie December futures contract as the big
investment houses strove to balance positions ahead of Friday's stock index
futures expiry.
These technical factors helped to boost the day's Seaq volume total to
549.9m shares from the 438.4m of the previous session. But low retail, or
customer, business on Monday, worth only Pounds 846.8m, appeared to confirm
that the big investment institutions are already winding down for the year.
The CBI survey, indicating that retailers expect this December's sales to be
little better than last year's, mildly discouraged the stores sector, where
analysts hope for a rebound in the Christmas sales which provide the bulk of
the year's profits at the big national retail and store chains.
But market analysts did find the CBI report entirely convincing and
preferred to wait for the official November retail statistics, which are due
today. Falls in retail stocks were mostly held to a few pence and there was
no pressure elsewhere in the market.
The very modest increase in UK manufacturing production in October was
virtually in line with expectations and a similar rise in November output
prices was also found acceptable. But the increase of 2.4 per cent in
producer input prices was received more nervously because of the underlying
fear that sterling's devaluation could reignite inflationary pressures.
At County NatWest, Mr Bob Semple commented that the input price news might
prove 'a cautionary note for the future', counterbalancing the widely
expected fall in headline inflation numbers as mortgage cuts continue to
take effect.
Equity strategists suggested that the underlying tone of the stock market
appeared firm enough and that share prices were likely to close the year in
good shape, once the stock index futures expiry is safely out of the way.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 40
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1750</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAE3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Foreign Exchanges: More pressure on French franc
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JAMES BLITZ
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BOTH the Bundesbank and the Bank of France intervened on the foreign
exchanges in support of the French franc yesterday, as the D-Mark
consolidated its recent strength, writes James Blitz.
Trading in most currencies was extremely thin on account of the Christmas
season, and the dollar moved in tight ranges against the D-Mark.
However, dealers increasingly believe that the franc may not survive without
a devaluation in the run-up to the French parliamentary elections in the
spring, and trading in the 'Mark-Paris' cross rate was jittery.
News that Mr Pierre Beregovoy, the French prime minister, was due to hold a
news conference on Thursday morning excited some dealers yesterday. The
subject of the news conference remained unspecified last night.
Mr Otmar Issing, the Bundesbank's chief economist, may have attempted to
calm markets by saying that M3 money supply would grow more slowly in
November and December, after showing annualised growth of 10.3 per cent in
October.
Any beneficial impact from this statement, however, was lost by his further
comment that German inflation remained high and was unlikely to ease in
coming months. This was seen as a further sign that there would be no early
end to high German interest rates.
The franc was seen at a low of around FFr3.4220 against the D-Mark in late
afternoon trading yesterday, before appreciating back to a close of
FFr3.4170. Both the French and German central banks intervened in support of
the currency at the FFr3.4176 level to the D-Mark around midday. The sums
deployed in a thin market were reported to be small. Sharp rises in French
money market interest rates may have been a better guide to tensions.
Mr Neil MacKinnon, chief economist at Citibank in London, said the prospects
for a franc devaluation before the spring remained strong, and would be
enhanced if signs grew that the French socialists were to lose the March
election. 'Traditionally, it is the right wing parties in France that have
carried out devaluations of the currency,' he said.
Speculation persisted in the market of an early devaluation of the Irish
punt, and there were continuing rumours of a post-Christmas holiday
alignment downwards of the Danish krone.
The Irish central bank cut overnight interest rates to 16 per cent from 20
per cent yesterday. The punt weakened against other European currencies,
before rallying to around DM2.6394, two pfennigs above its ERM floor of
DM2.6190.
Mr Bill Clinton, the US President-elect, said he would back a strong dollar
yesterday and this helped to boost the US currency. But the D-Mark's
residual strength pushed it off a ledge above DM1.57 to close at DM1.5670 in
London. It finished in New York at DM1.5675.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 31
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1751</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAE2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Money Markets: Futures fall again
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JAMES BLITZ
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
EUROPEAN currency futures fell again yesterday as the French franc remained
under pressure on currency markets and the Bundesbank was forced to
intervene on the foreign exchanges to support the currency, writes James
Blitz.
Dealers were increasingly doubtful that the French franc could survive the
continuing tensions in the European exchange rate mechanism without a
devaluation. Sterling cash rates firmed slightly amid increasing signs that
another easing in UK rates is a distant prospect.
Rates in the French franc currency market rose sharply alongside the
Bundesbank intervention. Three-month money climbed to 11 3/8 per cent from a
previous close of 11 per cent and six-month money firmed from 10 1/4 per
cent to 10 1/2 per cent.
One London based clearing bank dealer said the Bank of France could not
sustain these high market rates for long without raising its official
dealing rates.
French franc futures fell back sharply. The March contract retreated 6 basis
points to a close of 90.51, while the June contract surrendered 16 basis
points to end at 91.67.
Remarks from Mr Otmar Issing, the Bundesbank chief economist, that growth in
M3 money supply would be considerably lower in the next two months failed to
check another fall in Euromark futures.
The March Euromark contract dipped 3 basis points from its high of 91.96
yesterday. German call money edged up to 9 per cent yesterday as year-end
tax payments had their first heavy impact on bank liquidity levels.
Call money was at 8.95 per cent initially, but moved up to slightly above 9
per cent as tax payments began coming in to the banks.
Both cash rates and futures in the sterling market showed signs of firmness
yesterday, after UK indicators underlined that another cut in base rates was
unlikely before the spring.
UK input prices rose 4.1 per cent in the year to November, the highest
year-on-year increase since October 1976, compounding fears that a further
easing of UK monetary policy could have inflationary implications.
The March short sterling contract therefore fell 12 basis points from its
previous close of 93.30. Three-month money firmed to 7 1/4 per cent from a
previous close of 7 3/16 per cent.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 31
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1752</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAE1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Italy protests
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS in Italy this week have amply confirmed the public
disrepute of Italy's entrenched party political system. The pro-autonomy
Northern League protest party continued its recent spectacular success by
capturing a third of the vote in Varese and Monza near Milan. But the
growing appeal of this new party is also the corollary of the continued loss
of public confidence in the traditional political parties.
The depth of their discredit, which first became unmistakable in the
fragmentation of the April general elections, has since been increased by
the wave of political finance scandals, which have revealed the wholesale
implication of the Christian Democrats and even more of the Socialists. That
wave is still gathering momentum; last week parliament lifted the immunity
of Mr Gianni De Michelis, the former foreign minister, and Mr Bettino Craxi,
former prime minister, yesterday confirmed he is under investigation.
In the medium term, the combined effects of the crackdown by the judges and
rejection by the voters will seriously weaken the traditional party
structures which have conspired to share the benefits of government and
public office ever since the second world war. But in the short run, the
paradoxical effect may be to strengthen the government of Mr Giuliano Amato,
provided it presses ahead rapidly and boldly with reforms both of Italy's
public finances and of its constitution.
In his first eight months in office, Mr Amato has started well, with
far-reaching measures to contain Italy's ballooning budget deficit,
including cut-backs in public spending, restraints on public sector pay, and
a sharp increase in the income tax effectively levied on the self-employed.
This week he will call on parliament to endorse the necessary counterpart of
these budget measures, with a programme for the privatisation of Italy's
large state industrial sector. But a single austerity budget will not be
enough; Italy will need to hack away at the deficit for several years to
come if it is to bring its finances into reasonable order.
In the longer run, political reforms will be just as important if Italy is
to recover the chance of sound government. Vested interests in the party
hierarchies are likely to resist all reform proposals which could seem to
threaten their traditional fiefdoms. But the momentum for constitutional
reform, exemplified by the pressure for a number of national referenda,
should ensure that the parliament will itself put forward reform proposals
early next year, including a reduction in the role of proportional
representation and a strengthening of the independence of regional
government.
For the moment Mr Amato has the strength of a weak government which cannot
be overthrown. But that strength will not last indefinitely.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1753</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAE0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Personal View: Case for a second tier
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LYNTON JONES
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
The news of the probable demise of the USM - the London Stock Ex-change's
inelegant name for its second-tier market - crept into the press recently
with barely a whimper. Analysts were wheeled out to proclaim that the market
had had its day, and that most companies on the Unlisted Securities Market
ought now to move up to the main listed market.
How short memories are. In the heady days of the 1980s the ability to raise
equity capital on the USM at an early stage in a company's development was
seen as one of the main factors in stimulating the growth of new
enterprises. The London Stock Exchange created the USM primarily because it
had been criticised for its poor record in encouraging small companies to
raise risk capital.
But it did so with mixed feelings. There is a fundamental contradiction
between the objectives of those responsible for promoting the main listed
market, who seek to prove that only companies of the highest standards are
listed, and those responsible for promoting a second tier market, who have
to accept that some companies might present a high risk to the potential
investor. To have both markets run by the the stock exchange was therefore
always likely to produce tensions.
Not only were both markets run by the same exchange, they were run by the
same department within that exchange. It was a fundamental error to give
responsibility for both to the Quotations Department, which was always
uneasy about the USM's lower listing standards.
Despite the phenomenal growth of the second tier market during the
mid-1980s, those responsible at that time for assessing whether it met the
needs of industry were reaching some uncomfortable conclusions. The
Quotations Department was so risk-averse that virtually no companies were
admitted to the USM under the listing requirement for the financing of
greenfield projects. This meant that in addition to the USM there continued
to exist a market outside the exchange.
It was the continued existence of an unregulated over-the-counter market
outside the exchange and the perceived shortcomings of the USM that
ultimately led to the creation of the Third Market by the exchange. But once
again, the innate conservatism of the Quotations Department had the effect
of strangling this infant at birth.
With the introduction of the various EC listing directives, which narrowed
the differences in the listing requirements of main and second tier markets,
the exchange took the opportunity to close the Third Market altogether and
to review the conditions for listing on the USM. It now appears that this
review will conclude that there should be no difference between listing
requirements on the USM and the main market. Hence it is probable that the
USM will be closed down.
The timing is dreadful. The growth in the number of companies coming on to
the USM has closely mirrored the growth of the economy in general. Indeed,
as the economy went into recession, the number of companies using the USM to
raise capital nearly reached vanishing point. Now, with the economy
apparently beginning to recover, it is vital to have in place a healthy
second tier market to encourage the growth of new companies.
The stock exchange will never be able to run a second tier market with
enthusiasm. Its job, like that of the New York Stock Exchange, is to provide
retail investors with a safe haven for their investments, and institutional
investors with a liquid market for heavily traded securities. This role does
not sit easily with that of providing a market for higher risk investments.
As in the US, a second tier market run by a completely different body is
needed.
It is here that the regulatory problems arise. In many countries, the body
responsible for setting the listing requirements (the 'listing authority' in
the language of the EC) is the central regulator, such as the US Securities
and Exchange Commission. In the UK, the 'listing authority' is none other
than the stock exchange, which is not likely to make it easier for competing
exchanges to list the shares of UK companies. One wonders whether the Office
of Fair Trading has considered the anti-competitive nature of this
arrangement.
The lessons of this analysis are the following:
the UK needs a second tier market, especially at a time when economic
recovery is imminent;
the stock exchange is not best equipped to provide this market;
if we are to encourage competition among exchanges, and therefore the
provision of a specialised and independent second tier market, then it is of
the first importance that the role of 'listing authority' should pass from
the stock exchange to the Securities and Investments Board.
Let us hope that SlB chairman Andrew Large, in his current review of the
regulatory infrastructure, takes this into consideration.
The author is chief executive of OM London, an electronic futures and
options exchange. He has worked at the London Stock Exchange and was
managing director of Nasdaq International
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1754</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAEZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Safer pensions
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE DEADLINE passed yesterday for submissions to the Goode committee on
pensions law reform, after the publication of a consultative paper in
September. The committee is due to publish its findings by next June.
That part of the evidence which has been published reveals plenty of diverse
viewpoints, but also signs of a consensus that the security of pension
scheme assets and benefits must be greatly improved after the Maxwell
disaster and a series of lesser, but in themselves just as disturbing,
scandals.
One of the more thoughtful papers has come from the Confederation of British
Industry. Private-sector schemes did, in fact, peak in terms of employee
membership as long ago as 1967 at 8.1m and now cover well under 6m people,
against perhaps 5m in public-sector schemes. However, there are still
460,000 private-sector schemes with assets of Pounds 320bn.
The decline in private-sector coverage raises the fundamental question of
what occupational schemes are there for. They were originally designed to
attract workers and reward long service. These days, however, lifetime
service with the same employer is unusual and pension schemes are often used
to finance early retirement and redundancy packages. The CBI emphasises that
schemes will need to be much more flexible in future. But this could make
scheme membership less attractive to employees.
For this reason, it would be a pity if the Goode committee were to confine
itself to narrow questions of fraud and mismanagement. There seems to be a
fairly general acceptance that some sort of compensation scheme should be
introduced, but not many of those organisations which have sent in
submissions are ready to accept that comprehensive protection should be put
in place. True, the National Association of Pension Funds has taken a
strongly positive line, but has been strongly criticised for its pains by
some of its big member schemes. The CBI, too, believes that compensation
should be provided only in clear cases of fraud, but not of
maladministration or investment losses. Yet it is not clear that it will be
practical to draw fine distinctions or wait years for proof of fraud where
members' expectations have been disappointed.
Companies that wish to provide occupational schemes for their workers will
have to pay the price of extensive regulation and protection, just as do the
investment institutions that sell normal savings products. Inevitably the
imposition of minimum funding standards and external trustees would
seriously cramp the style of the traditional company scheme, and would raise
questions about the balance between schemes with a final salary link and
those with a money purchase structure where more of the investment risk
falls upon the member. If the Committee's recommendations turn out to have
momentous implications for company pensions that will be no reason for
pulling punches.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1755</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAEYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Wanted - potent pair of eyebrows: The names of potential
Bank of England governors have been submitted by a firm of headhunters
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT PESTON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
The FT yesterday intercepted a fax intended for the prime minister. It is
from the headhunting firm, Sell-Ffone &amp; Crynge, which has been employed in
the search for a new governor of the Bank of England.
Dear prime minister,
This is the final report on possible candidates for the post of governor of
the Bank of England.
I suspect you will want to announce the appointment soon to allow for a
smooth hand-over of responsibilities before s/he takes up the appointment on
July 1. Your officials tell me that an announcement early in the new year is
planned.
Were you to decide to make a controversial choice - and I suspect that is
unlikely - you might wish to take a leaf out of your predecessor's book. She
announced the appointment of Leigh-Pemberton (the current governor) two days
before Christmas in 1982, which is not a time when the press tends to devote
reams of newsprint to a discussion of monetary policy or bank supervision.
As you know, whoever is chosen will face tremendous challenges, perhaps
greater than any governor since Montagu Norman (governor for a record 24
years between 1920 and 1944), who began the transformation of the
institution into a modern central bank. I therefore assume that the
chancellor was making a seasonal quip when he recently told me that it would
be 'helpful to have a turkey at the Bank'.
The magnitude of the job can best be seen from an examination of the Bank's
mission statement, drawn up two years ago by Leigh-Pemberton to introduce
good corporate governance into the Bank. It has three elements: the value of
the currency should be maintained;
the stability of the banking system should be preserved by the work of the
Bank's supervisory division operating under the 1987 Banking Act;
the competitiveness and efficiency of markets in the City of London should
be encouraged.
The way in which the Bank carries out these functions is likely to change:
indeed it is questionable whether it will continue to have all these
responsibilities.
It is difficult to predict how the Bank's responsibilities to maintain the
currency - and combat inflation - will develop. The chancellor recently gave
it a new task of making a quarterly public assessment of progress in the
battle against inflation.
Although this falls some way short of giving it independent powers to set
interest rates, I suspect from my chats with you that such independence is
not completely off the agenda for the duration of your government.
If members of the European Community move towards economic and monetary
union, the Bank's monetary role will inevitably be transformed. It would
eventually become part of a federation of independent central banks setting
European monetary policy.
The governor must also implement reforms to the Bank's supervisory
department, which are being introduced following criticism that it was
ineffective in its role as supervisor of the Bank of Credit and Commerce
International, the corrupt international bank.
I understand you are keeping under review the question of whether the Bank
should continue to be involved in bank supervision at all, or whether these
responsibilities should be hived off to a new independent regulatory unit.
Given that the structural changes at the Bank are likely to be far-reaching,
the governor must possess the ability to think strategically and adapt to
change. There are two other important qualities s/he must have. Governors
are increasingly expected to negotiate face to face with their peers on
complex EC directives or other highly technical issues, such as the linkage
of payment systems or rules governing banks' capital requirements. Technical
expertise and negotiating skills are essential.
We started with 10 possible candidates: Sir David Scholey, chairman of the
merchant bank, S G Warburg; Eddie George, Bank deputy governor; Sir David
Walker, deputy chairman of Lloyds Bank and former chairman of the Securities
and Investments Board; Bruce Patullo, governor of the Bank of Scotland; Sir
Christopher Hogg, chairman of Courtaulds; Sarah Hogg (no relation), the head
of your Policy Unit; Sir Peter Middleton, deputy chairman of Barclays and
former Treasury permanent secretary; Sir Dennis Weatherstone, chairman of JP
Morgan, the US bank; Sir Leon Brittan, EC competition commissioner; and Lord
Lawson, former chancellor. Two emerged as front-runners: Scholey and George.
There follows an analysis of how they match up to what we see as essential
traits for the new governor. PEDIGREE
Until recently, almost all governors have been drawn from the merchant
banks. Leigh-Pemberton was the first clearing banker to be offered the post.
Even after the Bank was nationalised following the second world war,
governors have usually been merchant bankers, including Lord Catto (a Morgan
Grenfell man), Lord Cobbold (in one sense the first career Bank man to
become governor, though he spent his early career in merchant banking), Lord
Cromer (from Barings), and Lord Richardson (from Schroders).
So the traditional choice would be to go for Scholey, who is already a
non-executive Bank director.
On the other hand, the Bank has become far more professional in the past 70
years and there is a precedent for the choice of a career Bank man such as
George. Lord O'Brien (governor from 1966 to 1973) joined the Bank straight
from school.
EYEBROW POTENCY
Traditionally, governors are expected to encourage City firms to act
responsibly by a mere twitch of the eyebrow. But in fairness to all
candidates, the governor's god-like power to influence City events has been
lessened by legislative changes.
A governor's ability to exert pressure by raising an eyebrow at the apposite
moment was greatest when there were few formal rules governing City
behaviour and the Square Mile was a club, with the governor as chairman of
the membership committee. But the 1987 Banking Act and the 1986 Financial
Services Act have provided a statutory framework for financial firms'
dealings. If the Bank wants to prevent a bank from behaving in a certain
way, its ultimate weapon is the law. If it wants to go further and close
down a bank, it must be certain that it is justified in doing so under the
terms of the banking act.
All of which has militated against the use of eyebrows. Nonetheless,
Leigh-Pemberton's eyebrows have twitched effectively over the past few
years. He encouraged Midland to appoint a new chairman and a chief executive
to replace Sir Kit McMahon (who held both posts) in early 1991. Similarly,
he forced the departure of Christopher Reeves from the post of chief
executive at Morgan Grenfell in 1987 and supported the appointment of Rodney
Galpin to the Standard Chartered chair in 1988.
There have been limits, however. His disapproval of Lloyds Bank's hostile
attempts to buy Midland last spring did not deter Lloyds having a go (and
failing).
Scholey's eyebrows may turn out to be authoritative - his dislike of
publicity has succeeded in sustaining an aura of mystique around Warburg.
Mystique is an essential prerequisite for the successful exercise of
influence outside the public domain. George's lower forehead is hidden
behind spectacles and a billow of smoke from an ever-present cigarette.
TECHNICIAN/NEGOTIATOR
The first task of the governor may be to negotiate the setting up of the
European Monetary Institute and the European Central Bank, if progress
towards European monetary union revives. The EMI is the intended precursor
of the European Central Bank and is to begin life in January 1994. It would
have no formal responsibility for making monetary policy, but it is supposed
to be a powerful forum for evaluating EC members' monetary policy.
It is vital, therefore, that the governor, as British member of the EMI
council, should have the stature to defend the UK's position. The governor
must also be comfortable grappling with highly technical issues, such as the
division of national currency reserves in a European Central Bank.
If such skills are the most important criterion, George is the leading
candidate. Since 1982, he has been responsible for monetary policy, market
operations and market supervision at the Bank. On the other hand, Scholey's
negotiating skills have been widely praised - and he is said to be adept at
mastering a complex brief. He also has political skills (I understand he was
lauding your abilities, long before you were considered a serious candidate
to succeed Lady Thatcher).
SANG-FROID
George has demonstrated his ability to keep his head in a crisis. I
understand you were impressed by his coolness during the currency turmoil of
the summer which led to the UK's withdrawal from the exchange rate
mechanism.
Scholey, however, can claim that much of the business of merchant banking is
crisis-management - especially the giving of advice on takeovers and
mergers.
JUDGMENT
This is particularly difficult to assess. It is arguable that George should
have been more forceful in advising you earlier in the summer of the risks
of trying to defend the pound's level within the ERM.
STRATEGIC THINKING
Scholey is probably the only candidate to have reorganised completely a
large international organisation. By merging his merchant bank with two
stockbrokers and a stockjobber - or share wholesaler - he created a new
breed of UK securities firm. On the other hand, the profitability of Warburg
has recently come under pressure and its success in becoming a truly
international business has probably been less rapid than he would have
liked.
On balance, I believe there are strong arguments in favour of both George
and Scholey. The overall thrust of my analysis is that your choice will be
decided by whether you want a technocrat, in which case you should choose
George, or a strategist, in which case Scholey should be picked.
You may be tempted by the idea of trying to persuade George to serve under
Scholey. A minor consideration is that, if George becomes governor, it will
not be easy to find a new deputy governor, since there is no obvious
internal candidate.
On the other hand, we would be more than happy to act in the search for a
deputy.
Yours most sincerely, Gavin Sell-Ffone PS: If you opt for a compromise
candidate, do get back in touch.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1756</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAEXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Time to use force in Bosnia
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
AS MINISTERS gather again in Geneva to discuss the former Yugoslavia, the
pressure for stronger external intervention is growing. Today's meeting is
technically not a new conference but a meeting at ministerial level of the
steering committee of the existing international conference, which met in
London last August. That meeting was proclaimed a success, because a number
of agreements were reached. But those agreements have not been honoured. The
war in Bosnia has continued. So has the odious process of 'ethnic
cleansing'.
British and other European forces have been deployed in a humanitarian role,
and have had some success in getting supplies to the more remote Moslem
towns and villages which are still holding out. But as the carnage
continues, the inadequacy of these operations is more and more painfully
apparent to those involved in them, and to the world in general.
The airlifts and convoys are constantly obstructed and sporadically fired
on, usually by Bosnian Serb forces. The supplies which do get through, of
food, fuel and especially medical equipment, fall far short of what the
population needs to survive the winter. Above all, the shelling of Sarajevo
and other populated areas continues remorselessly. The humanitarian
operations are, at best, saving people from cold and starvation so that they
can be killed by mortar fire. That being so, today's meeting will be a waste
of time if it contents itself with obtaining yet more Serb signatures to yet
more meaningless agreements. It must be used, by those who genuinely wish to
help Bosnia, as the occasion for drawing up a plan of action; and it is no
longer any use pretending that action will be effective without any military
component.
The proposal to enforce the no-fly zone is welcome insofar as it at least
attempts to restore some credibility to UN Security Council resolutions. But
it will achieve little if it used simply to punish the Serbs, without clear
political and military objectives.
The ultimate political objective must remain the restoration of peace
throughout the republic, with the right of all its citizens to return to
their homes in safety, and the obligation of those who have destroyed
property to rebuild it. But that objective cannot be secured purely by
military means. The military objective, rather, must be to secure enough
territory to form a 'safe haven' for those Bosnians, Moslem and otherwise,
who recognise the authority of the elected government and reject that of Mr
Radovan Karadzic's ill-disciplined militia - thus enabling them to enter
negotiations on a stronger footing than is possible at present.
The UN's next task should be to delineate such an area, and issue an
ultimatum to Serb forces to withdraw from it. If the danger of reprisal
against existing UN forces is held to inhibit such action, as British
ministers have been arguing in recent days, then those forces should be
reinforced and/or withdrawn to more defensible positions.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1757</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAEWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Survey of The Baltic Basin States (4): 50 years in the
shadow - Finland's attitude towards an open Baltic has been muted
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT TAYLOR
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
FINLAND has been somewhat less than enthusiastic about the opening up of the
Baltic area. Caution has been an understandable watchword in policy making
for a country which since 1944 has learned how to survive under the shadow
of Moscow.
President Mauno Koivisto aroused international criticism when he appeared to
criticise the high risk tactics of the Latvian and Lithuanian governments
during the tense days of January 1991 when the infamous para-military Soviet
Black Berets acted violently.
Since those events Finland has taken a more sympathetic attitude to the
countries of central and eastern Europe. In 1991 the government provided
FM221m (Dollars 54.4m) in grant assistance with a further FM247m (Dollars
55.67m) allocation this year.
The Finnish Department for Export Credits has provided commercial credits
worth FM50m (Dollars 11.2696m) to Estonia and FM7m (Dollars 1.578) for
technical help in the Baltic states. Earlier this year 100,000 tons of
heating oil were dispatched by Finland to help Estonia through its grim
winter.
At the beginning of 1992 Finland established technical assistance funds in
the World Bank and the International Finance Corporation of FM3m (Dollars
0.726m)and FM1.5m (Dollars 0.363m) respectively.
A number of Finnish private companies are also taking a keen interest in the
opening up of the eastern side of the Baltic to the rigours of the market
economy. This is particularly true in the transport sector. Neste, the
state-owned oil conglomerate, is establishing badly needed petrol filling
stations throughout the region in Warsaw, St Petersburg and Riga. It is
campaigning actively for the development of the Via Baltica - a modernised
motorway that it is hoped will link the area with western Europe early in
the next century.
Finland's Baltic role has to be seen in a much wider context. Finnish
foreign minister Paavo Vayrynen claims that his country is the only
developed market economy which shares a common border with Russia. This has
meant a focusing of Finnish assistance on specific areas close to Finland -
Murmansk, Karelia and the St Petersburg area.
But at the same time trade between Finland and Russia has almost collapsed
in the aftermath of the abolition of the mutually beneficial bilateral
clearing house system that operated successfully from 1948 to 1990. Like
Sweden, Finland is also going through a severe economic recession with
sizeable cuts in its own domestic spending programmes and a squeeze on
Finnish living standards. Such unprecedented belt tightening has not put the
traditionally insular Finns in an altruistic mood to shoulder any Baltic
responsibilities.
Finnish relations with Estonia promise understandably to be the closest. The
languages of the two countries are similar and their geographical proximity
over the Gulf of Finland ensured that even at the height of the Cold War
ties were not cut completely. In 1964 President Urho Kekkonen visited
Estonia, followed by trade and cultural contacts and the opening of a
consular office in Tallinn in 1970.
Finnish-owned hotel chains and transport companies are particularly active
in improving Estonia's attraction for business customers, while Finnish
administrators and businessmen are helping the Estonian reform programme.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 12
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1758</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAEVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Survey of The Baltic Basin States (2): Investment badly
needed - St Petersburg is still Russia's window on the west
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LEYLA BOULTON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THREE centuries after it was founded by Peter the Great, the port city of St
Petersburg is looking for a new lease of life as Russia's window on the
West.
The collapse of the Soviet Union, allocating other key ports on the Baltic
and the Black Sea to other states, has reasserted its role as Russia's main
maritime gateway to the West. But the port itself is badly in need of
reorganisation and investment to meet the challenges of a newly-opened
Baltic Sea.
As often the case in Russia, grand ideas still outnumber actual projects and
funds to redress matters. 'Everything is still at the stage of
conversations,' says Mr Anatoly Bilichenko, the deputy director of the
city's trade port.
Mr Vladimir Fedoseyev, an official from the St Petersburg mayor's office,
sketched ambitious plans to create a 'free entrepreneurial zone' on the
basis of an expanded port. Despite the government's known scepticism about
tax concessions for specific areas to become free economic zones, he claims
that Moscow is 'on the verge' of giving the project the go-ahead. The idea
is to develop the present port so it reaches annual capacity of 20m tonnes
by the year 2000.
Meanwhile, both St Petersburg's state-owned Baltic Shipping Company and
private entrepreneurs are vying to set up a brand new super-port outside the
city. Rejecting this project as 'a typical example of. . . Communist-style
gigantism,' Mr Bilichenko says any new money should be invested in
re-equipping and developing his port - and foreign assistance available so
far has focused on just that.
'We have always been Russia's most universal port both in terms of cargo and
onward transport facilities,' he says. He points to infrastructure including
comprehensive air, rail and road links from the port, itself a 15 minute
drive from the centre of St Petersburg.
Unlike more specialised ports elsewhere, St Petersburg port handles almost
everything except oil - a sore subject given local environmentalists'
opposition to talk of building an oil terminal which would help make up for
export-handling capacity lost elsewhere.
But St Petersburg still has a long way to go to fulfil its potential, let
alone handle its present tasks.
Ships loaded with scarce supplies of sugar recently had to wait weeks to be
unloaded and this year Mr Bilichenko had to turn down 4-5m tonnes of
business exceeding the port's annual capacity of 13m tonnes. But he believes
that relatively small amounts of money - Dollars 50m to Dollars 60m - would
be enough to buy spare parts and new loading equipment to quickly expand
capacity by at least 1.5-2m tonnes.
The main problem is a lack of finance. While most of the port's customers
are Russian ships which pay for port services in roubles, virtually all the
equipment and spare parts needed by the port can be bought only with
precious hard currency in the West. 'It so happened that these things were
not produced by our enterprises,' Mr Bilichenko says somewhat ruefully,
referring to the priority given by state industrial planners to defence
production under seven decades of Communist rule.
Russia is now trying to switch part of its defence industry - some of it
concentrated in St Petersburg itself - to civilian uses, but this is a
process requiring time and huge amounts of capital which have so far not
materialised.
Recognising its importance to Russia (including its role in distributing
western humanitarian aid and food imports), the World Bank has promised the
port Dollars 10m out of a Dollars 350m loan to Russia for infrastructure
improvements. Tenders for the purchase of some of the equipment the port
needs are to be held imminently, according to World Bank officials. The
European Community is also pitching in with Dollars 4m in technical
assistance to help reorganise the port.
Mr Bilichenko says the port itself can raise Dollars 5m to spend on new
equipment. He also hopes, apparently without much conviction, to attract
rich shareholders when the port is turned into a joint-stock company as part
of the government's privatisation plans. With 51 per cent of shares to be
sold to its 6,000 employees, another 30 per cent will be offered to outside
investors.
Meanwhile, one of Russia's new entrepreneurs wants to build the country's
first private port. Mr Ilya Baskin, who recently launched a satellite
containing advertising material on Russian companies and aimed at the United
States, says he has already obtained all the necessary permits from various
local authorities to lease a site 100km out of town for a new port. He
claims to have defeated a rival scheme by the Baltic Shipping Company to
build a 180m tonne port on the same site at the fantastic cost of Dollars
19bn. Mr Baskin claims it will take him two to three years to set up a port
with capacity of 30m tonnes and that he already has the money to start work.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 12
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1759</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAEUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Survey of The Baltic Basin States (3): Sympathy with caution
 -Sweden has some past embarrassments to live down
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT TAYLOR
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SWEDEN TODAY likes to see itself as the strategic linchpin of a potential
Baltic region. But it must live down past embarrassments. Neutral Sweden was
one of only three countries in 1940 which recognised Stalin's brutal
annexation of Estonia, Lithuania and Latvia. The other two were Hitler's
Germany and Franco's Spain.
The Swedish government also lost no time in handing over to Stalin the
Baltic gold stored in the country by the fleeing Baltic authorities. In
1945-1946 it went on to deport, forcibly and in public, escaping Baltic
soldiers to the tender mercies of the Soviet authorities.
After that, for 45 years, Sweden's foreign policy of neutrality looked south
to the developing world and a lesser extent western Europe. As Bo Kragh,
adviser to the Estonian and Latvian governments, explains, Swedes knew all
about Chile, South Africa and Vietnam but nothing about the Baltic states
who had vanished into the maw of the Soviet Empire.
Then suddenly, in 1988, Sweden's 'forgotten neighbours' could be seen on
Swedish television waving their national flags and calling for independence
from Kremlin rule. In Sweden there was an astonishingly emotional outpouring
of sympathy for the Baltic states.
Every Monday lunchtime for weeks in 1990-1991, hundreds of Swedes would
gather in a central Stockholm square to demonstrate their solidarity with
the Baltic cause. At first the main attenders were old emigres from Latvia
and Estonia who had settled in Sweden after the second world war: by the end
in August 1991 the country's entire political establishment were present.
The Baltic states began to look to Sweden for more than verbal commitments.
Contingency plans were prepared to establish and recognise their governments
in exile in Sweden if the August 1991 hardline coup in Moscow had succeeded.
Swedish politicians of all parties across the left-right spectrum spoke up
loudly for the cause of Baltic independence.
As long as the Russian military presence in the Baltic states remains,
however, Stockholm is bound to take a cautionary view. It is possible Sweden
may be ready in future to try and exert pressure on Russia to withdraw its
troops. This would indicate how far Sweden is willing to go to help its
Baltic neighbours and risk antagonising Russia.
Until now recession-hit Sweden has not been particularly generous in its
trade and assistance programme for the Baltic states. Public financial
support has been described as pitiful. In the current financial year the
government has allocated SKr1.2bn (Dollars 206m) for the whole of eastern
Europe of which SKr700m (Dollars 120m) will go to Estonia, Lithuania and
Latvia. This is part of a SKr1bn (Dollars 172m) a year programme of aid over
three years.
A severe problem for Swedish companies is the lack of long-term export
credit guarantees for any projects they propose in areas of the former
Soviet Union.
Until now the country's export credit guarantee board has taken up a highly
restrictive attitude - much to industry's dismay.
Under intense lobbying from employers, however, the Swedish government is
expected to modify its attitude in next month's budget. Credit guarantees
will be available after July 1, 1993, although industry does not believe the
sum of money will be enough to attract larger companies.
Swedecorp as a government agency is promoting and taking part in industrial
development activities on the eastern side of the Baltic.
This year it has invested in three joint venture projects - two in Poland
and one in Latvia. It has also helped administer promotions in the area.
Assistance is also coming from BITS, the technical aid organisation.
Despite official Swedish caution, a growing number of companies have decided
to take the risk and start up activities on the other side of the Baltic.
Asea Brown-Boveri, the engineering giant, has revealed a long-term strategy
plan for the region and it has been particularly active in establishing
joint ventures in Poland and eastern Germany. ABB opened up offices recently
in Riga and Tallinn.
'In the Baltic states there is a great need to upgrade and modernise their
entire infrastructure - everything from power generation and transmission to
transportation,' argues Mr Bert-Olof Svanholm, ABB's president in Sweden.
But he also insists 'export credits and investment guarantees are a
necessity.'
Last month Molnlycke, the Swedish paper company, announced it had acquired a
majority shareholding in Viscan, the Polish diaper manufacturer in Wroclaw
in Silesia.
Televerket, the Swedish telecommunications company, has been particularly
active through the creation of joint ventures in the Baltic states for the
development of mobile telephone networks.
The country's main electricity supply company, Vattenfall, is one third
partner with its rival Sydkraft and the German company Preussen Elektra in
the construction of the Baltic Cable linking up the electricity grids of
Scandinavia and northern Germany.
Vattenfall is also developing environmentally-adapted and inexpensive power
production plants in Poland and it is collaborating with the Finnish power
company Ivo in modernising Estonia's power system.
Other companies active in the Baltic area include Ikea, the furniture group;
Tetrapak, the packaging company; the insurance group Trygg-Hansa, and
Svenska Handelsbanken.
The low cost of production in the east and its proximity to Nordic markets
should encourage more companies to take a chance.
But, battered by Sweden's current recession, employers are in no mood for
Baltic expansion unless the government becomes much more generous in its
credit guarantee policy - which looks unlikely.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 12
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1760</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAETFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Survey of The Baltic Basin States (1): End of a long dark
winter - The collapse of Soviet hegemony offers the Baltic countries an
opportunity to restore historic connections
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANTHONY ROBINSON and ROBERT TAYLOR
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE Cold War which chilled the Baltic region for nearly half a century is
over, and with it the sterile balance of fear which turned many Baltic
harbours into naval bases and reduced east-west trade to a trickle.
Instead of a highway, like the Mediterranean, this northern inland sea
became a backwater: a cordon sanitaire between the Nordic world and the
Slavic hinterlands. It was divided between the flourishing market economies
of its northern and far western shores and the impoverished,
Soviet-dominated south and east.
Now, the disappearance of these artificial divisions has created a sudden
and unexpected opportunity to restore old connections and establish new
networks for the 95m people, with an aggregate gross national product of
Dollars 600bn, who live in the lands which drain into the Baltic sea.
Optimists such as Mr Carl Bildt, the Swedish prime minister, believe that
'liberation of the economies of north western Russia and the Baltic states,
and the entry of Finland, Sweden and Norway into the emerging European
Union, is a powerful combination that promises to turn northern Europe into
a growth region in the decades ahead.'
Like others who dream of a revitalised north which is no longer on the
periphery, but an integrated part of Europe, he accepts that its future
depends largely on what happens beyond the Baltic shores.
A more assertively nationalistic Russia could jeopardise the first tentative
moves to Baltic integration. A westward-looking Russia, by contrast, would
play a vital part in the re-emergence of northern Europe. Above all, it
would stimulate the full development of St Petersburg as that window on the
west decreed by Peter the Great in 1703, when he ordered Italian architects
to build a granite city on the frozen marshland won from Sweden at the
battle of Poltava.
With nine different languages, no obvious central core, a variety of
religions and cultures and the lack of any common identity, it is doubtful
whether the states which border the Baltic will ever create over-arching
political institutions. 'Historically the peoples round the Baltic have seen
themselves as being part of a common area,' explains Mr Ivo Iliste, head of
the Swedish based Baltic Institute. 'Outer forces, particularly Russia, have
made them realise there may be a point in coming together.'
Thus far Baltic history has been more a struggle for supremacy than
co-operation, as Sweden, followed by Russia and Germany, sought hegemony
over the disparate countries of the region. 'The area has been the recipient
not the creator of civilising influences,' says Professor David Kirby of
London University. The Baltic region idea remains 'flimsy,' with 'many
interests pulling against it,' but a 'flexible Baltic identity' could
emerge, he believes.
The re-unification of Germany means that the most powerful economy in Europe
is now back with a more solid presence in the western Baltic. Once the
economy of the five eastern Lander recovers, and Berlin resumes its full
role as Germany's capital, the Baltic ports which traditionally handled
trade from this region, including those such as Szczecin and Gdansk, which
are now in Poland, will benefit from renewed prosperity in their German as
well as wider central European hinterland.
Such a prospect inevitably invites comparison with the Hanseatic League,
which stimulated Baltic trading from the 13th century on. Mr Pehr
Gyllenhammar, Volvo's executive chairman and Mr Bjorn Engholm, Schleswig
Holstein's Social Democratic prime minister, have spoken up enthusiastically
for a revival.
Meanwhile, the three Baltic states, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, have
already established a Baltic Assembly - and the Nordic countries all belong
to the loosely organised Nordic Council. But these are not embryonic
supranational bodies with wide powers and responsibilities.
Last March, in Copenhagen, a Council of the Baltic Sea States was
established by Danish-German initiative as a regional forum to intensify
co-operation and co-ordination based on free market principles and
commitment to democratic institutions. Its initial declaration points to a
range of issues for co-operation including economic and technological
assistance, environmental protection, transport developments and cultural,
educational and tourist exchanges. But the Council lacks a secretariat or an
office and is very much inter-governmental.
Other tentative organisations are emerging. Chambers of commerce have
established a common body. So have the Baltic ports. The universities of the
area are developing exchanges and scholarships. Cultural contacts are
growing.
But economic convergence over the Baltic area looks as if it will take a
long time. The transition from the Soviet command economy to the free market
on the eastern side of the Baltic will be painful and slow. A variety of
international and bilateral assistance is being provided at government
level, but so far western private companies have been more cautious. The
Nordic recession has meant leaner times at home, and greater reluctance to
develop corporate strategies in the Baltic area without credit guarantees.
In the longer term, however, many manufacturing companies - faced with high
labour and other costs in Scandinavia and Germany - are likely to invest in
low-cost production plants close to the southern and eastern shores of the
Baltic in preference to southern Europe or distant Asia.
Over the last two traumatic years the foreign trade of Russia and the newly
independent Baltic states has actually declined. But all three Baltic states
are re-orientating their economies and trade westward. Longer term, the
reconstruction of European Russia, especially the greater St Petersburg
region, should revive the cross-Baltic trade which flourished before the
first world war as Russia industrialised and urbanised at full speed.
Much depends on long term infrastructure projects such as the proposed Via
Baltica which would plug both sides of the Baltic into the European motorway
network and stimulate the economic development of the Baltic hinterland.
Modernising the ports like Kaliningrad, Gdansk, Riga, Tallinn and St
Petersburg to take fuller advantage of low cost sea transport is also a
priority.
Environmental concerns demand prompt action to clean up the heavily polluted
Baltic and the air contaminated by the heavy industries of the former
communist states. Nordic technology is already helping to repair nuclear
power stations in the east.
At present, however, turning dreams into reality is hard. This winter north
west Russia and the Baltic states are struggling to maintain energy and food
supplies. Anxieties remain over the continuing Russian military presence in
the Baltic states and Kaliningrad. Discriminatory nationality laws in
Estonia and Latvia threaten to stir up ethnic tensions as Russians feel they
are treated as second class citizens.
Politically, the re-emergence of a vibrant Baltic region could help Poland,
together with Hungary and Czechoslovakia, to speed up entry into the EC
behind the Nordic states, whose expected entry, by 1995, will help tilt the
balance of economic power and influence in the Community northwards.
But Professor John Hiden and Patrick Salmon warn in their recent book, The
Baltic Nations and Europe, that the lessons of history suggest the need for
caution. Efforts to translate pan-Baltic dreams into reality between the
first and second world wars were a 'gloomy story of mutual mistrust and
frustrated hopes,' they write.
This time such a denouement may be avoided. Mutual self-interest, backed by
the Helsinki accords on cooperation and security in Europe. argues for the
emergence of a new region of economic prosperity and political co-operation
to replace the rivalries of the past.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 11
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1761</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAESFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Minor Metals Prices
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Prices from Metal Bulletin (last week's in brackets).
ANTIMONY: European free market 99.6 per cent, Dollars per tonne, in
warehouse, 1,635-1,700 (1,650-1,710).
BISMUTH: European free market, min. 99.99 per cent, Dollars per lb, tonne
lots in warehouse, 2.25-2.45 (same).
CADMIUM: European free market, min. 99.5 per cent, Dollars per lb, in
warehouse, 0.45-0.55 (same).
COBALT: European free market, 99.5 per cent, Dollars per lb, in warehouse,
15.50-16.20 (15.60-16.60).
MERCURY: European free market, min. 99.99 per cent, Dollars per 76 lb flask,
in warehouse, 120-140 (same).
MOLYBDENUM: European free market, drummed molybdic oxide, Dollars per lb Mo,
in warehouse, 1.85-1.95 (same).
SELENIUM: European free market, min 99.5 per cent, Dollars per lb, in
warehouse, 4.80-5.50.
TUNGSTEN ORE: European free market, standard min. 65 per cent, Dollars per
tonne unit (10 kg) WO, cif, 40-50 (same).
VANADIUM: European free market, min. 98 per cent, Dollars a lb VO, cif,
1.75-1.85 (same).
URANIUM: Nuexco exchange value, Dollars per lb, UO, 7.90 (same).
 -----------------------------------
       LME WAREHOUSE STOCKS
      (As at Monday's close)
 -----------------------------------
tonnes
 -----------------------------------
Aluminium  +8,375 to 1,502,150
Copper       -875 to   331,975
Lead       +3,725 to   209,425
Nickel       +822 to    67,098
Zinc       +7,600 to   439,775
Tin        unchgd at    14,680
 -----------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 30
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1762</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAERFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Aluminium users look forward to
end of EC import tariff
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ALUMINIUM USERS who have been campaigning long and hard for the removal of
the European Community's 6 per cent tariff on imports of the metal are
hoping that the barrier will at last disappear - along with those imposed by
other countries on many non-ferrous metals - if the present Uruguay Round of
trade liberalisation talks comes to a successful conclusion.
Any change would receive a mixed reaction in Europe where the local
aluminium producers are split in opinion about the tariff, but it would be
warmly welcomed by by aluminium users and fabricators.
The case for removal was expounded recently by Mr David Humphreys, an
economist at the RTZ Corporation, the world's biggest mining group. He
pointed out that, although Europe was the world's second-largest aluminium
producer, it was now importing about a quarter of its requirements.
European integrated aluminium producers were likely to continue to focus
more on their downstream activities - particularly on packaging - and to
place their new primary production capacity in those parts of the world
outside Europe where low-cost energy was available, Mr Humphreys told a
meeting of the Institution of Mining and Metallurgy in London.
Already Austria Metall, Hoogovens, Pechiney and VAW between them had 446,000
tonnes of annual production in Australia and Canada.
Mr Humphreys said Europe should retain a core of primary smelting
operations, based on its larger, newer plants - particularly those away from
population centres using hydro-electric power. It was even possible that
some new capacity would be installed in Norway and Iceland, while France
would retain substantial capacity, partly because of the need for Pechiney,
the world's technical leader in aluminium smelting, to have a test bed for
its technology.
Nevertheless, he said, the trends were leading to 'an end to a Eurocentric
view of primary (aluminium) supply and with it will also go the
justification for a protectionist import tariff.
'Europe is now a major net importer of aluminium and the interests of its
consumers and of its fabricators are best served by access to low cost raw
materials.'
Some European producers still argue, however, that they need the tariff
because so much aluminium production elsewhere in the world is heavily
subsidised, in one way or another, by governments.
They also point out they are struggling to cope with an unprecedented and
sudden surge of aluminium exports from the Commonwealth of Independent
States, which has caused turmoil in the market and sent prices crashing.
RTZ's Mr Humphreys warned that CIS imports increasingly looked like a
structural change to western supplies, rather than a transitory phenomenon.
But he suggested that, if this was the case, present attempts to block them
would no longer be a rational response.
'Complaints that the displacement of clean western production by dirty CIS
production is environmentally unsound, while true, ignore the underlying
economic realities. Although exports from the CIS may fall as a result of
production difficulties or as more metal is retained for domestic use, the
CIS has an undeniable comparative advantage in energy costs,' he added.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 30
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1763</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAEQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Iron ore producers face price
cut threat
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By BOB JONES
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
GERMAN MILL agents have demanded a return to 1989 levels in the annual iron
ore price talks that kicked off last week. The demand was made of the
Brazilian miner Companhia Vale Rio Doce just before news broke of the
application for creditor protection of the German steelmaker Klockner-Werke.
The ore buyers are effectively saying they want the 1993 price of Brazil's
Itabira fines grade, which has often provided the benchmark in previous iron
ore 'mating seasons', to fall by as much as 16 per cent from this year's
level.
European steel companies have seen demand for their products fall steeply in
the fourth quarter of this year - hence the recent calls for European
Community intervention to restrict steel imports from eastern Europe. Many
steelmakers in the EC have also announced deep cuts in their output this
quarter.
But the iron ore industry can be expected to resist the calls for a big
price reduction for as long as possible. The first settlement in a mating
season almost always sets the trend for most of the world's seaborne trade,
which last year topped 390m tonnes.
Last week also saw the opening of price talks in Tokyo between Australian
miners and the Japanese mills. In the last couple of years CRA's Hamersley
Iron has agreed the initial benchmark price for its fines in Japan. However,
no prices were tabled by either side last week. Although Japan's steel mills
have performed poorly so far this fiscal year their steel output in 1993-94
is expected to creep back over the 100m-tonne mark. Demand for iron ore in
neighbouring countries such as South Korea and, especially, China is also
expected to improve.
In Europe the outlook for 1993 is less rosy, as evidenced by Klockner's
troubles, and miners are concerned that this will colour price talks.
Japanese buyers have little incentive to step into the talks as they know
European mills are not going to withdraw their demand for a big price cut.
With the consensus seeming to be that the final settlement will involve a
fines price drop of about 10 per cent tomorrow's meeting between Brazil's
CVRD and the German mills will be watched even more closely than usual.
Bob Jones is a deputy editor of Metal Bulletin magazine.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 30
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1764</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAEPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / World Commodities Prices: Cotton and Jute
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Spot and shipment sales for the week ended 11 December amounted to 228
tonnes against 116 tonnes in the previous week. Improved demand brought
moderate purchases mainly in Central Asian, African, and Russian
descriptions.
JUTE
Jan/Feb: C and F Dundee BTC USD 360 BWC USD 380 BTD USD 325 BWD USD 340 and
C and F Antwerp BTC USD 340 BWC USD 340 BTD USD 315 BWD USD 315.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 30
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1765</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAEOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Bolivia tries again on mine
ventures
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRIS PHILIPSBORN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   LA PAZ
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
BOLIVIA'S STATE mining corporation, Comibol, has for the second time opened
tenders for Bolivar, a mine producing silver, tin, lead and zinc. The move
marks an attempt by the government to reinstate joint venture deals between
Comibol and private companies, following their recent suspension.
Three companies - Jordex Resources, Comsur and Breakwater Resources,
recently taken over by Aritmeco of the US - have made bids for the mine, the
value of which may be published tomorrow. Evaluation of the bids by the
United Nations Development Programme will be completed within one month.
Comsur's bid in the first round, which was rejected, was Dollars 25m and a
planned 1,000-tonnes-a-day treatment plant.
Meanwhile, joint venture contracts remain in the limbo to which they were
condemned by the government in October, following union pressure and claims
by parliamentarians that they were illegal. However, the government has
taken the first step towards their reinstatement by attempting to rectify
the legal position. Amendments to the original contracts proposed by the
mining ministry have already been accepted by Cominesa, one of the two big
companies involved, along with Brazil's Paranapanema.
According to Mr Charles Bruce, executive vice president of Mintec, a
Bolivian mining consultancy, Cominesa will attempt to enter the Tasna mine
'early next year'.
Nevertheless, significant problems remain, not least the union opposition.
The government will have to tackle the unions head on early next year - a
general election is due on June 6 - if the joint ventures are to go ahead in
1993.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 30
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1766</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAENFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Russian problem may hit grain
prices
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LAURIE MORSE
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   CHICAGO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
DESPITE MURMURS about possible debt rescheduling it appears that Russia's
difficulties paying back its US grain loans will not be resolved before the
end of the month, leaving the country ineligible for a Dollars 275m infusion
of new loans the US Department of Agriculture had planned to release on
January 1.
The credit problems have shut Russia, the US's second-largest customer, out
of the grain market and could have grave implications for North American
wheat and maize prices if they linger on after the new year. While both
Russia and the USDA initially tried to put a temporary face on the problems,
grain traders say there is little hope Russia will be able to come up with
enough hard cash to become current on the accelerating payments.
Exporters and their bankers are looking to the Paris Club for a resolution,
saying the international body could choose to include a principal payment
deferral on the grain loans as part of a larger package of Russian debt
rescheduling. 'The rescheduling will have the effect of making them current,
though no money is changing hands,' says one banker familiar with Russia's
US farm loans.
However, international debt negotiations are moving more slowly than
expected even a month ago. Political wrangling between Mr Boris Yeltsin, the
Russian president, and the Russian Parliament has made recession-weary
international bankers reluctant to offer fresh financing, despite Mr
Yeltsin's commitment to democracy and a free-market economy.
It now appears that Paris Club action on Russia's debt will have to wait
until Russia and the International Monetary Fund have completed a full scale
financing agreement. In the meantime the change in US government will
prevent any unilateral policy changes before the presidential inauguration
on January 20. Washington farm interests are lobbying for direct farm aid to
Russia to replace the guaranteed, short-term loan programme.
As of yesterday morning, the country was Dollars 40.1m in arrears on its
US-backed farm loans, with a balance of Dollars 199m due by the end of the
month. It has been suspended from the loan programme since December 1.
Overall, Russia owes about Dollars 4.5bn for the three-year loan programme
that began in January, 1991, with nearly Dollars 2bn falling due in 1993.
Its suspension has left Dollars 81m of unused wheat credits and Dollars 30mn
in pork credits sitting on the books at the USDA. The Dollars 275m in new
credits was designated for a variety of commodities, including wheat and
feed grains. Even worse, exporters say banks have been reluctant to pay on
already-opened letters of credit from the Russian central bank, putting
previous sales and scheduled shipments in jeopardy.
Russia's grain loan problems are not unique to purchases from the US. The
Canadian Wheat Board has not shipped grain to Russia since early October. Mr
Brian Stacey, a Wheat Board spokesman, says Russia has used its maximum of
Dollars 1.5bn in revolving credit, and while it has been making payments,
they have not been sufficient to cover substantial interest on the loans.
Russia represents about one fifth of Canada's export grain market, giving
Canada a particular interest in resolving the country's debt problems. 'The
problem may be beyond Canada,' says one Wheat Board official, however. 'It
requires a co-ordinated solution among countries.'
US grain merchants are still counting on Russia as a buyer in 1993, although
purchases may be delayed until late in the marketing year, distorting prices
and disrupting the export 'pipeline'.
Mr Richard Feltes, grain analyst with Refco, says Russia has 1.5m tonnes of
US maize and 800,000 tonnes of US wheat purchased and waiting to be shipped,
along with 130,000 of soyameal. The country had been expected to buy 2.25m
tonnes of US maize between January and August and 3m tonnes of wheat between
January and May. Soyameal purchases were projected at 385,000 tonnes to the
end of September.
If Russia is precluded from loading any more US grain, Mr Feltes says, the
negative price effects will be felt most strongly in the wheat markets,
where supply and demand have been closely in balance, and where the
carryover in the US had been projected at a slim 498m bushels.
While US farmers will suffer if the Soviet grain market is limited, the loss
of North American imports is not expected to generate a food crisis in
Russia this winter. Russia's own harvest was near a record this year,
reducing its import needs by nearly a third, and its grain buyers contracted
sufficient supplies before the debt crisis to cover nearby needs, Soviet
specialists say.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 30
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1767</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAEMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / World Commodities Prices: Market Report
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BASE METAL prices generally edged off their lows in the afternoon at the
London Metal Exchange and most markets closed steadier. An exception was
TIN, which closed at Dollars 5,745 a tonne for delivery in three months,
down Dollars 90 on the day. Dealers blamed that on early liquidation sales
but added that selling pressure slackened as the day wore on and prices
steadied a little in after-hours trading. COPPER prices moved up in the
afternoon but still ended slightly lower on the day. Dealers said the market
had proved unable to break through resistance at the equivalent of Dollars
2,200 a tonne. ZINC prices matched the trend in copper with cash metal
closing unchanged on the day. Resistance was likely beyond Dollars 1,070 a
tonne for three months metal, Dollars 3.50 above yesterday's close, traders
thought. The NICKEL market was quiet with the three months price ending
Dollars 25 down at Dollars 5,827.50 a tonne following an initial mark-down
on another increase in LME warehouse stocks.
Compiled from Reuters
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 30
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1768</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAELFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Germans treat alcohol in the
wrong spirit
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID BLACKWELL
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE GERMAN alcohol monopoly flies in the face of the European single market
and must end, according to the Alcohol Free Trade Association. The
two-year-old association, which represents two-thirds of European Community
alcohol production, expects the European Commission to publish its
regulations in the next couple of weeks. It is hoping for a so-called light
regime, similar to that announced last month for potatoes.
The AFTA has already complained to the commission that the 70-year-old
German monopoly's pricing policy amounts to an abuse of a dominant position
and is contrary to the Treaty of Rome. 'Thousands of wealthy land owners
operate their own distilleries and enjoy the privilege of selling their
produce to the State at artificially high prices,' the association said.
German subsidies have reached DM343m (Pounds 140m) on the production of 100m
litres of alcohol a year - the same amount that two modern distilleries can
produce in the Netherlands at a cost of about DM1 a litre, said Mr Max
Jansen, AFTA president. The market price is about DM1.10.
'In Germany this is a cottage industry. Alcohol production is just an
addition to the farm,' said Mr Jansen. Germany should consider providing
direct aid to its farmers rather than encouraging unprofitable production
and surpluses.
EC alcohol production (excluding wine alcohol) is about 1.4bn litres, with
60 per cent derived from agricultural production and 40 per cent from
oil-based ethylene. About one-third of production is used by the drinks
industry for gin, vodka and liqueurs. Most of the remainder goes to the
cosmetics, perfume, pharmaceuticals and ink industries.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 30
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1769</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAEKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: France keeps up war against
US-EC deal
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID GARDNER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BRUSSELS
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
FRANCE LAST night continued its attrition tactics against the European
Community's subsidised food exports agreement with the US as farm ministers
of the 12 met for a second day here.
But the European Commission still plans to send undertakings, known as
'schedules', to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in Geneva
reflecting the subsidy and export volume cuts it agreed with Washington to
unblock the Uruguay Round world trade reform negotiations.
France insists these schedules go beyond the cuts in May's agreement on
common agricultural policy reform. But although assurances were sought that
the CAP and Gatt deals were compatible, there was no backing for holding up
the Geneva talks.
EC foreign ministers last week defeated French attempts to brake the
momentum in Geneva, but balanced this by saying that 'concrete results'
would have to be achieved in the other 14 trade areas under negotiation in
the Uruguay Round package. This prevented a damaging row on Gatt at last
weekend's Edinburgh summit, where EC leaders endorsed the foreign
ministerial formula. There is little or nothing that farm ministers can do
to reverse this. The compatibility issue will be considered as part of an
overall Gatt agreement, ministers agreed last night, despite French
opposition.
But France, which yesterday raised tricky questions on Gatt compatibility,
also announced that its attrition tactics would continue. 'This is but the
first of the analyses the French delegation will present,' said Mr
Jean-Pierre Soisson, France's farm minister.
The current UK presidency of the farm council and the European Commission
were expected last night to circulate a complex compromise on a range of
outstanding issues. Settlement on some of them could dim opposition to the
Gatt deal. They include:
Introduction of tariffs on Central American bananas above a fixed quota, in
line with Gatt requirements, but at a very high level to protect EC and
Caribbean producers.
Maintenance for a limited period of 'switchover' protection for farmers
against currency fluctuations. Phasing out of transitional protective
measures agreed for Portugal and Spain when they entered the EC in 1986.
Higher payments to small French beef and durum wheat producers.
Raising Italy's milk quota.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 30
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1770</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAEJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / International Capital Markets: FT-SE Actuaries Indices
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The FT-SE 100, FT-SE Mid 250 and FT-SE Actuaries 350 indices and the FT-SE
Actuaries Industry Baskets are calculated by The International Stock
Exchange of the United Kingdom and Republic of Ireland Limited. The
International Stock Exchange of the United Kingdom and Republic of Ireland
Limited 1992. All rights reserved.
The FT-Actuaries All-Share Index is calculated by The Financial Times
Limited in conjunction with the Institute of Actuaries and the Faculty of
Actuaries. The Financial Times Limited 1992. All rights reserved.
The FT-SE 100, FT-SE Mid 250 and FT-SE Actuaries 350 indices, the FT-SE
Actuaries Industry Baskets and the FT-Actuaries All-Share Index are members
of the FT-SE Actuaries Share Indices series which are calculated in
accordance with a standard set of ground rules established by The Financial
Times Limited and London Stock Exchange in conjunction with the Institute of
Actuaries and the Faculty of Actuaries.
'FT-SE' and 'Footsie' are joint trade marks and service marks of the London
Stock Exchange and The Financial Times Limited.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 29
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1771</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAEIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Government Bonds: Treasuries subdued as prices firm slightly
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By SARA WEBB and PATRICK HARVERSON
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   LONDON, NEW YORK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
IN THE ABSENCE of fresh important economic data, the US Treasury market
remained subdued yesterday, although prices did firm slightly in light
trading.
In late trading the benchmark 30-year government bond was up  3/16 at 102
3/32 , yielding 7.443 per cent. Prices at the short end of the market were
also firmer, with the two-year note up  1/8 at 99 25/32 , yielding 4.725 per
cent.
The main feature of the session was short-covering by dealers, which gave
prices at both ends of the maturity spectrum a modest lift. The only
economic release of the day - a 0.3 per cent decline in business inventories
 -was in line with expectations.
Prices at the long end would have been higher but for the Tennessee Valley
Authority's offering of Dollars 1bn in 30-year bonds. There was some modest
selling of Treasury bonds by dealers.
Short-dated French government bonds closed lower yesterday as the franc
continued to come under pressure in the foreign exchange markets and short
term interest rates edged higher.
The Bank of France and the Bundesbank intervened to support the French
currency, preventing it from breaking through the level of FFr3.42 to the
D-Mark, dealers said. The Franc/D-Mark exchange rate was quoted at 3.4175 by
late afternoon.
Three-month money rates rose from a spread of 10-11 3/16 per cent to 10 7/8
 11 5/16 per cent. Among short-dated issues, the yield on the 8 per cent
bond due 1994 moved from 8.34 per cent to 8.38 per cent. Longer-dated issues
ended unchanged on the day.
The French Treasury announced that it would auction FFr14bn to FFr16bn of
two and five-year notes tomorrow.
REPORTS that Mr Bettino Craxi, leader of the Italian socialist party, is
under investigation in connection with a political corruption scandal, sent
Italian government bonds sharply lower yesterday, with long bonds losing a
point.
The May 2002 bond fell from a high of 93.80 to 92.75 while the futures
contract tumbled from 93.99 to 92.93.
Elsewhere in Europe, German government bonds edged up in thin trade, closing
at the high of the day.
The market paid little heed to comments from Mr Otmar Issing, Bundesbank
board member, who said he expected M3 money supply to grow more slowly in
November and December, after October's figure of a 10.3 per cent annualised
rise. Mr Issing added that German inflation was still high and unlikely to
ease in coming months.
THE RELEASE of better-than-expected economic data helped to depress UK
government bond prices, and longer-dated gilts lost nearly half a point.
Dealers said the producer prices and industrial production data released
yesterday were stronger than expected, wiping out hopes of an imminent cut
in the base rate. Producer output prices showed a rise of 0.3 per cent in
November from October, and input prices showed a rise of 2.4 per cent.
The Liffe gilt futures contract slipped from 99.28 to 99.18, while the 9 3/4
per cent gilt due 2002 fell from 109 1/32 to 108 19/32 .
JAPANESE government bonds opened on a weak note, but the release of
disappointing economic data helped to lift prices later in the day and bonds
ended slightly firmer or little changed.
Bond prices continued their downward drift early in the trading session with
the futures contract falling from 107.46 at the opening to a low of 107.28.
However, dealers said news that machinery orders for October showed a fall
of 23.7 per cent year-on-year may have helped to support prices as the fall
in orders was bigger than expected.
The futures contract closed unchanged at 107.46 while in the cash market,
the yield on the No 145 JGB moved from 4.645 per cent at the opening to
close at 4.625 per cent.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 29
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1772</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAEHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / International Capital Markets: Russian banks face up to a
hard currency challenge - Leyla Boulton in Moscow examines the threat to the
existing order from foreign institutions
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LEYLA BOULTON
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   Moscow
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
AS Russia opens up to the outside world and strives towards a market system,
so its banks are beginning to wake up to the potential threat posed by
foreign institutions.
Russia has 1,550 so-called banks, but only 200 of them are big enough to be
worthy of the name, according to an exhaustive study of Russian banking*.
With inflation exceeding 2,000 per cent this year, none of the banks provide
long-term rouble finance, and their hard currency deposits are placed in
foreign banks rather than re-lent inside the country.
Even those banks which act as more than transmission belts for central bank
credit to state-owned enterprises, face severe shortages of staff, resources
and experience. The environment in which they operate throws up serious
additional handicaps. The settlements system, for example, is a nightmare:
banking documents are handwritten, often get lost, and can take weeks to
clear.
However, the authorities are aware that the very weaknesses which make
Russian banks fear competition militate in favour of a foreign banking
presence. The Russian central bank, rebuffing calls by parliament to stop
the distribution of licences to foreign banks until 1994, said foreign banks
would help attract badly-needed foreign investment.
Mr Arkady Volsky, head of Russia's industrialists, claims that if foreign
banks were allowed to take deposits from Russian enterprises, which
presently put their hard currency earnings in bank accounts abroad, it would
help stem the capital flight which is plaguing Russia's reform efforts.
In the next week, the central bank is due to produce regulations to assuage
Russian banks' fears without closing the door to foreign banks.
'The regulations' main feature will be to counter the accusation that
foreign banks will be pumping money abroad. Our position will be vice-versa:
that money absorbed by foreign banks will be invested here,' said Mr Viktor
Gerashchenko, central bank chairman told the Financial Times.
Without giving details of how this would be achieved, he said banks would be
required to hold a net asset position - compelling them to keep more money
within the country than they take out.
Foreign banks eagerly await details, even though only five of the many with
representative offices in Moscow have applied for licences to establish
subsidiaries.
While welcoming the idea in principle, western bankers want to know how it
will be enforced. 'You cannot force banks to lend,' said one western banker,
who pointed out that foreign banks in Russia still cannot hold land or
buildings as collateral. Given that, he wondered whether keeping foreign
currency on deposit, as Russian commercial banks do, would count as taking
money out of the country.
Although Russia at present has no restrictions on foreign banking, obtaining
a banking licence can take a very long time. Bank Austria operates on an
'offshore' basis - it can only take deposits from foreign companies and the
limited number of Russian enterprises which have the right to hold bank
accounts abroad, while Credit Lyonnais is the only bank to have received
permission to set up a subsidiary.
But the weakness of the rouble means that with starting capital of just
Ecu20m, Credit Lyonnais it is among the five biggest banks in Russia even
before it has started to operate.
Some Russian bankers say they are all for foreign presence but only in joint
venture banks like International Moscow Bank, a joint venture 60 per cent
owned by foreign shareholders. According to the central bank, by April 1992
it had attracted Dollars 2bn of the Dollars 4bn held by Russian-based banks
in foreign currency in correspondent accounts abroad.
Here lies Russian banks' main concern: that foreign banks will pick off
their most lucrative foreign currency business, leaving them with rouble
deposits. It is estimated that only ten Russian banks are capable of
withstanding foreign competition in hard currency operations.
*Banking in Russia, Guide 1993, published by Osiris Conseil, Paris; Fax
47009252.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 29
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1773</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAEGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / International Bonds: IADB reopens July issue to raise
Dollars 200m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TRACY CORRIGAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE Inter-American Development Bank raised Dollars 200m yesterday by
reopening an existing Dollars 500m issue launched in July.
Although placement proved rather slow, due to the slowdown in investor
activity during the Christmas season, dealers reported some interest from
investors bullish on the dollar, who have been buying short-dated dollar
bonds selectively. However, the deal, which matures in August 1997, was
considered aggressively priced, offering a yield of just five basis points
above the comparable US Treasury. Lead manager Salomon Brothers pointed out
that the margin was 15 basis points when calculated over the interpolated
yield curve.
The original Dollars 500m issue had become very expensive. After the deal
was launched in July at 18 basis points over the comparable Treasury, the
spread had tightened to 10 basis points below the curve. Dealers said this
anomaly existed because of the lack of Eurodollar bonds, preferred by some
investors because they are issued in bearer form, which trade below par.
By the end of the day the spread on the new tranche had widened from five to
11 basis points over the five-year Treasury yield.
Moody's has placed the long-term debt ratings of International Business
Machines under review for possible downgrade, affecting Dollars 18bn of
debt. The move threatens to widen further the gulf between Moody's and
Standard &amp; Poor's assessments of IBM's creditworthiness.
IBM's debt is still rated AAA by S&amp;P, although with a negative outlook,
while Moody's rates IBM's senior debt two notches lower at Aa2.
Moody's said the latest review was triggered by IBM's announcement that it
was taking a Dollars 6bn charge in the fourth quarter to cover further
workforce and capacity reductions.
British Airways' Pounds 300m of unsecured Eurosterling bonds has also been
placed under review for possible downgrade by Moody's following BA's bid to
acquire up to 25 per cent of Qantas Airways.
The Australian government, which is in the process of privatising the 100
per cent-owned airline, is expected to decide whether to accept the
acquisition in January. BA is also awaiting a decision by the US Department
of Transportation on a Dollars 750m investment in USAir.
The review will focus on the impact of these potential investments and the
operating benefits which could be realised.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 29
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1774</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAEEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / International Company News: Allstate Insurance debt under
review
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NIKKI TAIT
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
STANDARD &amp; Poor's, one of the large Wall Street rating agencies, yesterday
announced that it was reviewing the debt ratings of Allstate Insurance
Company, with a view to possible downgrade, as a result of the insurer's
revised assessment of the losses from Hurricane Andrew earlier this year.
The insurer, one of the largest property-casualty insurers in the US and
part of the Sears, Roebuck financial services and retail group, is currently
projecting a Dollars 2.65bn loss as a result of claims which followed the
hurricane.
The storm system swept through southern Florida and Louisiana in
late-August, causing massive damage and becoming the costliest disaster
which the US insurance industry has ever faced.
S &amp; P suggested yesterday that, if the after-tax charge from the hurricane
was Dollars 1bn at Allstate, and the insurer loses around Dollars 1bn (under
the statutory accounting principles common in the insurance industry, rather
than GAAP), this would raise the operating leverage ratio above three times,
compared with 2.7 times in 1991.
It noted that there was potential to improve the company's capital position,
if and when Sears goes ahead with plans to sell up to 20 per cent of the
equity in Allstate to public investors.
S &amp; P currently has a AA minus claims-paying rating on Allstate Insurance
Company, and its property-casualty subsidiaries.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 28
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1775</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAEDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / International Company News: China Airlines in Dollars 110.4m
share offer
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TAIPEI
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
CHINA Airlines, Taiwan's flag carrier, has launched a public offer of shares
worth TDollars 2.8bn (USDollars 110.4m), becoming the island's first airline
to go public, Reuter reports from Taipei.
Applications to buy the 41m shares, priced at TDollars 68 each, will be
accepted from today. CAL plans a stock exchange listing in mid-February.
'The offer will help us raise money to repay debts and finance purchases of
new aircraft,' CAL said. It plans to expand foreign operations.
CAL is currently 85 per cent owned by the China Aviation Development
Foundation, technically a private body. The remaining 15 per cent was sold
to local companies and CAL employees in share placements that began late
last year.
The public offer will reduce the foundation's ownership to about 80 per
cent. Foreign investors will be allowed to buy the shares.
CAL has remained profitable in recent years despite the difficulties faced
by many international airlines. In the first nine months of 1992, pre-tax
profits were TDollars 4bn on revenue of TDollars 33bn.
CAL, which flies to 26 countries and territories, operates a fleet of 30
aircraft and plans to expand this to 34 by the end of next year.
A recent survey found CAL was the world's fourth most profitable airline,
after British Airways, Singapore Airlines and Cathay Pacific.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 28
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1776</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAECFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / International Company News: Streisand deal with Sony could
exceed Dollars 40m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN FRIEDMAN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
SONY'S US movie and recorded music subsidiaries have struck an exclusive and
long-term deal with Ms Barbra Streisand, the singer and actress. The
contract is believed to be worth at least Dollars 40m and could rise to as
much as Dollars 60m.
The contract was orchestrated by a Sony team that included Mr Mickey
Schulhof, vice-chairman of Sony USA, Mr Peter Guber, chairman of the
Hollywood-based Sony Pictures Entertainment group, and Mr Mark Canton,
chairman of Sony's Columbia Pictures division.
Although large, it is consistent with other such deals for US superstar
entertainers.
Madonna, the pop star, recently agreed a Dollars 60m multi-media deal with
the Time Warner group, while Mr Michael Jackson, another entertainer, has a
similarly-sized contract with Sony Music.
Sony yesterday said it could not comment on the financial terms of the new
contract.
But one executive explained that it could total as much as Dollars 60m,
depending on how many films Ms Streisand became involved in and whether she
worked as an actress, producer or director.
Some parts of the new Streisand deal are believed to be extend to 10 years.
The contract covers recorded albums, as well as acting, directing and
producing feature films.
The 50-year-old Ms Streisand began her career in 1962 with Columbia Records,
part of CBS Records.
CBS Records was acquired by Sony four years ago, and Ms Streisand has
remained under contract with the Sony record division.
Last year, Ms Streisand directed Prince of Tides, a Columbia Pictures film
that cost about Dollars 30m to make and earned Dollars 125m in gross
worldwide receipts at the box office.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 28
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1777</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAEBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / International Company News: Battle to seize control of Astra
Intl stepped up
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By WILLIAM KEELING
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   JAKARTA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE BATTLE for control of Astra International, Indonesia's biggest motor
group, intensified yesterday with Mr Sumitro Djojohadikusomo, Astra
chairman, blocking the proposed sale of 44.6 per cent of the company by the
Soeryadjaya family, its majority shareholders.
In a related development, government officials yesterday confirmed a
liquidation order had been placed on Bank Summa, which is privately-owned by
the Soeryadjaya family. The bank has outstanding obligations of Rp1,600bn
(Dollars 780m). It owes about Rp890bn to depositors, Rp300bn to the central
bank and around Rp400bn to commercial banks.
At the weekend, the Soeryadjayas reached agreement for the sale of 108m
shares in Astra with a consortium led by Mr Prajogo Pangestu, who controls a
substantial timber business. The consortium is acting under the umbrella of
Yayasan Pasetya Mulya, a management institute reportedly funded by members
of Indonesia's Chinese business community.
Brokers say the consortium includes Mr Liem Sioe Liong, who runs the Salim
Group, and Mr Eka Wijaya, head of the Sinar Mas Group.
In September, the Soeryadjayas agreed not to sell Astra shares without Mr
Sumitro's approval.
Mr Sumitro said Toyota Motor of Japan, the vehicles of which provided half
of Astra's Rp4,933bn turnover in 1991, opposed the sale due to the
consortium's composition.
'I am responsible for maintaining the relationship with Toyota Motor
management,' he said. Government officials, however, suggested the
liquidation of Bank Summa may result in Mr Sumitro losing his right of veto.
The Soeryadjaya family, prior to their agreement with Mr Sumitro, had
pledged 100m shares in Astra against a loan of Rp500bn from a consortium of
three banks.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 28
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1778</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAEAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / International Company News: Hostile reaction to Black plan
to raise Fairfax stake
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN BROWN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   SYDNEY
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
AN ATTEMPT by Mr Conrad Black's UK Daily Telegraph group to raise its stake
in Australia's Fairfax newspaper group from 14.33 per cent to 25 per cent
appears likely to fail following a hostile reaction from members of the
government.
The government said yesterday that the Telegraph had made a formal
application to the Foreign Investment Review Board (FIRB) for a relaxation
of the existing 15 per cent ceiling on its Fairfax shareholding.
The application accords with Mr Black's intentions when Fairfax was acquired
last year by the Tourang consortium, led by the Telegraph. However, it
appears to have rekindled political opposition to foreign media holdings.
Mr Barry Jones, president of the governing Labor Party, said Mr Black's move
could even trigger an attempt by Labor's federal parliamentary caucus to
tighten existing rules on foreign ownership of newspapers.
The Telegraph's application is likely to be considered sympathetically by
the FIRB, which investigates all proposals by overseas companies to acquire
more than 15 per cent of Australian companies.
The FIRB has adopted a relaxed approach to inward investment in recent years
and has approved about 95 per cent of applications since Labor was elected
in 1983.
But decisions by the FIRB have to be approved by Mr John Dawkins, the
federal treasurer, who is subject to binding resolutions by the
parliamentary caucus.
The Telegraph wanted a 20 per cent stake in Fairfax when the group was
acquired by Tourang, but was limited to 15 per cent by the caucus, which put
a ceiling of 20 per cent on total foreign ownership. This included a 5 per
cent stake held by Hellman and Friedman, the US investment bank. The rest of
the shares are owned by Australian institutions and private shareholders.
Mr Black has previously indicated that the Telegraph's hopes of increasing
its stake in Fairfax were supported by Mr Paul Keating, the prime minister,
and other senior ministers.
However, Mr Keating's office denied that any guarantees of support had been
given to Mr Black. Officials also suggested that the government was not keen
to have the foreign ownership issue aired in the run-up to next year's
election.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 28
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1779</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAD9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / International Company News: Jardine Strategic buys 16% stake
in C &amp; C
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   LONDON
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
JARDINE Strategic Holdings has acquired 16 per cent of Cycle &amp; Carriage, the
Singapore conglomerate, for SDollars 212.5m (Dollars 129.6m), Reuter reports
from London.
The company said it bought the 33.7m share stake from OCBC Securities, part
of Oversea-Chinese Banking group.
C &amp; C is a large motor vehicle distributor with interests in property, food
and retailing in Singapore and Malaysia. For the year ended September, it
made net profits before extraordinary items of SDollars 66m on sales of
SDollars 1.56bn.
Jardine's managing director, Mr Nigel Rich, said: 'It is policy to hold
significant stakes in major companies and over time we would be looking to
consolidate our investment.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 28
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1780</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAD8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / International Company News: Fedex sees improvement
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NIKKI TAIT
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
FEDERAL Express, the Memphis-based delivery company, lifted second-quarter
after-tax profits to Dollars 37.9m in the three months to end-November,
against Dollars 26.5m a year ago, writes Nikki Tait.
Revenues were virtually flat at Dollars 1.96bn, against Dollars 1.94bn.
The group's troubled international operations made progress, although they
still posted an operating loss of Dollars 37.6m on revenues of Dollars
564.2m, compared with a Dollars 69.6m loss on revenues of Dollars 651.6m a
year earlier.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 27
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1781</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAD7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / International Company News: Phibro restructuring aims to
refine its operations - The Salomon unit is going back to basics by focusing
on oil products trading
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PATRICK HARVERSON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
PHIBRO Energy, the US oil trading and refining company, briefly emerged
recently from the shadow of its more illustrious parent, the Wall Street
securities house Salomon, to announce a significant restructuring.
The changes involve taking Phibro out of the business of making markets in
physical oil products and merging the remaining trading and refining
operations into Salomon. This represents something of a retreat from the oil
business for Salomon, which is taking a fourth-quarter pre-tax charge of
between Dollars 25m and Dollars 35m to cover the costs of the changes.
As recently as May of last year, Mr Andrew Hall, Phibro's chairman, was
discussing ambitious plans. There was talk of building Phibro into an
operation worthy of joining the ranks of the leading oil companies, one that
was involved in every part of the business from the oil well to the petrol
pump.
This seemed conceivable in the late 1980s when, due to some astute bets on
oil prices and a healthy refining business, Phibro was making huge profits.
In 1990, it earned Dollars 492m, more than Salomon's marquee bond trading
business.
Those ambitions, however, never came close to realisation. An unfavourable
shift in oil market conditions (trading companies thrive on volatility, but
since the end of the Gulf war oil prices have been unusually stable and
low), narrowing margins in the oil products trading business, and losses on
a risky oil production joint venture in Russia took their toll.
In 1991, the company plunged into the red with a Dollars 34m loss. This year
has been not much better - in the most recent quarter, Phibro reported a
pre-tax loss of Dollars 23m.
These problems, coupled with separate, but equally important, upheavals
within Salomon's Wall Street business stemming from the August 1991 bond
market scandal at its Salomon Brothers unit, convinced Phibro's and its
parent's management that big changes were required.
As Mr Robert Denham, Salomon's chairman, says, the motivation to restructure
Phibro came from Mr Hall, who felt Salomon's shareholders would be best
served if Phibro handed over the refining and production operations to
Salomon, where they would report directly to Mr Denham, and if the company
restructured its oil products trading business.
This would leave Phibro, and Mr Hall, to concentrate on trading crude oil,
selective oil products, precious metals, petrochemicals, other commodities
and energy-related derivative products. Mr Hall maintains: 'I wanted to
devote my attention 100 per cent to our trading business - that's where we
get the best returns on our capital.'
Phibro, in fact, was getting no return on its capital from its oil products
marketmaking operations, which had become increasingly unprofitable as the
business became more transparent and competitive. Mr Hall says: 'When you
add it all up, the margins of the business just don't cover the hidden
costs.'
The separation of Phibro USA, which owns four oil refineries, from Phibro's
trading operation is a blow to Mr Hall's hopes that profitable synergies
would result from running the two together.
It is something that Mr Hall appears to have come to terms with some time
ago, because the refining business has recently been run from Houston,
Texas, as a stand-alone operation with its own small trading staff.
The future of the refining business is now Mr Denham's responsibility. The
Salomon chairman, a lawyer by trade and with no particular experience of the
oil business, says his role is to 'think in an economically rational way
about strategic decisions' affecting the operation.
Options being considered include joint ventures, a spin-off of the business
to shareholders, or an outright sale of the refineries. Mr Denham, however,
is in no hurry: 'There is nothing horribly broken in the business that
requires an immediate fix.'
The question of what to do with Phibro Energy Production, the big joint
production venture in Russia known as White Knights, is also now Mr Denham's
responsibility. Although White Knights - the largest foreign oil venture in
the former Soviet Union - is producing plenty of oil for export, a
complicated and unresolved tax problem means Phibro is losing money on what
was always a high-risk operation.
The main impact of the Russian venture so far has been to dissuade Phibro
from becoming more involved in the production business. Mr Denham says: 'I
suppose if the White Knights experience had been a super success . . . that
would have encouraged us in the original direction - the thought that White
Knights would be the first step towards more production ventures.'
Mr Denham does not expect to spend much time on White Knights; he is happy
with the project's management team, and is cautiously optimistic. 'I still
think that we have a pretty reasonable prospect of getting money out of it.'
The changes at Phibro should be seen in the wider context of the recent
restructuring of its parent, Salomon. When Mr Warren Buffet, the billionaire
investor, took over the chairmanship of Salomon immediately after last
year's bond trading scandal, one of his earliest criticisms was that Salomon
Inc, the parent company, and Phibro, the oil business, were both run to
benefit Salomon Brothers, the Wall Street firm.
In contrast, Mr Buffet wanted to run the group for the benefit of its
shareholders, by having a holding company (Salomon Inc) that acted as a
holding company. Mr Denham, who took over from Mr Buffet earlier this year,
inherited a new management structure that ensured the two subsidiaries were
run to benefit the parent company.
The integration of Phibro into the parent group is, therefore, a
continuation of Buffet's reforms, which also included Salomon Brothers
refocusing on its core businesses.
As one Wall Street analyst says of the Phibro restructuring: 'Look at it in
the context of Salomon's restructuring - it's a getting back to basics. Oil
refining and production was always a bit out of the way for them.'
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
                   SALOMON INC EARNINGS (DOLLARS M)
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
YEAR                    1987       1988      1989     1990     1991
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Salomon Brothers         253        513       534      416    1,036
Philbro Energy            60        227       375      492      (34)
Philbro Brothers*         52         48      (116)    (168)       -
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Total pre-tax income**   365        788       793      740    1,002
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
*Philipp Bros commodity subsidiary is no longer a reportable industry
segment
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
**Excludes losses due to non-re-curring special items and corporate
expenses
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: company figures
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 27
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1782</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAD5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / International Company News: Gerber forecasts lower earnings
as price war bites
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NIKKI TAIT
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
GERBER Products, the US baby food manufacturer, yesterday warned that
'unprecedented competitive activity' meant it was lowering earnings
estimates and expected a fall in sales volumes this year. Gerber shares
plunged Dollars 4 7/8 to Dollars 30 1/4 before the close.
The company, which has about 70 per cent of the US market, said that until
late-November - halfway through its third quarter - it had been expecting
volume growth of between 1 and 3 per cent, and earnings in the year to
end-March of Dollars 2.05 to Dollars 2.10 a share.
Since then, the group said there had been 'a dramatic change in the
competitive situation and the resulting order rate'.
Gerber tried to push up prices in October, and this, coupled with a
subsequent price-war, left its products looking expensive.
'In one key market, our products were priced at more than twice that of our
closest competitor,' the company complained.
Gerber said it would probably show a fall in volumes during the year of
around 3 to 4 per cent, while earnings per share are expected to dip to
Dollars 1.80 to Dollars 1.90, from Dollars 1.93 in 1991-92.
Gerber's two main competitors US are Ralston Purina, via its Beech-Nut
subsidiary, and HJ Heinz.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 27
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1783</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAD4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / International Company News: Profits decline at Danisco
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HILARY BARNES
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   COPENHAGEN
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
PRE-TAX PROFITS at Danisco, the Danish distilling, sugar and packaging
group, were down at the half-year to October 31 to DKr323m (Dollars 53.8m)
from DKr468m, writes Hilary Barnes in Copenhagen.
The group blamed 'exceptionally difficult economic conditions,' including
weak international demand and the appreciation of the krone against a number
of currencies which have devalued recently.
The group's half-year sales were up slightly from DKr6.43bn to DKr6.47bn.
Profits before financial items and minority shares fell by only DKr6m to
DKr495m.
The group said second-half pre-tax profits would be higher, but lower than
last year.
Lauritzen Group, the shipping and shipbuilding business, said it would break
even in the current year after difficult conditions in international
shipping and offshore drilling. The group made a pre-tax profit of DKr588m
in 1991 on turnover of DKr8.15bn.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 26
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1784</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAD1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / International Company News: Remy-Cointreau up at FFr104m in
first half
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALICE RAWSTHORN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   PARIS
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
REMY-COINTREAU, the French drinks group, yesterday announced a slight
increase in net profits for the first half of this year, writes Alice
Rawsthorn in Paris.
The group, which is best known for Cointreau, its orange-tasting liqueur,
saw net profits increase to FFr103.8m (Dollars 19.5m) in the six months to
September 30 from FFr101.4m in the same period last year.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 26
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1785</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / International Company News: Moody's downgrades Volvo
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   STOCKHOLM
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
MOODY'S Investors Service, the US credit rating agency, has downgraded the
commercial paper ratings of Volvo, the Swedish motor vehicle manufacturer,
to Prime-2 from Prime-1.
Moody's acknowledged that Volvo had undertaken an aggressive cost-reduction
programme.
However, the rating agency said that Volvo still had excess production
capacity and a cost structure which would prevent a return to strong
profitability until demand picked up significantly.
Moody's said that the downgrade reflected the outlook for continued pressure
on Volvo's earnings performance and the potential for further weakness in
the company's debt-protection measurements.
Moody's added that it also reflected the erosion of Volvo's financial
flexibility caused by the decline in the value of its non-strategic
investments outside the automotive industry .
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 26
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1786</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / International Company News: Petrofina deal with Saudi
investors in jeopardy
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
PLANS by Petrofina, Belgium's oil company, for the Dollars 500m sale of half
of its US refining and marketing assets to private Saudi Arabian investors
could be jeopardised by the reluctance of the Saudi government to sanction
the deal.
If the Saudi deal does not go ahead by the end of the year - a deadline set
by the company - it raises the possibility Petrofina may put its paints
division up for sale in order to repay some of its debt, accor-ding to
industry analysts.
Petrofina's 86 per cent-owned US subsidiary, Fina, has been involved in
talks with the Saudi investors for about 18 months. The sale would include
50 per cent of the company's two refineries at Port Arthur and Big Spring in
Texas as well as its small chain of petrol stations and chemicals plants.
Petrofina does not produce enough oil in the US to service its refining
operations and the rationale behind the sale is that Saudi Arabia would
provide crude oil to feed the refineries. However, the company is still not
sure whether the deal will go ahead.
Petrofina, which announced on Monday it would halve its dividend pay-out
this year due to significantly lower profit forecasts, has seen its debt to
equity ratio increase to just over 50 per cent this year.
The company's shares fell sharply on the Brussels bourse yesterday as
investors expressed their surprise at the extent of the dividend cut from
last year's BFr561 a share. The stock recovered slightly during the
afternoon to close down BFr500 at BFr7,490.
Mr Francois Cornelis, Petrofina's chief executive officer said on Monday the
company expected to see sharply lower profits for this year following the
effect of the recession on its businesses.
The company indicated yesterday that 1993 would also be an extremely
difficult year and it was not expecting to see an upturn in the western
European economy until towards the end of next year.
Mr David Stedman, oil equity analyst at Daiwa Europe, expects the company to
post a net profit of BFr7.3bn (Dollars 226m) this year, less than half last
year's level of BFr16.3bn.
'It will inevitably be a poor year next year,' he said.
'They have a range of good quality assets, but no one in their position
could turn it around in such a short time.'
Petrofina's refining, marketing and chemicals assets are concentrated in
Europe and the US which have borne the brunt of the recession. The company
has almost no exposure to the Far East - where oil demand has been growing
throughout the recession in Europe and the US.
The company announced it was slashing its capital expenditure from BFr52bn
this year to BFr40bn next year, but it would continue to focus on its core
investments, including the completion of deep water facilities at its
Antwerp refinery and further development plans in the North Sea.
Petrofina faces potentially large investment costs for its 30 per cent stake
in Norway's Ekofisk field where the authorities have called for safety
standards to be improved. This could involve the commissioning of a
completely new oil platform at a cost of over Dollars 1bn to the field's
partners.
World stockmarkets, Page 37
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 26
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1787</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / International Company News: Nedlloyd under new pressure from
Hagen
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RONALD VAN DE KROL
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   AMSTERDAM
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
NEDLLOYD, the Dutch transport group, has come under renewed pressure from Mr
Torstein Hagen, the dissident shareholder who forced the company to appoint
him to its supervisory board in the autumn.
He is seeking an extraordinary shareholders' meeting to make changes which
would amount to a lifting of some of its anti-takeover defences.
DNO, the Norwegian-based oil company of which Mr Hagen is chairman, said
yesterday it wanted Nedlloyd to end the restrictions on voting rights, to
abolish its priority shares, and to change the system of electing its
supervisory board, all of which are common mechanisms in the Netherlands to
protect a company from outside influences or takeover. Nedlloyd said it
would consider DNO's request to call a meeting.
Mr Hagen's company said the proposed changes were designed to make Nedlloyd
more responsive to shareholders. A company official declined to elaborate,
but said Mr Hagen would hold a press conference today in Oslo.
It described Mr Hagen as feeling 'frustrated', after attending only a couple
of Nedlloyd supervisory board meetings, about his inability to make a
'constructive impact'. It said the root of Nedlloyd's problems was its
self-perpetuating supervisory board, which, similar to other big Dutch
companies, appoints its own members.
DNO wants the supervisory board to be elected by shareholders. 'Any refusal
by the current supervisory board to go along with this proposal can only be
seen as an effort by this body to protect its own and management's
entrenched positions.'
DNO said its proposals were supported by six other large shareholders, but
it did not name them.
Mr Hagen is believed to control up to 25 per cent of Nedlloyd's shares.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 26
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1788</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Pittencrieff in Dollars 6.2m acquisition
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Pittencrieff, the oil and gas services company, has expanded its interests
in mobile communications by paying Dollars 6.2m (Pounds 4.1m) cash for
Commercial Radio Service and its sister company Mounts Tower Leasing.
In the year to September 30 1991 profits for the two companies were Dollars
810,000. Gross billings are about Dollars 305,000 a month.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1789</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Shaftesbury cuts loss to Pounds 4.7m
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Mr Peter Levy, chairman of Shaftesbury, the property company, said despite
difficult market conditions substantial progress had been in reducing
borrowings and generating sufficient rental income to cover outgoings.
In the year to September 30 losses before provisions were cut from Pounds 4m
to Pounds 2.54m. After provisions against cost of developing properties of
Pounds 2.15m (Pounds 8.79m) the pre-tax loss was Pounds 4.69m (Pounds
12.8m).
Losses per share were 16.3p (52.2p). Following a valuation of investment
properties the deficit of Pounds 3.52m had been charged to revaluation
reserve. Net assets over the year fell to 87p (117p).
Mr Levy said that borrowings had been cut by sales during the year and since
the year end. Rental income now covered all outgoings, he said.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1790</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Birkby Pounds 204,000 in the black
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
A turnround from pre-tax losses of Pounds 2.12m to profits of Pounds 204,000
was announced by Birkby for the six months to September 30.
The group specialises in the provision of managed rental workspace.
Mr Michael Woodhead, chairman, said the results reflected both the successes
of the rationalisation programme and the short period of trading since the
acquisition of the Birkby Group - formerly Finlan Group - on August 3.
He said that the full effect of the acquisition, reorganisation and the
capital raising would be seen in the second half.
Turnover amounted to Pounds 2.19m (Pounds 5.49m). Earnings per share worked
through at 4.8p (509.4p losses).
Following the confirmation of the reduction in the company's share capital
and share premium account on December 2, a further set of interim accounts
was being prepared. Directors said they expected to declare an interim
dividend of 1p.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1791</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADTFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Melville Street net asset value at 144p
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Melville Street Investments, the development capital investment trust,
reported net asset value of 144p per share at October 31, against 150p at
April 30 and 147p a year earlier.
The company said that a number of companies had continued to encounter
difficult trading conditions and provisions had been made. The result was
reflected in the net asset value.
For the six months to end-October net revenue was Pounds 391,000 (Pounds
246,000) helped by an increase in bank interest received from Pounds 14,000
to Pounds 116,000. Earnings per share were 2.09p (1.32p) and the interim
dividend is maintained at 1.5p.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1792</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADSFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Creighton's 9% ahead at Pounds 0.62m
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Creighton's Naturally, the USM-quoted creator and maker of natural health
and beauty products, achieved a 9.2 per cent improvement in profits to
Pounds 617,000 pre-tax for the half year ended September 30.
The interim dividend is lifted to 2.1p (2p) from earnings of 9.1p (8.4p) per
share.
The group also announced the acquisition of 50 per cent of Fine Fragrances
for Pounds 875,000 in cash and shares. The purchase will help the group in
both the domestic and export markets.
The improvement in profitability arose from actions taken to reduce
operating costs. Sales fell from Pounds 5.23m to Pounds 4.6m. The company
exported more during the half year than for the whole of the previous 12
months.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1793</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Hardys &amp; Hansons shows 5% decline
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Hardys &amp; Hansons, the Nottingham-based brewer, yesterday reported a 5 per
cent downturn in annual profits.
On turnover ahead 4 per cent to Pounds 30.3m, pre-tax profits for the 12
months to October 2 amounted to Pounds 6.72m, down from Pounds 7.04m in the
previous 53 week period. The outcome was struck after dividends and net
interest receivable of Pounds 962,000 (Pounds 1.63m).
After tax and the preference dividend, earnings per 5p share emerged at
18.035p, down from 19.271p. A recommended final dividend of 5.1p lifts the
total for the year to 7.9p (7.5p).
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1794</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Brasway more than halved at Pounds 330,000
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Pre-tax profits of Brasway, the tube and hydraulic hose and fitting
manufacturer, more than halved from Pounds 708,000 to Pounds 330,000 in the
six months to October 31.
Turnover was down 6 per cent at Pounds 16.4m compared with Pounds 17.5m.
Mr Mark Swaby, chairman, said that benefits of new products should be seen
in the second half, but he warned that the immediate trading outlook was
still tough.
The interim dividend is maintained at 0.24p, payable from earnings of 0.28p
(0.62p) per share.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1795</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Abtrust New Dawn assets up 24%
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Abtrust New Dawn Investment Trust had a net asset value at October 31 of
155.96p per share, a gain of 24 per cent on the 125.79p at the April 30 year
end and 50 per cent up on a year ago.
Net revenue for the six months to end-October was Pounds 219,365 (Pounds
109,694) for earnings almost doubled at 0.73p, against 0.37p.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1796</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Redundancy costs cut Hoskyns to Pounds 9.5m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN CANE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
HOSKYNS GROUP, the computing services company in which Cap Gemini Sogeti of
France has a majority stake, saw pre-tax profits fall sharply last year as
increased competition and restructuring costs acted to force down margins.
CGS also announced that it was likely to be offering 469p each for the
outstanding shares. It was a condition of its 1990 purchase of a 69.5 per
cent holding that it make a further offer within three months of the 1992
preliminary announcement for the remaining shares. The shares closed
unchanged at 451p.
For the year to October 31 profits fell 34 per cent to Pounds 9.5m (Pounds
14.3m) after redundancy costs of Pounds 2.5m.
Turnover fell slightly to Pounds 197.7m (Pounds 200.7m). Mr Geoff Unwin,
chairman, said if allowance was made for the run down of facilities
management contracts at Plessey, Hoskyns' former majority holder, and
disposals, the underlying turnover growth was 6 per cent.
Earnings per share were down at 5.8p (10.5p). A final dividend of 1.65p is
proposed for an unchanged total of 2.4p.
Hoskyns is UK market leader in outsourcing or facilities management, one of
the fastest growing areas in data processing. The company signed twice as
many outsourcing contracts in 1992 as in 1991. The forward order book is
worth Pounds 175m.
Mr Unwin said he did not expect to see any increase in the amount spent on
computing in 1993, but it would be distributed differently with outsourcing
attracting a growing share.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1797</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Triplex Lloyd rises to Pounds 3.3m -
Building products remains weakest division
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PAUL CHEESERIGHT, Midlands Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
TRIPLEX LLOYD, the industrial engineering group, increased interim pre-tax
profits by 6 per cent to Pounds 3.31m despite a deteriorating performance by
its building products division.
Turnover for the six months to end-September slipped to Pounds 81.1m. The
comparative figure of Pounds 83.8m included Pounds 8.8m from discontinued
operations. Earnings per share declined to 4.8p (5p) on capital enlarged via
the acquisition last January of Paralloy.
The interim dividend is maintained at 2.5p.
Building products, where operating profits declined to Pounds 621,000
(Pounds 673,000), remained the group's weakest division. However, both the
automotive and engineering and power divisions increased operating profits
to over Pounds 2.04m compared with Pounds 1.69m and Pounds 1.65m
respectively.
Mr Colin Cooke, chairman, said there was no sign of any market upturn for
building products and that the outlook for automotive sales was 'cautious'.
He noted, however, that for the power division there were 'substantial
opportunities for growth even in the absence of a general improvement either
in the UK or world economy.'
Against the trend among other engineering companies, gearing increased by
over 15 per cent to 60 per cent.
That, according to Mr John Foley, the finance director soon to become
managing director, was the result of the provision of Pounds 4m of working
capital for Paralloy.
Interest charges accounted for Pounds 1.29m (Pounds 1.24m). However, the
company refinanced its short term debt by using the US private placement
market to raise Dollars 35m (Pounds 23m) which swaps into fixed rate
sterling borrowing at rates under 9 per cent for terms of between seven and
ten years.
COMMENT
Triplex Lloyd's power division will carry it through the second half.
Paralloy is now making money; investment at Deritend Precision Castings,
another power subsidiary, is paying off. The markets for the other divisions
are too uncertain to offer any guarantee of increased profits, but by the
time a lower interest rate bill and the proceeds of property sales are
factored in to the immediate outlook, Triplex Lloyd should be looking at
1992-93 pre-tax profits in excess of Pounds 7.5m. That would translate into
earnings of 10.2p and put the shares at yesterday's unchanged price of 140p
on a prospective p/e of 13.7, cheap at the price given a sector average of
over 25.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1798</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Purchase and improved margins lift
Greencore
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TIM COONE
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   DUBLIN
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
GREENCORE, the Irish sugar and agribusiness group, reported a 25 per cent
increase in pre-tax profits to IPounds 31.5m (Pounds 34m) for the year
ending September 25 on turnover up 19 per cent at IPounds 388m.
The results are the first full-year figures from the company since its
privatisation and flotation in April 1991. They also reflected the
incorporation of Food Industries into the group in November 1991 at a cost
of IPounds 57.9m.
Increased margins were achieved in all three divisions - sugar, agribusiness
and other food.
Mr Gerry Murphy, chief executive, said the results 'reflect the achievement
of greater operating efficiency through the group and the successful
integration of the companies acquired with Food Industries'.
The increase in turnover and a near doubling of the interest charge to
IPounds 8.8m were attributable almost entirely to the incorporation of Food
Industries.
Mr Kevin O'Sullivan, finance director, said it was a 'great achievement' to
have covered the costs of acquiring Food Industries 'with a little to spare'
within a year of its purchase.
The sugar division increased operating profits by 10 per cent to IPounds
22.5m on a marginally smaller turnover of IPounds 126.3m, due primarily to a
reduction of low-margin overseas sales and improved efficiency from new
capital investment. Mr Murphy said the current beet harvest was producing
sugar yields 'at the highest level in forty years'.
Market analysts in Dublin said the results reflected well on the new
management team brought in over the past year under Mr Murphy.
They said the only concern was the current high level of interest rates in
the Irish economy and the devaluation of sterling last September. Both would
have an adverse effect on the company.
Mr Murphy said: 'Current interest rates are unsustainable and something has
to give soon, although I do not believe a unilateral devaluation would be
good for the country.'
There was the chance of a further acquisition in the coming year 'if we find
the right business at the right price and depending on the state of the
equity and financial markets.
Earnings emerged at 31p (27.6p) and a final dividend of 5p makes an 8p
(4.5p) total.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1799</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Sanderson Elect ahead to Pounds 2.8m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN CANE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Pre-tax profits moved ahead at Sanderson Electronics, driven by a vigorous
performance in the UK which enabled the Sheffield-based computing services
company to shrug off losses at General Automation, the US computer
manufacturer in which it has a 49 per cent stake, writes Alan Cane.
Turnover for the year to September 30 increased to Pounds 21.4m (Pounds
20.5m) in difficult trading conditions, but profits rose 17 per cent to
Pounds 2.8m (Pounds 2.4m). Earnings per share were 24p (19.2p).
The market discounted the results, marking the shares down 46p to 226p,
after a 30p rise on Monday. The company declared a first interim dividend of
5.4p. For the present year, dividends totalling 9p have already been paid.
Analysts are looking for profits of Pounds 3.9m next year and believe the
shares are underpriced.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1800</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Buy-out bid values Printech at IPounds 24m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TIM COONE
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   DUBLIN
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
A MANAGEMENT buy-out bid has been launched for Printech International, the
Dublin-based printing supplier to the computer industry, which obtained a
full listing on the London and Dublin stock exchanges in May 1991.
The cash offer of 77 1/2 p per share represents a 41 per cent premium over
the last dealt price of 55p, and is worth a total of IPounds 23.7m (Pounds
25.4m).
The bid is backed by DCC, the holding company headed by Mr Jim Flavin, which
holds a 46.6 per cent stake.
The buy-out will be carried out through Ochil, an 80 per cent owned
subsidiary of DCC, in which Printech executive directors will have a 20 per
cent minority interest.
Their Printech shares will be replaced by Ochil shares, while remaining
shareholders will receive cash or loan notes. A senior debt facility of
IPounds 9m, arranged through the Bank of Ireland, will finance the cash part
of the bid.
By yesterday afternoon, 85 per cent of shareholders had accepted the offer.
One who had not was Mr John Lawrie, the chief investment manager at Scottish
Provident Ireland who called it a 'pathetically derisory offer'.
'This bid demonstrates how cheap Irish equities have become. It is
unprecedented for a thriving company to be bought out at barely eight times
earnings. This development represents a threat to the long-term viability of
the Irish stock exchange if sound second-line companies can be taken out
like this', he stated.
Mr Flavin said: 'Institutional investors have shown little appetite for the
smaller capitalised stocks. Neither the company nor the shareholders were
benefiting from the listing'.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 25
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1801</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Southern Electric improves to Pounds 15.3m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID LASCELLES, Resources Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SOUTHERN ELECTRIC, the Berkshire-based regional distributor, raised its
interim profits through a combination of higher sales and reduced costs.
For the six months to September 30 pre-tax profits were Pounds 15.3m, a rise
of 11.7 per cent, achieved on turnover of Pounds 760.6m (Pounds 745.5m).
Earnings per share rose by 13.5 per cent to 3.78p.
Southern also announced an interim dividend of 5.6p. The 14.3 per cent
increase was the highest announced so far in the electricity results season.
But Mr Duncan Ross, chairman, said that comparisons with last year's pay-out
were distorted by changes in the rate of increase in the interim and final
dividends. He said the latest distribution was equivalent to a full year
rise of 12 per cent.
Analysts said the result conformed to expectations. The shares fell 2p to
419p in a market broadly down because of the sale of Welsh Water's stake in
South Wales Electricity.
Mr Ross said that unit sales had risen by 3.1 per cent despite the
recession, much of the increase coming from industrial customers, including
Honda which recently opened its new plant in Swindon. However, there had
been no overall pick-up pointing to an economic recovery.
Mr Henry Casley, chief executive, said costs had been contained partly
through staff reductions, which would amount to some 530 this year, and also
through tighter control of bad debts. Outstanding payments had fallen by 31
per cent, or Pounds 18m, giving a boost to cash flow. However, he stressed
that the savings were not being achieved at the cost of customer service,
which continued to be monitored closely.
Mr Ross said he was pleased, though not surprised, by the clean bill of
health the electricity regulator had given last week to gas-based
electricity contracts. Southern is one of the regional companies which is
most heavily involved in gas. It has three projects which will become
operational after 1995.
It is still negotiating a new set of long-term supply contracts and would
prefer a five-year deal with the generators. Mr Ross said Southern would be
drawing up its new tariff in February, and he was confident it would show an
increase well below the inflation rate.
See Lex
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1802</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Growth in south-east Asia behind 31% gain
at Courts
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER PEARSE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
OVERSEAS growth, especially in the Far East, enabled Courts (Furnishers),
the home furnishings group, to report pre-tax profits up 31 per cent at
Pounds 2.81m in the half-year to September 26.
The shares advanced 25p to 344p.
The rise from Pounds 2.14m was also helped by property profits of Pounds
311,000 (losses Pounds 322,000) and was struck on turnover ahead at Pounds
84.2m (Pounds 80.7m).
Turnover in the UK fell to Pounds 46.6m (Pounds 48.1m), but overseas it
advanced to Pounds 37.6 (Pounds 32.7m), thanks mainly to strong performances
from Singapore and Fiji. Sales were up, though less strongly, in Malaysia,
Papua New Guinea, Mauritius and St Lucia.
Consumer confidence in the UK suffered, said Mr Paul Cohen, chairman, from
the fear of unemployment, while the housing market remained depressed.
Four high street stores were closed, reducing the group's outlets to 95. A
new superstore is scheduled to open in Swindon in May.
Mr Bruce Cohen, chief executive, said that the group's 28 superstores
accounted for two thirds of UK turnover. If a superstore makes Pounds 110
per sq ft, a high-street store makes only Pounds 68, he added.
In October, Courts floated 25 per cent of its Singapore subsidiary on the
Singapore stock exchange, raising Pounds 6.3m.
Other overseas arms to have been floated are: Jamaica, 29 per cent; Barbados
10 per cent and Mauritius 12 per cent. Mr Bruce Cohen said that Malaysia was
possibly the next.
The interim dividend is held at 1.83p, payable from earnings per share of
4.95p (2.69p).
Gearing stood at about the same level as last time's 48 per cent, though Mr
Bruce Cohen said that it was nearly twice covered by Courts' internally
financed worldwide consumer credit, worth about Pounds 90m.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1803</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Prescription for a smooth handover - The
retirement of Bill Pybus after 25 years at AAH
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PEGGY HOLLINGER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MR BILL PYBUS will celebrate his 25th anniversary at AAH Holdings by
quitting the healthcare and distribution group. The group will announce
today that he is retiring as chairman some five months earlier than planned.
Mr John Padovan, a former merchant banker and at present deputy chairman,
will become chairman from January 1.
Mr Pybus, a large friendly figure just shy of 70, has won considerable
respect in the City during his time with the company. Under his stewardship,
AAH has been transformed from an unassuming coal distribution company with a
market capitalisation of about Pounds 4m, to the UK's leading wholesale
pharmaceutical distributor with a value of about Pounds 450m.
The company now ranks in the top 200 quoted companies by market value. Last
month it announced interim pre-tax profits of Pounds 17.5m on sales of
Pounds 679.7m.
Mr Padovan's elevation had been widely expected following his arrival on the
board in March. However, it had been assumed that the handover would be made
at the end of the financial year in April. Mr Pybus said he had decided to
retire early, 'to get John in the driving seat as soon as possible'.
Company observers are not expecting a great shake-up. A former deputy
chairman of Barclays de Zoete Wedd, Mr Padovan has much in common with his
long-time acquaintance Mr Pybus and both se that AAH's future lies in
specialist distribution.
'This is not a radical change,' said Mr John Aldersley, analyst with Smith
New Court. 'It is more of an evolutionary change.'
Mr Padovan said his greatest challenge would be to build on Mr Pybus's
achievements.
When Mr Pybus joined the board in 1968, Amalgamated Anthracite Holdings, was
heavily dependent on a solid fuels market, where turnover was estimated to
be declining at about 10 per cent a year.
AAH also owned a ragbag of other businesses. Forced by the nationalisation
of the coal industry in 1947 to give up control of its mines, the company
had moved into such diverse areas as heavy engineering and even a chicken
hatchery.
However, shareholders might have guessed as early as 1968 that Mr Pybus's
ambitions lay in a different direction. In his first chairman's statement,
Mr Pybus made his intentions quite clear: 'The future should offer scope for
a well-run transport business to earn a fair profit and this is a field in
which the skills required are those which we have in the group.'
His early ambitions have since been realised, largely through the group's
strength in the pharmaceuticals sector. The big break came in 1985, with the
purchase of Vestric, Glaxo's distribution arm, for Pounds 15m. In a single
bound, AAH jumped from fourth to first place in the UK wholesale
pharmaceuticals distribution league.
The company now provides some 70 per cent of wholesale drugs to hospitals in
the UK and claims 29 per cent of the total UK wholesale drugs distribution
market worth Pounds 3.2bn a year.
Vestric not only brought AAH a national distribution network, but also
radically altered the composition of the group's profits. The purchase
allowed Mr Pybus to edge out the solid fuels business, which was sold in
1987.
With hindsight, the exit from solid fuels was neatly timed: 'They have had
desperately warm winters ever since, so we are extremely relieved,' said Mr
Pybus.
It is the pharmaceuticals arm which will provide the group with its bread
and butter profits for the next few years.
In the short term, the withdrawal last year of major rival, Medicopharma,
has helped AAH substantially to increase its market share.
Further out, the opportunities abroad are also tempting and the company has
taken its first tentative steps with the proposed acquisition of Ireland's
Cahill May Roberts group. However, the tightly-held nature of pharmaceutical
businesses in continental Europe means such expansion is likely to be lower
on the list of priorities.
Analysts point to the opportunities for the group's other divisions, such as
environmental services and building supplies. 'There are many more contracts
to be won from local authorities' under the new competitive contract
tendering regulations, according to Mr Tony Dew, analyst at Kleinwort
Benson. Only about half have been tendered so far.
Building services, which reported interim profits of Pounds 1.5m, is also an
obvious candidate for expansion. The smaller retail pharmacy division will
continue to grow through acquisitions.
The caveat to such opportunities would have to be economic recovery. With
about 80 per cent of profits dependent on pharmaceuticals, the group's
defensive qualities appear to outweigh its cyclical exposure. Nevertheless,
analysts are forecasting about Pounds 37m for the current year, against
Pounds 32.2m last time.
Mr Padovan is confident the foundations laid by Mr Pybus are solid enough to
achieve those profits and eventually more.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1804</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Buoyant exports help Halmajump 21%
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW BOLGER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A STRONG export sales performance helped Halma, the safety and environmental
control group, increase pre-tax profits 21 per cent to Pounds 8.12m.
Turnover rose 15 per cent to Pounds 50.9m in the 27 weeks to October 3.
Direct exports increased 24 per cent to Pounds 13.5m and overseas sales rose
19 per cent to Pounds 24.5m.
The group said the results reflected a good performance across the board
from almost all its 38 subsidiaries.
Mr David Barber, chairman, said UK activities in themselves had a strongly
positive balance of payments, so the devaluation of sterling would benefit
profitability. Many of the group's products were firmly established in their
overseas markets, so the currency change would lead to either increased
sales or higher profit margins.
Halma spent Pounds 1.8m on acquisitions, including Pounds 800,000 for IPC
Resistors in Canada and its sister company in Kentucky, which should improve
its position in the US market for heavy-duty resistors. Cashflow remained
buoyant and the group had no net borrowings.
Earnings per share increased to 3.77p (3.25p) and the interim dividend is
lifted to 1.036p (0.863p).
COMMENT
Halma's shares jumped 8p to close at 208p, partly because the shares are
tightly held and marketmakers had to scramble to cover their positions.
There can be little quibbling about the 21 per cent jump in pre-tax profits,
more than half of which came from acquisitions. Sales to continental Europe
rose 32 per cent, and the group is confident it can survive any looming
downturn there - mainly because its niche products are often driven by
environmental and safety legislation. The only catch is that forecast
full-year profits of Pounds 19m put the shares on a prospective multiple of
23, a 40 per cent premium to the market. Longer-term, analysts wonder
whether the company's consistent growth record can be maintained as it grows
in size. Existing shareholders have done well by sitting tight, but
prospective buyers at this level should consider how much further the shares
can advance.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1805</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Enterprise Computer repeats losses of
Pounds 3.4m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN CANE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
REORGANISATION and restructuring measures at Enterprise Computer Holdings, a
supplier of second user IBM computers, failed to stem losses in the six
months to September 30.
Mr Shaun Dowling, chairman, said the company had captured its share of the
available business in a market that was showing continuing deterioration and
that an improvement in economic conditions would be necessary before the
company would prosper.
Turnover of Pounds 35.5m was 38 per cent down compared with the same period
last year reflecting in part the disposal of non-core businesses.
The loss before tax was Pounds 3.39m compared with Pounds 3.4m in 1991.
Losses per share were 4.3p (4.6p) and the interim dividend is passed.
New management under Mr Dowling took over on June 1. The business has been
slimmed down from 13 sites to three key operations in the UK, Germany and
US.
Overheads have been cut by Pounds 4m a year but shareholders; funds are now
down to Pounds 4.4m.
Mr Dowling said he believed the losses and drain on cash were now behind the
company: 'The second half has started rather more optimistically' he said,
and I hope to report a general improvement at the year end.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1806</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Welsh Water Pounds 69m disposal - S Wales
Electricity sale brings smiles all round
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANGUS FOSTER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
WELSH WATER, which gained a reputation for aggressive expansion away from
its core business following privatisation in 1989, yesterday pulled out of
its most controversial investment when it sold its 14.9 per cent stake in
South Wales Electricity.
Welsh paid about Pounds 51m for the stake in 1990 and 1991 and argued that
the two companies could combine functions like billing to cut costs. But
South Wales saw the stake as hostile and refused to discuss co-operation.
Welsh sold the stake yesterday morning for Pounds 68.7m, or 460p a share,
via a placing underwritten by County NatWest. Welsh realised a pre-tax
capital gain of about Pounds 17.4m after expenses.
Mr John Elfred Jones, chairman of Welsh Water, said the sale reflected lack
of progress in discussing closer co-operation. 'Since the summer their share
price has been very good indeed so we decided to sell,' he said.
He telephoned Mr Wynford Evans, South Wales' chairman, yesterday morning to
tell him the decision. 'It's smiles all round,' Mr Jones said.
Welsh Water's shares jumped 16p to 529p, partly on relief the stake had been
sold.
The stock market was sceptical that savings could be made and some observers
feared Mr Jones was trying to build up a 'Wales plc' type of conglomerate.
Analysts also questioned Welsh's strategy and feared its expansion away from
core, or regulated, water and sewerage services could be criticised by
Ofwat, the regulator, during a 1994-95 periodic review.
Mr Nigel Burton, analyst at SG Warburg, welcomed the sale. 'It clears the
way for them to put forward a more focused core strategy,' he said.
South Wales' shares fell 8p to 473p but Mr Evans said he was pleased Welsh
was off his company's share register.
Welsh hinted that it was considering selling the stake last month when it
announced interim results.
However, since Mr Jones was seen as the driving force behind the investment,
no sale was expected before his retirement next year.
He said Welsh's other non-core businesses would not be affected. These
include a loss-making hotel company and an engineering company, both of
which have been hurt by recession.
Mr Jones said Welsh had 'no home' for the proceeds of the sale and further
investment in existing non-core businesses was unlikely.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1807</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Midlands Radio lower after exceptional cost
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
After exceptional restructuring costs of Pounds 277,000 compared with Pounds
35,000, Midlands Radio's pre-tax profits showed a marginal decline in the
year to September 30.
On turnover 3 per cent up at Pounds 10.4m, operating profits, after
regulatory costs, advanced 24 per cent to Pounds 1.28m.
Pre-tax profits, however, fell by just Pounds 8,000 to Pounds 679,000.
Earnings per share improved slightly, from 3.3p to 3.35p, and the proposed
final dividend is maintained at 1p for an unchanged total of 2.5p.
Mr A Parkinson, chairman, reiterated that an approach had been made to the
board which might or might not result in an offer for the company. He said
that discussions were continuing.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1808</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Thames completes UK Gold funding with BBC
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RAYMOND SNODDY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THAMES TELEVISION and the BBC yesterday completed the funding of UK Gold,
the British satellite television company based on popular repeats.
TCI, the largest cable television operator in the US and with US West one of
the largest in the UK, has taken a 27 per cent stake in the Pounds 35m
venture - Pounds 25m cash and a Pounds 10m standby fund.
The BBC has a 20 per cent stake, Thames 15 per cent plus an option for a
further 5 per cent and Cox, the large US media company, 38 per cent.
TCI is also involved in cable programming through channels such as
Discovery, the factual channel, Bravo, the classic movie channel, and the
Children's Channel.
UK Gold is based on the programme libraries of Thames and the BBC and shows
early episodes of programmes such as Casualty, The Bill, EastEnders and
Dallas.
It is the start of the development of a 'secondary market' in UK programmes
 -creating a channel specifically dedicated to showing library material.
The channel, launched on November 1, attracted an average weekly reach in
multi-channel homes of 41.2 per cent equal, UK Gold estimates, to about
2.75m adults.
Nearly half of UK Gold's viewing comes from 16-34 year-olds, a higher
proportion than either ITV or Channel 4.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1809</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOADAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Deficit at Hobson reduced to Pounds 8,000
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Losses at Hobson were cut from Pounds 42,000 to Pounds 8,000 pre-tax in six
months ended September 30. Turnover of Pounds 3.08m compared with Pounds
2.81m.
Both the toiletries manufacturing operation and commodities trading
activities were profitable at the operating level, although the former
suffered from low sales volumes.
Losses per share of the USM-quoted company emerged at 0.02p (0.08p).
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1810</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAC9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Boardroom shake-up at Pegasus
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER PEARSE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
IN A boardroom coup prompt-ed by institutional investors, Mr Jonathan
Hubbard-Ford, who on November 25 resigned the chief executive post at
Pegasus Group he had occupied only since May, has been re-appointed chief
executive of the USM-quoted accounting software company.
This follows the decision made on December 7 by Mr Derek Moon, non-executive
chairman, to replace SG Warburg with Henderson Crosthwaite as the company's
broker.
Warburg had been the mouthpiece through which the institutions had told Mr
Moon that they would prefer Mr Hubbard-Ford in charge of Pegasus. Mr Moon,
along with Mr Tony Barber, Mr Roger Dickinson and Mr John Percival, all
directors, has now resigned.
His place has been taken by Mr Philip Sellers, non-executive chairman of CSL
Group and a non-executive of Etam. Mr Jamie Minotto, managing director of
Pegasus Software, has appointed to the board, along with Mr Neil Pearce, the
non-executive director who represents Advent Capital. The other institutions
include Postel, Scottish Amicable and Prudential.
Mr Hubbard-Ford said last night that the board had 'sensibly' heeded the
suggestions of the institutions, and added that Warburg would be
re-appointed broker.
He said that the board upheaval was the result of a clash of both management
style and policy. 'We are a knowledge-based business: we must be open.'
He said Pegasus could now 'refocus its efforts on its core business'. Areas
of the product range would be reviewed, and 'we need to utilise fully our
large end-user base, our committed dealer network and cash resources' -
boosted by the Pounds 1.7m disposal in September.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1811</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAC8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Southern Water hit by recession
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANGUS FOSTER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SOUTHERN WATER, the water and sewerage company for much of the English south
coast, yesterday announced a small fall in interim pre-tax profits because
the previous figure was boosted by exceptional gains.
Profits before exceptionals, however, rose 8.3 per cent - helped by gains
from 'non-core' or unregulated businesses.
The pre-tax line fell from Pounds 61.4m, including a Pounds 6m exceptional
gain on the sale of investments in three statutory water companies, to
Pounds 60m in the six months to end-September.
Mr William Courtney, chairman, said he was pleased with the results, which
were affected by recession. Mr Martyn Webster, group finance director, said
recession cost the company about Pounds 2m because of lower metered water
usage from companies.
Southern also sharply increased its provisions against bad debts. Provisions
were expected to reach Pounds 15m by the financial year end compared to
Pounds 10m in April.
Turnover increased 10 per cent to Pounds 160.2m, helped by average price
rises of 9 per cent, while operating costs increased 9.6 per cent to Pounds
100.5m.
Southern's non-core activities, which include engineering, mineral water and
environmental businesses, increased operating profits 7 per cent to Pounds
4.5m and remained self-financing, Mr Webster said.
Capital expenditure fell from Pounds 80m to Pounds 63m after four coastal
schemes were held up by planning consent delays. Net cash holdings improved
from Pounds 1.7m to Pounds 13.4m, partly because of the delays.
Earnings amounted to 34.4p (35.3p). The interim dividend is lifted to 7.1p
(6.5p).
COMMENT
These results were as expected and the 2p rise to 455p owed more to a strong
sector. Profits, while respectable, were flattered by the hold-ups in
capital spending, which should delay the switch from net cash to net
borrowings until next year. Nevertheless, the non-core performance was
promising, especially since - unlike some other water companies - the
division is profitable after, as well as before, interest costs. Full year
forecasts of Pounds 118m put the shares on a p/e of 7, with a yield of just
over 6 per cent. While Southern's 'safety first' image will never win it a
premium rating, it provides a pleasant backwater for the cautious.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1812</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAC7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Lower exceptionals help reduce losses at YJ
Lovell
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PAUL TAYLOR
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
YJ LOVELL (Holdings), the Buckinghamshire-based housebuilder and property
developer which recently negotiated a three year loan agreement with its
bankers, yesterday reported a pre-tax loss of Pounds 12.2m for the year to
September 30, compared to a Pounds 20.3m loss in the previous 12 months.
The losses, which amounted to Pounds 23.7m (Pounds 47.6m) at the retained
level, came on turnover which declined 24 per cent to Pounds 276.9m (Pounds
363m) reflecting extremely depressed trading conditions in the UK
construction and housing markets.
Losses per share were 13.7p (22.6p), and the final dividend is again
omitted.
The share price dropped  1/2 p to 10p after the announcement.
Profit after interest payments of Pounds 4.5m (Pounds 6.67m) but before
exceptional items fell by 56 per cent to Pounds 2.26m (Pounds 5.09m).
Construction operations, excluding plant hire, remained profitable as did
partnership house building where 1,845 units were completed, up from 1,774
last time.
Exceptional losses of Pounds 14.4m (Pounds 25.4m) comprised a further Pounds
9m in property write-downs, group restructuring costs of Pounds 2.67m
including redundancy payments, and the Pounds 2.75m costs incurred in
renegotiating the bank facilities earlier this year.
Below the line extraordinary losses before taxation were Pounds 13.2m
(Pounds 36.1m). These additional provisions were needed because of the
continued reduction of values in some of the group's businesses, many of
which are in the process of being discontinued.
Mr Bob Sellier, chief executive, acknowledged that Lovell has 'a lot of
problems,' but he said 'we have faced up to them and we are working through
them realistically.'
n
He said particular attention is being paid to cash flow management. During
the latest period the group showed a net inflow of Pounds 11.3m.
As a result, net debt on the balance sheet fell to Pounds 55.2m (Pounds
66.6m).
Off balance sheet there was a further Pounds 45m of borrowings at the
year-end. Shareholders funds fell to Pounds 45.5m (Pounds 70.4m), reflecting
the consolidation of the business.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1813</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAC6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Schroders launches its first UK investment
trust
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Schroders, the merchant bank and fund management group, plans to launch its
first investment trust based on UK equities in the new year.
The new trust, called the Schroder Split Fund, will have a split capital
structure and Schroders will link a personal equity plan to the
high-yielding income shares.
The only investment trusts Schroders has launched to date are based on
specialist areas such as Greece and Korea.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1814</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAC5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / BP to cut workforce by 20,500 worldwide
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES and PAUL ABRAHAMS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BRITISH Petroleum yesterday announced it would cut a further 9,000 jobs
worldwide by 1995, increasing an earlier figure for expected job losses to a
total of 20,500, or 20 per cent of the workforce.
The cuts are in addition to previously announced plans to cut 11,500 jobs by
early 1993.
The job losses are part of a cost-cutting drive launched by Mr David Simon
when he became group chief executive. this year. BP aims to cut Dollars 1bn
(Pounds 600m) from operating costs by 1995.
The company said yesterday it had set a target to make 5,000 direct job cuts
over the next two years, with a further 4,000 jobs to be lost through the
divestment of peripheral businesses.
The latest reductions will come mainly from the downstream part of the
business - refining operations and petrol stations - where competition and
low oil products prices have squeezed margins while demand remains affected
by the recession. But BP also indicated that further cuts in its corporate
staff will be made.
BP has suffered from increasing debts and a huge net cash outflow to fund
its ambitious oil exploration programme.
The company is expected to incur a loss of around Pounds 500m this year on a
replacement cost basis, partly as a result of provisions made for job cuts
mid-year.
The company's debt-to-equity ratio is at 87 per cent and, in spite of the
dividend cut earlier this year, analysts believe it could rise above 90 per
cent by the end of the year.
But Mr Simon hopes that by saving Dollars 1bn a year, he can add Dollars
600m to annual profits by 1995.
He hopes to cut Dollars 400m from refining and marketing costs, Dollars 300m
from the corporate centre, Dollars 200m from exploration and production and
Dollars 100m from chemicals.
He also hopes to boost profits by a further Dollars 400m from reduced
advance corporation tax tax payments and improved efficiency.
BP Chemicals yesterday said it was closing a 50,000 tonne a year butadiene
plant with the loss of 40 jobs at its Baglan Bay site in South Wales, adds
Paul Abrahams. Dow Chemical announced yesterday it was mothballing a 20,000
tonne a year polystyrene plant in Bilbao and shutting a 14,000 tonne a year
latex unit from May.
London Stock Exchange, Page 40
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1815</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAC4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Companies in this issue
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
 ------------------------------------------------------
               COMPANIES IN THIS ISSUE
 ------------------------------------------------------
UK
 ------------------------------------------------------
AAH                                           24
Abtrust New Dawn                              25
BP                                            23
Birkby                                        25
Brasway                                       25
Carlton TV                                    10
Courts (Furnishers)                           24
Creighton's                                   25
Enterprise Computer                           24
Eurotunnel                                    23
Ferranti                                      23
Greencore                                     25
Halma                                         24
Hardys &amp; Hansons                              25
Hobson                                        24
Hogg Group                                    18
Hoskyns                                       25
Lovell (YJ)                                   24
Melville Street Invs                          25
Midland Bank                                   8
Midlands Radio                                24
Pegasus                                       24
Pittencrieff                                  25
Prudential                                    18
Racal                                         18
Reliance Security                             25
Rover                                          8
Sanderson Elect                               25
Schroder Split Fund                           24
Shaftesbury                                   25
South Wales Elect                             24
Southern Electric                             24
Southern Water                                24
Thames TV                                     24
Transmanche Link                              23
Triplex Lloyd                                 25
Wace                                          23
Wellcome                                      18
Welsh Water                                   24
 ------------------------------------------------------
Overseas
 ------------------------------------------------------
Alitalia                                      26
Allstate Insurance                            28
Amoco                                         28
Astra Intl                                    28
Danisco                                       26
Fairfax                                       28
Federal Express                               27
Ford                                           8
Gerber                                        27
IBM                                           23
Jardine Strategic                             28
Malev                                         26
Monsanto                                      27
Nedlloyd                                      26
Petrofina                                     26
Phibro                                        27
Remy-Cointreau                                26
Sony                                          28
TCI                                           24
Volvo                                         26
 ------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1816</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAC3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Wace shares drop 33% after property write-down of Pounds 37m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW BOLGER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SHARES in Wace tumbled a third from 77p to 52p after the pre-press and
specialist printing group warned that profits for 1992 would be well below
market expectations.
Wace, which earlier this year was rocked by the sudden departure of Mr John
Clegg, chief executive, also announced a Pounds 37m property write-down and
said the US operations would be sold.
It said tough trading conditions had forced it to reduce costs, and
restructuring would lead to an exceptional charge of Pounds 5m.
Mr Trevor Grice, who took over as chief executive, said properties were
being carried in Wace's books at values assessed last December by Dominic
Hart, a company of chartered surveyors with which Mr Clegg had been closely
connected. The group appointed Richard Ellis as surveyors, which as of
November wrote down the value of the group's investment property from Pounds
26.3m to Pounds 8.3m, industrial property from Pounds 21.7m to Pounds 11.3m
and US property from Dollars 14.3m to Dollars 9.3m (Pounds 5.9m).
Mr Grice said of the write-down, of which the rest was associated costs: 'We
were surprised by the severity.'
After completing a strategic review, Wace has decided to sell its US
operations, which last year accounted for more than a third of the group's
total sales of Pounds 305m. Mr Grice said he hoped to raise about Dollars
100m net from the US disposal, which would be used to reduce group debt.
Wace has a gearing of about 250 per cent after the property write-down, but
Mr Grice emphasised that its interest cover was covered more than twice over
by operating profit.
Mr Clegg was living and working in the US when the DTI launched a
still-unpublished investigation into share dealings that were conducted in
the name of some of his relatives. Asked if Mr Clegg would be a buyer for
the US operations, Mr Grice said: 'Never in a million years.'
Wace said economic conditions had not improved. July and August had been
difficult trading months and while sound results were recorded in September,
October and November, the operating profits for the second half would be
down on the first half and substantially down on the second half of last
year.
Last night's closing price gave Wace a market value of Pounds 38.2m, against
last year's peak of Pounds 193m.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1817</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAC1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Big Blue turns mean and lean to survive recession: Louise
Kehoe analyses the latest cuts at IBM and why investors welcome them
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LOUISE KEHOE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
With yet another round of large-scale job cuts and manufacturing
consolidation, International Business Machines is desperately struggling to
stem the erosion of its share of the world computer market in the face of
market changes and a global economic slowdown.
Yesterday's announcements represent a further shake-up at IBM which only 12
months ago reorganised its operations into 13 semi-autonomous operations.
IBM will shed about 25,000 employees next year, resulting in a Dollars 6bn
(Pounds 3.8bn) charge against fourth-quarter earnings. This comes on top of
the Dollars 5.4bn charges that the company already planned to take this year
to pay for other cost-cutting moves, including 40,000 job cuts. IBM employs
about 300,000 worldwide.
The company will also shift resources to services, software and
client-server computing and other growth segments of the computer market and
away from its traditional areas of leadership including mainframe computers,
data storage products and semiconductors.
Revising these plans, IBM said it will give its business units greater
control over their manufacturing operations and their facilities, with the
'freedom to do what they need to do', such as cutting employment, reducing
plant capacity or setting up their own sales forces.
Some of those business units may eventually sell their own stock, IBM said.
The latest cuts were forced by 'declining sales of computer hardware,
coupled with rapid improvements in technology and productivity, (which) have
reduced our capacity requirements', said Mr John Akers, IBM chairman.
The announcement by the world's largest computer manufacturer underscores
the problems facing many multinational manufacturers as they confront
economic slowdowns in North America, Europe and Japan.
However, IBM also faces problems that are unique to the computer industry
which is in the middle of a transition from mainframe-based centralised
information systems to 'client-server' networks of desktop computers.
Yet the severity of IBM's problems and the scale of its cuts is shocking and
even drew comment from President-elect Mr Bill Clinton, who was chairing an
economic conference in Little Rock, Arkansas. He said IBM's cuts illustrated
the enormity of the pressures faced by US manufacturers. In particular, he
expressed dismay that IBM will slash its product development spending.
'Product development will be cut by Dollars 1bn - the exact thing we don't
want to be cutting,' he said.
Investors were, however, pleased by IBM's announcement. 'We have been urging
IBM's board of directors to take action to put the company on a more
profitable track,' said Mr DeWitt Bowman, chief investment officer of the
California Public Employees Retirement System (Calpers). 'Frankly the
situation is similar to General Motors,' he said. 'We prefer to see
companies to address problems before drastic action is needed, but if it
comes to that, then so be it.
'Only time will tell whether the latest round of cuts at IBM are
sufficient,' he added. Like many Wall Street analysts, Calpers is far from
certain that the blood-letting is over.
In the strongest suggestion to date that IBM may abandon its 'no lay-offs'
policy, Mr Akers said that if business conditions do not improve
significantly, 'it is likely that some business units will be unable to
maintain full employment in 1993'.
Although his statement has created fear and uncertainty throughout IBM, it
was welcomed by analysts who have long criticised IBM for not taking more
decisive action to reduce its workforce. IBM said the 1993 workforce cuts
will come from manufacturing and development organisations as well as
support areas of its marketing and services units.
It said it will also make further reductions in its manufacturing capacity,
concentrating primarily upon the company's mainframe, data-storage and
semiconductor business units. These are IBM's traditional areas of strength
and are the underpinnings of its claims to being a technology leader.
However, deteriorating sales of mainframe computers in particular, have
masked the strengthening performance of IBM's mid-range computer, computer
workstation, service and software businesses over the past year, according
to industry analysts.
Until now, IBM's mainframe operations had been sacrosanct. Now, the company
is specifically targeting the underperforming unit for cuts. Similarly, the
data storage business unit, called Adstar, which produces large capacity
disk-drives for mainframe computers, will have to cut its operations.
Semiconductors, one of the most capital-intensive segments of IBM's
operations, will also be cut for the first time, indicating that IBM may
rely more in the future upon outside suppliers of components.
The cost and expense reductions will be focused on capital spending,
development and sales and general and administrative expenses, IBM said.
Overall product development spending will be reduced by approximately
Dollars 1bn in 1993 and capital spending, which has already been reduced by
about Dollars 1bn this year, will continue to be cut.
The company also expects sales, general and administrative expenses to
decline by about Dollars 1bn next year.
'The actions we are announcing demonstrate IBM's continuing resolve to deal
aggressively with the difficult transition that is occurring in the computer
industry. The result will be a stronger and more prosperous IBM,' Mr Akers
concluded.
In the short term, however, IBM expects unfavourable business and economic
conditions to continue into 1993 and that fourth-quarter results will be
below expectations. It may also have to cut its Dollars 4.84-a-share
dividend.
Any such cut would be sure to further depress IBM's stock price further,
which yesterday hit a 10-year low, sinking Dollars 4 5/8 to trade at Dollars
58 1/4 yesterday.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1818</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAC0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Ferranti cuts pre-tax losses to Pounds 11m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANGUS FOSTER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
FERRANTI International, the electronics and defence company which came close
to collapse following the 1989 discovery of huge fraud in its US subsidiary,
yesterday announced reduced losses but said its markets remained tough.
Mr Eugene Anderson, chairman, said that following the company's
restructuring in the last two years, it needed orders to generate cash. 'We
have bids out for about Pounds 400m of business. If we win only Pounds 100m,
that would totally transform us. We're at a very critical stage,' he said.
Pre-tax losses improved from Pounds 28.8m to Pounds 10.9m in the six months
to September 30. This was because of reduced operating losses and no
exceptional items, which cost Pounds 11.3m last time.
Ferranti's shares slipped 1 1/4 p to 8 3/4 p, partly because of uncertainty
about when certain large Middle Eastern defence contracts would be awarded.
One analyst said: 'If they can pull in a few of those contracts in the
second half, it would greatly help cash flow and their chances of finding an
industrial partner.'
Turnover fell from Pounds 212.4m to Pounds 109.4m. Most of the reduction
stemmed from disposals, which last year included the sale of Ferranti's
missile business to GEC. The rest was because of recession and falling
defence expenditure. Outstanding orders fell from Pounds 272.1m at year end
to Pounds 246.1m.
Litigation is continuing in connection with the fraud, which involved the US
subsidiary International Signal and Control and cost Ferranti an estimated
Pounds 600m. Ferranti has recovered about Pounds 42m, mainly from ISC's
auditor KPMG Peat Marwick, and it does not expect further significant
recoveries. Mr James Guerin, former chairman of ISC, was given a 15-year
jail sentence in June.
Ferranti's net borrowings fell more than Pounds 20m to Pounds 74.1m but
still exceeded shareholders' funds of Pounds 62.2m. A Pounds 60m term loan
until September is likely to be renegotiated early next year, Mr Anderson
said.
Interest costs fell from Pounds 6.8m to Pounds 5.6m and there was a Pounds
2m tax credit compared with a Pounds 500,000 charge last time. The loss per
share improved from 3.15p to 0.95p. No dividend is payable until the company
restores a distributable reserve.
Job cuts were made during the six months. The workforce stands at about
4,700, against 5,300 six months ago and 27,000 in 1989.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1819</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOACZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Arts: A remarkable 'Cyrano de Bergerac' - Theatre
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
To begin with an apology: I had never seen Cyrano de Bergerac before in any
of its manifold versions, whether on stage screen or whatever, so can make
no comparisons with previous performances. Innocence or ignorance, however,
can be an advantage: I can say with absolute freshness what a remarkable
piece it is. Nothing else is quite like it.
The version at the Haymarket is a new translation by John Wells. That itself
gives pause for thought. Anything that Wells has a hand in - whether it is
'Dear Bill' in Private Eye or his current role in Graham Greene's Travels
With My Aunt at Wyndham's - tends to bear his own unmistakeable, whimsical
stamp. One could almost believe that he invented Cyrano.
But he did not; it just fits his style. The original play is by Edmond
Rostand (1868-1918) and has been a success around the world ever since it
was first performed in Paris in 1897. Cyrano (1616-1665) was a real figure:
poet, soldier, philosopher, scientist and lover of both sexes, he was
someone whom Rostand picked up at a time when the European theatre was
entering a period of great earnestness.
There is nothing earnest about Cyrano, whether the man or the play. Rostand
called it an heroic comedy. It could be equally well described as a mock
tragedy. However, it seems to me that it is simply sui generis.
The principal attribute of Cyrano is that he has a very large nose, which he
assumes disfigures him and blights his life. In fact, he is quite wrong
about this. In the play, he is an affable character, much sought-after and
well-liked. It is his misfortune to believe that he gets by largely on his
verbal felicity, while the men with good looks get the girl.
But there is much more to Cyrano than Cyrano. Rostand was plainly steeped in
Shakespeare. Echoes of the battle scenes in Henry IV recur throughout;
possibly Cyrano is meant to be a rather cleverer Falstaff with a French
education. There is, in this production by Elijah Moshinksi, some remarkably
good ensemble playing of a kind that one does not always associate with the
West End. One of the characters, de Guiche, is played by Julian Glover,
fresh from his performance as King Henry for the Royal Shakespeare Company.
The RSC influence is catching.
There is also a development of the balcony scene in Romeo and Juliet. Cyrano
cannot court the woman he wants for fear of being thought too ugly, so he
gives his words to his handsome friend. For a time they woo together as if
on stilts. This is comedy of a very high order. So, too, is the fencing
scene where the duellists not only have to compete with blades but also in
inventing verse as they fight.
Shakespeare comes in again with a series of puns: 'But soft, what nose
through yonder window breaks?' and the inevitable 'a nose by any other
name'. Yet the influences are by no means all English. In this very curious
mix of a play, it is quite hard not to think of Proust and Stendahl. Rostand
brings everything together.
Cyrano is played by Robert Lindsay who carries his nose to perfection. Note
when he is asked to taste some wine from a rather narrow glass. The girl,
Roxane, is Stella Gonet; she becomes remarkably dignified, almost queen-like
in spectacles, in her old age. Both the designs by Michael Yeargan and the
lighting by David Hersey are exceptional. A huge amount of effort has gone
into the details, and it pays off. Cyrano should be added to the list of
plays to be seen during the holidays - or whenever.
Theatre Royal, Haymarket (071) 930 8800
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1820</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOACYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Arts: Sad goodbye to long term survivors - Television
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTOPHER DUNKLEY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Television has come to the end of an era. In the past week two of its
greatest stalwarts died: Dan Maskell and This Week. Both were significant
not only as long term survivors, but as symbols of what British television
has been in its first age: by and large a public service broadcasting system
with good intentions and high ideals, dedicated to all the varied interests
of its audience, and not obsessed with maximising either its ratings or its
profits.
Maskell spent his entire broadcasting career with the BBC. He began his
television commentaries from Wimbledon in 1951, the year when Philip Harben
presented a cookery series called Country Dish to mark the Festival of
Britain, and the BBC's pin-up announcers were McDonald Hobley and Sylvia
Peters. Television was still a gee-whizz gimmick and the senior service was
BBC Radio with its Light Programme and Home Service. Maskell started as he
was to go on for 41 years until his retirement earlier this year at the age
of 84, speaking only when he had something useful to say, never using an
unkind word, invariably courteous and urbane, always knowledgeable and
audible. When he started there was no commercial broadcasting in Britain.
This Week, on the other hand, was born into the commercial system in 1956
shortly after the creation of ITV. It was only three years after Richard
Dimbleby had launched Panorama at the BBC and the idea at Associated
Rediffusion (Thames Television's predecessor) was to offer a weekly current
affairs magazine with journalism as good as the BBC's but a more 'grabby'
approach. To achieve a high standard of journalism they made This Week a
reporter-led programme and over the years employed James Cameron, Robin Day,
Alastair Burnet, Peter Williams, Robert Kee, Llew Gardner, Jonathan
Dimbleby, Peter Taylor, Denis Tuohy and many more.
As to the 'grabbiness', having recently searched through many of the
programme's 1,500 editions in order to present a retrospective on ITV
tomorrow, I have been vividly reminded of what this meant. In the early days
it meant stopping the ex-servicemen's busking band, The Happy Wanderers, in
Oxford Street, whipping out a truncheon-sized microphone from your inside
pocket (presumably with a hefty cable trailing down the inside of your
trouser leg) and interviewing the band amid a huge crowd of onlookers. Later
it meant building a full size replica of a Cruise missile on a lorry and
trucking it around the home counties to investigate public reaction. Last
week in a final edition that typified the programme's traditions - social
concern and a determination to disclose - it meant taking your cameras out
on the streets of London to show how life expectancy for those sleeping
rough is 47 years.
We are unlikely to see the likes of This Week or Maskell again. British
television is now well on the way to becoming an Eastern Atlantic version of
American television. Several of Britain's satellite channels, including Sky
One, already consist almost entirely of American programmes. The
commentaries on the satellite sports channels stand at the opposite side of
the spectrum from Maskell's: these men, usually Americans, cannot shut up,
they seem to believe that silence will be interpreted by the audience as
death. The BBC with its recent timid decision to plan for a major reduction
in its audience share appears to be opting voluntarily for a position
similar to that of the marginalised public service broadcasting system in
the US.
And all the signs are that the new ITV companies coming into operation on
January 1, after succeeding in the Government's new auction process,
designed to bring even more vigorous market competition into broadcasting,
will act more than ever like their American counterparts. Several, including
London's Carlton, will buy all their programmes from independent producers
rather than support their own centres of programme-making excellence. This
Week is dying because Thames TV failed to keep its licence during the
auction, and although Thames will continue in business as a major
independent (they plan to go on producing The Bill, This Is Your Life and so
on) it seems that neither Carlton nor the ITV network as a whole has any
intention of running anything like This Week.
There will still be current affairs, but the top ranked programme in
Carlton's listing of 'Factual Programmes' is The Good Sex Guide, and in the
first few months of 1993 the weekly slot currently occupied by This Week
will be taken over partly by the independent company 20 20 Vision and partly
by the foot-in-the-door Cook Report. Each outfit has produced interesting
material in the past, but nobody is pretending that either will be
supporting six programme teams as This Week has, ensuring that, at any time,
a crew could be on the next flight out of Heathrow to cover any trouble spot
in the world. That, say the people at Carlton, has become the prerogative of
the news programmes.
So what of ITV's main news programme? Sure enough News At 10 has just been
modified to bring it more closely into line with the American model. There
is nothing new about this; British news programmes on both ITV and BBC have
been imitating their American counterparts for decades. When Huntley and
Brinkley wowed the Americans the British switched to two-handed
presentation. Now the three major US networks have reverted to the lone
presenter: Dan Rather, Tom Brokaw and Peter Jennings compete in trying to
combine charisma and authority with down-home folksiness and
through-the-screen acceptability (I do not invent these phrases, I assure
you).
So ITN has taken Trevor McDonald and promoted him to the single-seat role.
Given the colour of Mr McDonald's skin and the terrifying enthusiasm with
which Enoch Powell's pronouncements upon race were once greeted in this
country - an enthusiasm which no one suggests has subsequently abated - this
was a brave and admirable thing to do, but scarcely a move designed to boost
the ratings, despite Mr McDonald's splendid professionalism. In the process
they effectively demoted the excellent Alastair Stewart, who promptly left,
and limited poor Julia Somerville to an 'Over to you Hugh' role.
The second half of the programme, which has trouble holding its audience
(people tend to zap away the moment the commercials start and then stay
away) now contains a 'Focus' spot which does, indeed, look like a mini
current affairs programme and sometimes contains good material. For instance
the recent item following up newspaper campaigns on the appalling effect of
EC regulations on abattoirs and scrap metal yards was strong, vivid, and
important.
However, if little bits of work like that are henceforth to be seen as ITV's
contribution to current affairs then we are right indeed to mourn the
passing of an era.
To me 'news' still means the difference between the world yesterday and the
world today, and the job of current affairs - however much the technology
and the journalistic techniques may change - should be to explain the how
and the why of those differences.
Watching a reporter being kicked up the backside by an irate double glazing
salesman, the sort of thing that happens in the Cook Report, has more to do
with the Jeremy Beadle school of embarrassment television than with current
affairs.
So it is 'Goodbye Dan Maskell, goodbye This Week, and hello America'.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1821</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOACXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Arts: Tate Gallery plans new museum
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANTONY THORNCROFT
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
The Tate Gallery in London, which houses both British and modern art,
intends to split up its collections.
Yesterday it revealed plans to build a new Pounds 50m plus museum of modern
art in central London, to be mainly financed by money from the Millennium
Fund and to be open by 2000.
The existing Tate, on Millbank, will become an enlarged museum of British
art. A Dollars 10m donation from an anonymous American well-wisher will
enable it to build new galleries in the Tate, which should be complete by
1996.
While it waits for Millennium revenue, financed through the national
lottery, to come on stream, the Tate is looking for a temporary home for its
modern art collection. It hopes that a property developer with an unlet
building will loan it to the Tate for about five years, and perhaps
contribute to the Pounds 5m-Pounds 10m needed for the conversion into an art
gallery.
The dual role of the Tate, as the main British gallery covering the very
different fields of modern art and British art, has attracted criticism, but
the main impetus for the new museum comes from the Tate's inability to
display more than 15 per cent of its 5,100 paintings and sculptures. Even
with the new museum only 25 per cent of its holdings will be on show at any
one time.
The Tate Gallery is making an early bid for Millennium money, intended to
give the nation important new arts buildings to celebrate the year 2000. It
will have received the government's tacit approval for the scheme, but will
be expected to raise some of the money from private and corporate sources
and to build up an endowment fund to finance the running of the new museum.
It is possible that an existing building, like the unused Bankside power
station on the Thames, will be converted to a museum if the finance for a
new structure is not forthcoming. The Tate is not yet launching an appeal;
it is staking a claim and hoping that its commitment will attract a response
from business and government and ensure success.
The Tate Gallery of British Art will show foreign artists if they have
influenced British artists, and the Tate Gallery of Modern Art will exhibit
some British paintings. Nicholas Serota, director of the Tate, said the
scheme was 'a vision put down in words,' but, along with the chairman of the
Trustees, Mr Dennis Stevenson, thinks the climate is right for this
ambitious project. Both museums would offer free admission.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1822</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOACWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Arts: Today's Television
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Why is lip service so often paid to the need to preserve the cultures of
obscure little bits of land? Cultural pride fiercely locked into geography
is indivisible from the patriotic lunacy which so easily leads to violent
death. It is but a step from the eisteddfod to the torched cottage.
Bookmark, we are told, is about 'Serbian epics', the myths and poetry which
'enshrined the glory of the mediaeval empire'. These epics, it seems, are
still sung on the front line to incite the weary warriors. A good reason for
abandoning them, you might think. Still, this series has produced some
remarkable documentaries so it should be worth watching (8.10 BBC2).
Dispatches has fixed upon a 'dog bites man' story. At 9.00 they plan to
reveal on Channel 4 that most diets fail in the long run, and that dieting
can affect your mood and reduce your sex drive. In fact 'dieting can be
positively bad for you'. A programme revealing that dieting was effective
and good for you would be more remarkable . The Friend In The Corner (11.00
Radio 4) recalls 1956, Tony Hancock and the Goons, and BBC radio began
'Journey Into Space' and changed the shipping forecast.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1823</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOACVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Arts: Fortepiano pleasures - Concert
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By:MAX LOPPERT
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Robert Levin is a scholar of distinction and a performer whose repertory
stretches from the early keyboard collections to Boulez and Carter. As he
proved at the Queen Elizabeth Hall on Thursday, his powers as a recitalist
on the fortepiano are immense. He is not a miniaturist or an antiquarian
(although the physical and spiritual qualities of the instrument were
captured with alert 'period' sympathy), but a musician engaged to his utmost
on the matching and reconciling of instrumental sound and musical sense.
A fortepiano recital in this coldly un-intimate hall is a risky business,
even when a wooden shield has been supplied to enclose player and
instrument, to focus the tone and line amid so much acoustical woolliness.
But in his touch of the instrument Mr Levin did nothing egregious or
cosmetic to achieve communication; he had no recourse to flashy,
audience-wooing tricks. Rather, his accounts of Schubert (the D major
Sonata, D850) and Beethoven (the 'Hammerklavier') gloried in the smaller
dynamic range, the palette of unhomogenised tone-colours.
He did this by paying the most precise and purposeful attention to tempo
relationships, varieties of accents, fine distinctions of chord-voicing,
accurate applications of legato and marcato phrasing, in ways unavailable to
all but the most sensitive modern-piano performances. The exquisitely fresh,
springy and above all keen-spirited character of his Schubert was a
continual delight; such needle-point wit, such nimble-footed fantasy of the
finale recalled Clifford Curzon's performance of the D major - than which no
praise can be higher.
The 'Hammerklavier' represented a challenge of a far more arduous sort,
bravely and in many ways brilliantly faced. I have never heard the Allegro
movements go at such a lick, nor the decorative details of the Adagio traced
and developed with so lightly lyrical a command of phrase. In this of all
works the late-20th-century ear is still habituated to expecting
monumentality of sound; Mr Levin's reading achieved genuine rugged
monumentality of spirit, which is much rarer.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1824</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOACUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Arts: Donizetti Variations - Ballet
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CLEMENT CRISP
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Any evening that shows us Balanchine's Donizetti Variations comes to us
smiling - and we smile back. And any triple bill as well planned as London
City Ballet's on Monday night is also to be greeted with pleasure. (I had
thought the art of programme-planning, of composing an evening that, like a
serious meal, has shape and conscious progression, was lost to British
ballet.)
LCB began with the Donizetti, which is Balanchine's 1960 response to the
ballet music from Don Sebastian. Nothing could be prettier, more fleet or
more featly done. A ballerina, Eva Evdokimova, and her cavalier, Paul
Thrussell, three trios (one man, two girls), and a bubble of steps that are
quick, bouncy, Bournonvillian, are the components.
Balanchine knew all there was to know about ballet music in operas:
Diaghilev, engaging him in 1924, asked 'Can you make opera ballets, fast?'
'Yes', said Balanchine, who had never made one in his life, 'very fast', and
went on to make dozens for the Monte Carlo opera seasons. Such music spoke a
language he enjoyed - he used it irresistibly in several works - and to the
delicious tunes from Don Sebastian he produced a series of ebullient and
taxing entries that LCB show off with enthusiasm. Evdokimova, at the piece's
heart, is in radiant form: grand enough to give the piece a focus, and
quick-footed and responsive to the fioriture of the writing. It is a wholly
irresistible ballet, and in it LCB looks bright, willing, well-mannered.
The meaty centre of the evening was a revival of Jack Carter's Witch Boy.
This is very much of its time (the mid-1950s) in manner and dramatics -
magic and mayhem in the Smokey Mountains - but it is surely made, and in the
past has held audiences by its dramatic energy. I do not think LCB's casting
is quite right. The memory of John Gilpin's mysterious passion haunts the
title role for those of us fortunate to have seen him, and none of the
present players seems to find the absolute clarity of feeling and movement
that the piece requires to bring it off. It is, though, a useful acquisition
to LCB's repertory, and worth seeing.
The evening ended with that nicest of iced puddings, Les Patineurs. Ashton
choreography is difficult for artists not reared in the Royal Ballet's
traditions - and, alas, difficult nowadays for those who are. LCB's dancers
push certain effects unnecessarily (the characterisations are in the steps
and need no external prodding with 'charm'), but the performance was sound,
and Ashton was recognisable. In sum, a well-conceived and well-executed
evening: LCB has never looked better.
London City Ballet is at Sadler's Wells with varied programmes - check with
theatre listings - until January 2. 'Witchboy' is sponsored by Bankers Trust
Company. 'Les Patineurs' is sponsored by John and Olivia Hughes
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1825</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOACPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Business and the Environment: Purity in a cold climate -
Icelandic companies are trying to capitalise on a pollution-free environment
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT CORZINE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Bacteria which originated with the Vikings and 2,000-year-old water may seem
an odd combination on which to build a modern export-oriented food industry.
But skyr, a thick yoghurt-like product first made by Iceland's early Viking
inhabitants and bottled water from glaciers are just two elements of an
ambitious effort by Icelandic companies and government to exploit the
country's status as one of world's most pollution-free environments.
The strategy stems in large part from a sharp fall in recent years of the
cod catch - the mainstay of Iceland's post-war economy - and the subsequent
pressure on the government to develop alternative export industries.
Efforts at export diversification have also emerged from private-sector
companies frustrated at the small size of Iceland's domestic market.
New ideas range from massive power generation schemes to natural food
products and health spas. The common thread is that all capitalise on
Iceland's enviable environmental credentials and all are aimed at the
growing international demand for products and services that are 'pure' or
non-polluting.
Government efforts have concentrated on promoting Iceland's potential for
generating large amounts of cheap electricity through clean and renewable
means.
Only 10 per cent of Iceland's economically viable hydroelectric and
geothermal potential has been tapped, according to Landsvirkjun, the
national power company. It estimates that the average cost of power from
future hydro development for mainly industrial users would be lower in
Iceland than elsewhere, including large projects such as Itaipu in Brazil
and James Bay in Canada.
The government's priority is to lure energy-intensive industrial users, such
as aluminium smelters and other metal industries. It emphasises, however,
that any developments would have to adhere to strict environmental
standards, the costs of which it believes will be offset by secure access to
cheap electricity.
Landsvirkjun officials believe Iceland could also be a competitive European
site for the production of non-polluting hydrogen fuel for vehicles, another
energy-intensive process.
Research has also been conducted into the direct export of electricity to
mainland Europe. A detailed study of the likely performance of a proposed
500MW, 950km-long direct current submarine cable to Scotland will be
completed by the end of the year.
Landsvirkjun officials believe most technical obstacles can be overcome, and
that power from such a cable would be competitive in the UK electricity
market, even against relatively low-cost natural gas-fired plants. The
possible imposition by the European Community of a carbon tax amounting to
Dollars 10 per barrel of oil equivalent would further enhance the
competitiveness of the project, the officials say.
They concede, however, that the unusual depth (up to 1,000 metres) and
length of the Pounds 1bn submarine cable, its high initial capital cost and
the long lead-time needed to build additional dams, power plants and the
cable itself considerably increase the risk profile of the project.
But the officials believe their greatest advantage lies in growing public
opinion in western Europe favouring electricity that is generated without
adding to greenhouse gases, but without having to resort to nuclear power.
Iceland is also hoping to sell its extensive experience in using geothermal
energy, which accounts for a third of the country's total energy consumption
and provides most of its space heating and hot water needs as well as some
electricity production.
Marketing efforts have been directed mainly at eastern Europe, with
particular emphasis on Russia's Kamchatka Peninsula, which Icelandic
officials say has tremendous geothermal potential.
Private-sector attempts to capitalise on Iceland's environmental reputation
are more modest but are generally closer to fruition.
The food and drink industry has been a market leader in exploiting the
'cold, clean and pure international image of Iceland,' according to Porarinn
E. Sveninsson, the director of the Akva spring water company based in the
northern town of Akureyri.
It has recently begun selling bottled water in selected northeastern states
of the US, even though the competition from domestic and European producers
is fierce.
Sol, a Reykjavik-based food and drink producer, also sells bottled water in
the US and Europe. But in addition it has succeeded in entering the market
for 'New Age' soft drinks, which eschew the use of chemical preservatives
and which place a premium on pure ingredients, especially water.
David Thornsteinsson, Sol's chairman, cites the success of the
Icelandic-canned Seltzer brand of fruit-flavoured drinks in the UK. Sales of
the drinks rose from Dollars 900,000 in 1990 to an estimated Dollars 2.9m
(Pounds 1.90m) this year, confirmation, Thornsteinsson says, that consumers
are willing to pay a premium for assured purity of ingredients.
He rejects suggestions that competitors could emulate Seltzer's success by
shipping Iceland's glacial water in bulk to bottling plants elsewhere. 'The
tanks and the need to process it at the other end would alter the taste too
much', he says. 'Besides, Iceland enjoys inexpensive back haul freight rates
to the US and Europe, so the cost of shipping the finished product is
minimal.'
Icelanders believe there could also be potential to emphasise the natural
qualities of more traditional food products, such as the country's
distinctively-flavoured free range lamb. Those raised along the coasts have
a diet consisting mainly of moss and seaweed, while those reared in mountain
pastures eat mainly herbs.
A study on establishing a big health centre in Reykjavik is under way,
according to Markus Orn Antonsson, the city's mayor, who believes the
absence of air and water pollution will appeal to European, and especially
German tourists.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1826</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOACOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Management: Rail network runs along new lines - Radical
changes to Italy's inefficient and overmanned state system
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT GRAHAM
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Remember Lord Beeching, the axeman of British Railways who launched the
first pre-Thatcherite onslaught on the UK's overblown public sector?
Today there is a remarkable parallel with the FS, the Italian state railways
under the management of Lorenzo Necci. Europe's most inefficient and
overmanned rail network is being given a radical face lift, slimmed down and
partially privatised. Endowed with its first business plan worthy of the
name, the FS is due to become a publicly-quoted company at the end of this
month.
The FS, with the treasury as sole shareholder, will act as a holding company
for a network of subsidiaries - some of which will include private capital -
covering every activity from property development, through to freight,
high-speed trains and computer software.
When Necci was brought in as special administrator of the FS in June 1990,
the railways had been through a series of disastrous management experiences.
It took him until last May to present a business plan and he did so on a
take it or leave it basis. He wanted things done his way. In the event, he
had little difficulty in gaining support for a new mandate.
'The basic problem in the FS has been one of management,' says Necci, whose
main experience has been in the state sector - working with ENI, the
national oil concern, and latterly running their chemicals side.
He believes in management by objectives and leadership from the top. He
inherited a railway in which only 5,000km of the 16,000km of track was
considered economic (essentially the north-south Milan-Naples route).
Productivity on the basis of units of traffic per employee was 70 per cent
less than the French railways and a third less than that of Germany.
Passenger tariffs were, and remain, one-third of those in other EC
countries. Not surprisingly the FS last year had an operating loss of
L9,429bn (Pounds 4.48bn).
One of his first priorities was to tackle overmanning. Since June 1990, the
number of jobs has dropped by about 20 per cent from 208,000 to 165,000.
This is the most concentrated reduction in manpower ever carried out by an
Italian state entity and has been done with remarkably little labour protest
from a traditionally powerful sector of the union movement. A further 40,000
jobs could go in the next seven years. The secret has been a generous system
of early retirement, funded largely by the state but with FS contributing
L700bn a year.
Necci has recruited 60 new managers. With these he has transformed the old
pyramidical FS management structure, based on departments with limited
responsibility, by creating nine divisions.
These group homogenous activities such as passenger traffic, freight and
asset management, and give management operational responsibility for running
their own profit centres and investment programmes. The central board under
Necci concentrates on co-ordination, strategic planning and relations with
the government.
The philosophy behind the new FS management is twofold. First, it must shift
FS from its previous status as a mere operator-administrator of a
loss-making public service to a profit-conscious service, responsive to the
public and industry. Second, it must tailor its activities to the financial
constraints of the treasury and the possibilities of attracting private
capital.
In theory the state will only intervene in a regulatory way and in the form
of a reguarly-reviewed agreement stipulating those investments deemed
entrepreneurial and those considered socially necessary (like the
maintenance of uneconomic track). It remains to be seen whether FS can find
sufficient resources both for capital needs and to cover its share of
projected losses without resort to its new shareholder, the treasury.
The hardest conundrum to resolve is that of raising the currently-frozen
freight tariffs and fares. Necci has to accommodate both government
anti-inflation policy and attract new custom while bringing prices into line
with the rest of Europe. This could mean premiums on the most popular
routes, already signalled by the effective separation of the 'economic'
5,000 km of track from the rest. Some routes will be closed if they attract
less than 30 passengers a day, although the bulk of the uneconomic track is
expected to be run on behalf of the regions.
Private sector involvement centres on three areas - the proposed high-speed
train network, property development and information technology. The most
important of these is TAV, which will develop the high-speed train network
owned 60 per cent by FS and 40 per cent by Italian and foreign institutional
investors. Current estimates for a Milan-Naples north-south link and
Venice-Turin east-west axis are about L25,000bn. Another proposed link is
Turin-Lyon.
For its part, the FS hopes to raise funds not only in the market but through
property divestment and development, the latter with private sector
partners. A new FS company, Metropolis, will develop stations, track and
FS's extensive property holdings.
Given the huge projected costs of the high-speed train network, Necci runs
the risk of finding this project sucking the bulk of funds at the expense of
maintenance and modernisation of the rest of the railways. The difficulty of
finding funds also suggests the high-speed train project will move slower
than anticipated.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1827</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOACNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Management: Training supremos learn a profitable lesson / A
look at how Britain's Industrial Society has come back from the brink
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL CASSELL
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
'IT WAS a shambles. We were technically insolvent and our backs were up
against the wall,' recalls Rhiannon Chapman, director of Britain's
Industrial Society.
Eighteen months ago, the independent advisory and training organisation
committed to developing workplace skills and spreading the gospel of good
management, was fighting for survival. A proud, 73-year history was
insufficient to guarantee any kind of future.
After decades of spirited campaigning to impart best business practice to
thousands of private and public sector customers, the society badly needed a
dose of its own medicine.
By 1990, the organisation had recorded an annual deficit of Pounds 1.4m and
another loss was to follow in 1991. Poor financial management meant it was
owed about Pounds 1m by customers; unused to being chased they were
painfully slow to pay up.
'We were at that point which companies reach when the banks are tempted to
pull the rug. We had a very sick balance sheet, with no cash and no
reserves.
'It would have been pretty embarrassing to have been brought in to preside
over the death of the organisation', Chapman adds.
The financial crisis which remained largely hidden behind the Regency facade
of the organisation's Carlton House Terrace headquarters in London stemmed
from longstanding weaknesses.
The society had never entirely seen itself as a hard-nosed business, a
tendency reinforced by its commitment to balance its core commercial
services - in-house training, company consultancy, conferences and courses -
with a range of non-profitable community projects.
It spread its training and advisory services too thinly. The programmes
offered to the society's 12,000 member organisations were also looking
outdated; weak marketing skills compounded the problems which the recession
further underlined.
Attempts to stop the rot hit staff morale. And just when training was
emerging as a political hot potato, the society appeared to have lost its
way.
Its renewal began with the appointment in July 1991 of Chapman, a former
personnel director at the London stock exchange.
The choice of a woman was a statement of change in itself, given the
exclusively male lineage which had run the society since its formation in
1918. Her reported assertion that the governing council had been 'quite
brave' to appoint her was widely shared.
For her part, Chapman saw the society as an important national asset which
was under threat.
The society could at least rely on goodwill among its traditional customers,
having won widespread approval and support from government, business and the
trade unions. Its reputation as an even-handed source of advice was largely
intact.
But the priority was for Andrew Cameron, who arrived from RTZ Corporation as
finance director, to sort out the books. Old property valuations were
updated, paving the way for short-term loans. Financial controls were
improved and costs were cut without job losses.
An intensive re-examination of the society exposed to detailed scrutiny its
staff of 350, its services and its relationships with customers. A possible
name change was considered and may yet emerge.
'Product lines' were reappraised - 'Did we need to go on running old courses
for the sake of those Neanderthals who didn't want new ones?' - and a new
generation of programmes is emerging.
The society's organisational structure was also dismantled. An old,
departmental structure denied customers full access to the range of
services, while staff dedicated to teaching others the art of good
communications rarely knew what their colleagues were doing. The new system
features six, regionally-based business groups capable of responding better
to local requirements.
The core group of 16 middle and senior managers were subjected to a bruising
period of self-analysis and appraisal which led to them all having to
re-apply for newly-defined posts.
In September, Bill Beaver, former director of corporate affairs at National
Westminster Bank, arrived to head up a revitalised marketing effort.
The 'quiet revolution', claims Chapman, means a more self-confident society,
armed with a new mission statement and charter of principles intended to set
new standards of best practice for organisations and individuals.
Though the society may be more commercially adept, it will not give up its
role in forging closer links between business, education and the community.
It works closely with Training and Enterprise Councils, organises
work-related schools conferences and helps to break the homeless-unemployed
cycle.
Its finances have improved. In the year ending last June, the society showed
a surplus and there is cash in the bank.
The revitalised organisation is more likely to use its highly-valued
independence to speak on issues which it believes are vital to the education
and development of Britain's workforce. Chapman says that, despite progress,
the organisation is 'not out of the woods' yet. But it can, at least, say
that it is practising what it preaches.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1828</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOACMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Jobs: Putting your money where your faith is - Where
expatriate workers' religious convictions can increase their employers'
paybills
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL DIXON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
'IT all began with the New Testament . . . ' explained the patient voice
from the German Embassy in London. 'You mean when the decree went out from
Caesar Augustus that all the world should be taxed?' the Jobs column
inquired.
'Well, not precisely at that moment,' the un-named diplomat conceded. 'But
as a consequence of it, yes.'
Now, with today bringing this column's last appearance of the year, it is
probably futile to assure readers that the above conversation really
occurred, as distinct from being invented to give a Christmassy flavour.
Even so, the fact is that what prompted the call to the German embassy was
only accidentally connected with the season.
It just so happened that Price Waterhouse was showing off its new system for
calculating the costs of sending employees to work overseas. And one of the
PW consultants came up with an example. 'Suppose you moved someone on a
Pounds 60,000 salary in Britain to Germany for three years with a guarantee
that they'd be no worse off through taxation and so on,' he said. 'What
d'you think would be the total outlay?'
Then quick as a flash the computer produced the answers. They were that,
whereas before Black Wednesday the prospective bill would have been almost
Pounds 391,000, it is now over Pounds 475,000.
'Mind you,' the consultant went on, 'the cost could be more if the people
you send don't know about local conditions. For instance, if they belong to
certain religious denominations and say so on their registration forms,
they'll be liable to the extra taxes the German government collects for the
churches.'
However familiar that fact may be to readers, it was news to me. My first
thought was that perhaps the said taxes varied, with different religions
coming to market at different prices. After all, I'd seen something of the
sort before: at the start of my national service 40 years back in the navy,
when the various chaplains came round in turn describing their schedules for
Sunday morning.
The Roman Catholics and the Church of England each had pukka parades. While
they were marching off to their respective services, agnostics and atheists
were kept busy square-bashing. In the meantime the Methodists and Church of
Scotland made their way informally to a short joint service with no sermon,
followed by coffee made by the Wrens in attendance. (Whereupon, having not
been brought up in any church, I became a Methodist - though I'm ashamed to
say a since-lapsed one.)
Could it be, I mused coming back from PW's demonstration, that the Germans
operate some comparable arrangement through the tax system? Hence the chat
with the diplomat.
Alas he swiftly knocked down my idea about price-competition. The tax was at
the same rate regardless of denomination, although in some of the country's
states it was a percentage point less than in others.
'It is the successor to the church tithe of medieval times. But it is not on
your total income, or at 10 per cent either. It is levied at 8 or 9 per cent
of whatever sum you are assessed for by way of normal taxes. You do not pay
unless you positively register yourself to do so.'
In any case, he said, the option is open only to Roman Catholics, Jews and
certain Protestants. 'A church needs many members to make the scheme pay -
as the government acts as collector for the churches, you don't think it
loses on the deal, do you? And no one pretends that whether you pay counts
in heaven; it is solely about money here on earth.'
Nevertheless, he added, things can go wrong. After unification, for example,
the scheme was not well explained to the former East Germans. 'When they
came to register, some who had clung to their faith wished to affirm it, and
under the old regime it had anyway been unwise to leave blank spaces on
official forms. So suddenly, of the little earnings they had, more was
taken. But the government and churches apologised, and let them change
things for the next half-year.'
Which, this being Christmas, the Jobs column offers as an example to
tax-collectors the wide world over.
F
INALLY this year to pagan matters - my traditional guide to the cost of
acquiring and trying to escape a hangover in 18 international centres. The
figures are generously supplied by the Runzheimer consultancy, based in
Rochester, Wisconsin.
The first three columns give the 'on-cost', the local prices of a litre
apiece of a particular (though undisclosed) brand of whisky and of vodka,
followed by the average of both. The next four cover the 'off-cost': 100
branded aspirin, three dozen Alka Seltzer (except in Tokyo where for some
reason they don't seem to be sold) and half a pound of instant coffee -
again averaged.
The right-hand column lumps the on-cost and off-cost averages together,
giving the aggregate price - in money, at least.
And now, wishing you all the compliments of the season, I'll hope to meet
you again in 1993.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1829</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOACLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Watchdog protests at 'loss' of inheritance tax revenue
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW JACK
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MILLIONS of pounds in possible receipts from inheritance tax are being
forgone annually because of inadequate procedures, the National Audit Office
said yesterday.
Action by the Revenue's share valuation division alone, which has closed
many inheritance and capital gains tax cases without a detailed examination
since 1989, might save up to Pounds 20m a year.
The NAO, the public-sector spending watchdog, said the Revenue should review
procedures introduced to reduce inheritance tax arrears. It should also
re-examine the existing system of reminders and penalties to handle cases
faster.
The NAO report says the Revenue's capital taxes offices are coping well with
a complicated tax system and that delays and backlogs are being reduced.
Total inheritance tax last year was Pounds 1.3bn, raised at a cost of Pounds
28m.
It highlights a number of issues deserving further attention, including
temporary measures introduced in the share valuation division that have not
been amended, although the volume of cases closed without detailed
evaluation has risen substantially since 1989.
Work-saving measures introduced in 1985 in the London capital taxes office
to concentrate on cases offering the best return may have jeopardised tax
amounting to several million pounds. The office has fallen behind with work
because of rapid staff turnover. In April this year, the London office had
21,100 open cases, of which 21 per cent had been pending for three years or
more. The number of cases involving difficulty in recovering unpaid
inheritance tax rose from 1,494 in 1986 to 2,274 last year.
The NAO says the Revenue should consider better monitoring of compliance
with exemption procedures.
Inheritance tax, NAO report 336, HMSO. Pounds 5.25.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1830</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOACKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Red tape relaxed for EC trading
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW JACK
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE CUSTOMS &amp; Excise department will shortly issue details of simplified
administrative arrangements for businesses trading with other EC countries.
The guidance follows successful negotiations to reduce red tape associated
with 'triangulation' - where goods or payments between a supplier in one EC
country and a customer in another pass through an agent in a third.
Under initial EC proposals, that agent would have had to be registered for
VAT, account for tax and submit detailed statistical documents in every
country with which it did business.
But EC member states' finance ministers agreed in a meeting this week to the
wording of a simplified directive that will reduce the burdens on business.
UK Customs officials described the previous arrangements as a 'running
sore', which had generated considerable anguish and complaints from British
business.
Under the new arrangements, the final customer for the goods will account
for any tax paid, while the intermediate agent will simply complete a
regular form called the EC sales list.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1831</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOACJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: Debate of schools measure
criticised
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID OWEN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE GOVERNMENT is so desperate to reserve Commons debating time for the
Maastricht bill that it is prepared to sacrifice scrutiny of other measures
such as the one it has described as the most important education bill since
1944, Labour claimed yesterday.
Ms Ann Taylor, shadow education secretary, was opposing the imposition of a
guillotine on the Education Bill, which would establish a new funding agency
to authorise the capital and recurrent expenditure of self-governing
grant-maintained schools in England and Wales, among other reforms. Debate
was being truncated because the government could not 'manage its business
properly', Ms Taylor said.
Branding the proposed timetable 'a most unsatisfactory state of affairs,'
she did not understand how the government could make great claims about the
importance of a bill and then complain when it was scrutinised in committee.
It was 'interesting' that the guillotine had been introduced as the clauses
on grant-maintained status had been reached in standing committee, she
added. Claiming that an increasing proportion of ballots being held in
schools were 'going against' the government, she said Labour was 'very keen
to highlight this failure of government policy'.
She brushed off an attempted intervention by Mr John Patten, education
secretary, with the admonition that he should have contributed to the debate
in committee. But she allowed Mr Eric Forth, a junior education minister, to
observe that about 80 per cent of ballots were resulting in votes for
grant-maintained status.
For the government, Mr Tony Newton, leader of the Commons, said if progress
on the bill continued at a constant pace, the 255-clause measure would not
reach the statute book until the year 2001.
The government was proceeding in an 'entirely sensible and responsible way',
he said. 'I have no doubt that . . . any government . . . would be inviting
the House to consider the position in a similar way.'
The proposed timetable provided for a further month for the committee stage,
and two full days for the report stage and the third reading.
The government's timetabling motion was carried by 298-258, a majority of
40.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1832</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOACIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / ITV will appeal on OFT rulings
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RAYMOND SNODDY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE ITV companies decided yesterday to appeal to the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission against rulings by the Office of Fair Trading on the new central
network system.
Earlier this month the OFT said the way the ITV system planned to deal with
independent producers was anti-competitive and was in part 'intended to have
an anti-competitive effect on the television programme-making and the
television broadcasting business'.
The commission hopes to deal with the appeal in three months although it has
the option under the rules to take a further three months.
The ITV companies will appeal against three aspects of the OFT report on the
network.
The companies object to the OFT decision that ITV can only keep the rights
of programmes commissioned directly by the network for five years with an
option for a further two. That compares with ITV's proposed 10 years plus an
option of five.
They are also opposed to the idea that independent producers can be
commissioned directly from the centre without the involvement of any ITV
company, the responsible broadcaster under the law.
The greatest concern has been caused by the OFT decision that options for
ITV to acquire rights to further programmes in a series should not be part
of standard contracts.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1833</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOACHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: No. 10 defends Gummer's pond
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALISON SMITH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MR JOHN GUMMER, the agriculture minister, was supported yesterday by
officials at 10 Downing Street yesterday as he insisted that there had been
no impropriety in accepting improvements worth Pounds 2,600 to the grounds
of his country house, Alison Smith writes. Labour MPs have sought further
details of the landscaping of a pond paid for by Hillsdown Holdings as part
of an agricultural show in September.
The Ministry of Agriculture said Mr Gummer had ended up out of pocket over
the show, but it emerged last night that Adas, the farm advice agency, had
drawn up the specification for the pond, but had not charged Hillsdown
Holdings for the work. Downing Street said Mr John Major had not been
consulted at the time, but was convinced Mr Gummer had done nothing wrong.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1834</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOACGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: New plan for coal early next year
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID LASCELLES, Resources Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE government intends to put forward fresh proposals for the coal industry
in late January or early February, Mr Michael Heseltine, the trade and
industry secretary, said last night.
He told the Commons trade and industry committee he hoped MPs would have
time to debate the proposals before March 31. That is the date by which
British Coal must negotiate long-term contracts with the electricity
industry to replace those that are expiring.
Mr Heseltine's remarks came as a senior Labour MP claimed that five of the
10 collieries where mining has stopped, pending completion of the
government's review of the coal industry, were profitable.
Mr John Evans, MP for St Helens North, said the five pits should remain as
part of a viable coal industry. He was supported by Mrs Elizabeth Peacock,
Tory MP for Batley &amp; Spen. 'We are being told that all those mines are not
loss-making - nor do they have the bleak future British Coal says they do,'
Mrs Peacock maintained.
Mr Heseltine told MPs no pits would be closed irrevocably before the energy
review had been completed. 'I hope events will come together in a way that
will provide an opportunity for debate,' he said.
MPs are worried that British Coal will shut pits or refuse to license them
to others for fear of creating competition for its own operations.
Mr Heseltine agreed there was a potential conflict of interest and said he
might become involved in decisions, but he warned that any steps to enlarge
the coal industry would have to take into account available markets.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1835</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOACFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: Caution on Bosnia reflects risks of
entanglement
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MR JOHN MAJOR'S cautious response yesterday to calls for military
enforcement of the United Nations no-fly zone over war-torn Bosnia reflects
growing concern at the risks of an ever more dangerous military
entanglement.
As international momentum builds for much tougher action against Serbian
forces, senior ministers are engaged in an intense debate about the
political and military risks facing the government.
Some of Mr Major's colleagues - notably Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign
secretary - are concerned that without further restraint Serbia will become
increasingly confident in its dismissal of international pressure.
Mr Hurd's assessment is that the combination of sanctions and public
opprobrium so far has done little to curb the Serbs' territorial ambitions.
The end result might be the spread of the present conflict in Bosnia to
Macedonia and Kosovo, in turn sparking a full-scale war in the Balkans.
His fears are shared by many ministerial colleagues. Yet there is a
substantial voice in the cabinet arguing also that Britain cannot run the
risk to the lives of 2,400 British troops that would result from a decision
by the UN to shoot down Serbian aircraft in the no-fly zone.
As one minister put it: 'American planes can safely shoot down Serbian
helicopters. They could not prevent the Serbs from retaliating against our
ground forces.'
Mr Malcolm Rikfind, the defence secretary, has warned repeatedly of the risk
of heavy casualties.
The most cautious in the cabinet argue also that there is no political
pressure on the government to risk the lives of British troops.
Although public opinion may be outraged by the barbaric behaviour of Serbian
forces, it shares the fears of the government about deeper military
involvement.
Such tension was evident in Mr Major's response to MPs when he was pressed
by Mr John Smith to join the US and France in pressing for a new UN
resolution to allow the use of military force to halt Serbian flights.
Mr Major - who will discuss the crisis in weekend talks in Washington with
President George Bush - was careful not to dismiss the possibility of a new
UN resolution.
His officials regard it as inevitable.
But by emphasising the risks - both to the UN humanitarian effort and to the
lives of British troops - he underlined that Britain favoured a steady
ratcheting upwards in the pressure on Serbia rather than an immediate
'shoot-to-kill' policy against Serbian aircraft.
The prime minister will also suggest to President Bush alternative ways to
intensify pressure on the Serbs.
Whitehall officials have been drawing up plans to intensify sanctions -
possibly including the breaking of telecommunications links and the
derecognition of all Serbian diplomats.
More controversially, officials have also been examining the possibility of
suggesting an end of the blanket UN embargo on arms shipments to the region.
Some ministers believe there is a strong moral case to break from
traditional international practice and agree to arm the Bosnians, whose
equipment is far inferior to that of the Serbs.
Even those measures would carry risks. The humanitarian convoys in Bosnia
depend on Serbian acquiescence. Were its enemies to be better armed, Serbia
might well withdraw such co-operation, attack British troops and pour more
of its own regular forces into Bosnia. Against that background, it is easy
to understand Mr Major's caution.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1836</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOACDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: PM upbeat on outlook for economy
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By IVOR OWEN, Parliamentary Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A revival of business confidence in 1993 was forecast by Mr John Major, the
prime minister, yesterday in his final question time appearance in the
Commons before the Christmas recess.
He told MPs that Britain had a 'very solid platform' for industrial
recovery.
Tory backbenchers were clearly heartened by his firm endorsement of the
optimism expressed by Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, on Monday about the
prospects for the economy.
The prime minister backed the view of Mr Peter Butler (C Milton Keynes North
East) that there were already signs of a 'fully justified growth in business
confidence' throughout the country by adding: 'You will see a good deal more
of that in the months to come.'
Brushing aside sceptical comments from the Labour benches, he emphasised
that in addition to Britain's annual rate of inflation falling to 3 per
cent, 'factory gate inflation' was down to the lowest level for a
generation.
Mr Major said it was the clearest sign yet that the battle against inflation
 -so vital for industry, commerce, investment and jobs - was being won.
To Tory cheers, he insisted: 'It is precisely because of this success that
we now have the lowest interest rates in the European Community, and a very
solid platform for industrial recovery next year.'
Responding to further plaudits from Tory loyalists for his handling of last
weekend's summit in Edinburgh, the prime minister said it would become
increasingly apparent that Britain had set the agenda for the entire EC.
He underlined the 'significant turnround' in the attitude of some member
states to the enlargement of the EC.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1837</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOACCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Power company joins meter venture
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JAMES BUXTON, Scottish Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SCOTTISH Hydro-Electric, the electricity company, is entering the market for
'intelligent' electricity metering systems through a joint venture with an
electronics company.
Hydro-Electric says the joint venture will enable it to 'accelerate and
guide' the development of intelligent metering systems and win a share of
the English market.
It is forming a 50-50 joint venture company named Remote Metering Systems
(RMS) with Verran Electronics of Basingstoke, Hants, and investing an
initial Pounds 1m in shares and loan notes, with Pounds 2m to follow later.
Intelligent electricity metering systems will allow electricity suppliers to
read meters hundreds of miles away, with information transmitted along
electricity lines.
The system can also transmit information from the company to the consumer,
in particular details about tariffs.
Intelligent metering will become increasingly necessary as customers become
free to choose their power supplier.
It is the first electricity company to announce a joint venture with a
company in remote metering.
Verran was founded in 1988 and now has a turnover of Pounds 3m.
Southern Electric, Page 24
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1838</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOACBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Carlton warns on Channel 5 deal
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RAYMOND SNODDY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
CARLTON TELEVISION has warned the Independent Television Commission that it
may seek a judicial review if the Channel 5 franchise is awarded to Channel
Five Holdings, the consortium led by Thames Television.
The commission is due to decide tomorrow whether to award the franchise  -
which will cover about 70 per cent of the UK population - to the Thames
consortium, the only bidder.
If the commission decided not to award the franchise, it might face a
judicial review threat from Thames. Carlton, which will take over the London
weekday franchise from Thames on New Year's day, is concerned that it might
face competition from Channel 5 in London before the end of its first year
on air.
At issue is likely to be the nature of the proposed service from the
consortium. Carlton will argue that the 1990 Broadcasting Act envisaged a
national channel with the obligation to show a diversity of programmes and
not a London-based service to be shown all over the country. At a later
date, Channel 5 plans to provide services from other cities such as
Manchester, Birmingham and Glasgow, although it may be the turn of the
century before those are established.
The consortium's programme plans reflect the focus of one of its important
backers: Mr Moses Znaimer, founder of CityTV in Toronto, which specialises
in local news, films and popular music.
The ITC has to decide whether the consortium's finances and programme plans
pass a quality threshold. It must also be certain that the consortium can
retune millions of video recorders likely to suffer interference from the
Channel 5 signal. Apart from Thames and its parent, Thorn EMI, Channel Five
Holdings has the backing of Time Warner, the world's biggest media company.
Associated Newspapers; Pearson, owner of the Financial Times; and Cox, the
Atlanta-based media group, are among those which told the commission they
are interested in investing in the project.
Thames has made the minimum bid of Pounds 1,000 a year and, unlike all but
the smallest ITV companies, Channel 5 will not have to pay part of its
advertising revenue to the government.
UK Gold funding, Page 24
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1839</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOACAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Advert 'untruths' are attacked
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By GARY MEAD, Marketing Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE Advertising Standards Authority has accused estate agents and property
developers of using 'blatant untruths' and 'hidden conditions' in
advertising intended to tempt customers in a collapsed market.
In its latest monthly report, the authority quotes a housebuilder claiming
that a development was in quiet countryside when it was next to a busy
military airbase.
The authority said some estate agents were using misleading illustrations of
property. 'Advertisers have been known to feature houses unbeknown to their
owners,' it explained.
The report covers complaints about advertising against more than 100
companies. Among those rejected by the authority, an independent
self-regulatory body, was one filed against Co-operative Bank by the
Cosmetic Toiletry and Perfumery Association. It objected to some of the
bank's advertisements that were critical of cosmetic testing on animals and
were used by the bank to promote its investment policies.
The authority upheld one complaint against a British Airways newspaper
advertisement which promoted a 'return ticket to the USA from Pounds 309',
but failed to mention that the offer required a minimum one-week stay.
Forte Hotels was found to have misled customers through an advertisement
promoting a special offer of a three-night break for Pounds 113, which
included a table d'hote menu.
The complainant discovered that no such menu had been on offer at any of the
hotels in the chain for the previous 12 months.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1840</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAB9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Monopoly probe into Kent buses
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT RICE, Legal Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SIR BRYAN CARSBERG, director-general of fair trading, yesterday asked the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission to investigate bus services in mid Kent.
This is the first probe of its kind ordered into local bus services and
represents a change of tactics by the government in its attempts to inject
greater competition into the business.
The investigation follows complaints from other bus operators about alleged
anti-competitive behaviour by Maidstone &amp; District Motor Services, the
largest operator in the mid Kent area.
The allegations range from pricing below cost in an attempt to drive
competitors out of the market to refusing other operators use of a bus
station managed by Maidstone &amp; District.
The commission has been given six months to report. The investigation will
cover the state of competition in the districts of Maidstone, Rochester,
Gillingham, Tonbridge, Tunbridge Wells, Sevenoaks and Gravesham.
Sir Bryan's announcement about mid Kent came ahead of today's House of Lords
judgment in the Sheffield bus mergers case.
In November last year the Appeal Court upheld an earlier High Court ruling
overturning an MMC recommendation that South Yorkshire Transport should sell
four rival bus companies acquired in 1989.
That decision placed a severe limitation on the powers of the competition
authorities to vet mergers leading to concentrations in local markets.
The Sheffield case turns on the meaning of 'a substantial part of the UK'
within the context of the market-share test set out in the 1973 Fair Trading
Act.
The High Court ruled in March last year that the Sheffield mergers should
not be dissolved because the area of operation investigated by the MMC was
not a 'substantial part of the UK' within the terms of the 1973 Act.
When the Appeal Court upheld that ruling, the MMC tacitly accepted that,
unless the House of Lords reversed it, the only effective way for the
government to challenge local bus mergers and promote competition in
services would be to ask the MMC to carry out an investigation.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1841</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAB8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Rover to introduce second shift at Cowley
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN DONE, Motor Industry Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ROVER is to introduce a second production shift early next year at its
Cowley assembly plant at Oxford, where it plans to increase output next year
by about 50 per cent.
Nissan Motor, the Japanese carmaker, also plans to raise output at its
Sunderland assembly plant by 50 per cent next year.
Rover, a British Aerospace subsidiary, is expected to start volume
production of the new 600 large family saloon at Cowley in February.
The new range, which will replace the Montego, will be added to output of
the Rover 800 executive car at the plant. The 600 has been largely developed
by Honda of Japan, which owns a 20 per cent stake in the Rover vehicle
operations.
Honda began production in October of the sister car, the Accord, at its
Pounds 370m Swindon car assembly and engine plant.
Rover has redeveloped and rationalised the Cowley plant with an investment
of about Pounds 200m. The plant now has capacity to produce about 110,000
cars a year. Rover said output at Cowley would rise to about 75,000 next
year from fewer than 50,000 this year.
The company said the second shift would be introduced without adding any
jobs at the plant, which has a workforce of about 4,700 people.
Nissan Motor said output at its Pounds 900m Sunderland plant had risen by
43.5 per cent this year to 179,000 from 124,700 last year.
Mr Ian Gibson, managing director of Nissan Motor Manufacturing UK, said the
company was planning to raise output by a further 51 per cent next year to
270,000 cars with about 84 per cent of production being exported.
Output of the Nissan Primera large family car is expected to fall by 8 per
cent next year to 130,000 from 141,800 this year, while production of the
Micra small car, which began in August, is forecast to rise to 140,000 next
year from 37,200 in the last five months of this year. About 87 per cent of
Primera output has been exported this year.
Mr Gibson said that productivity at the Sunderland plant for the Primera was
now slightly ahead of Nissan's sister plant in Japan. Productivity for the
Primera had been improved by 8 per cent this year with the hours per car
reduced by one hour to 12.5 hours.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1842</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAB7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / FT boosts business readership
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
MORE captains of industry read the Financial Times than any other newspaper,
according to a Mori survey among chairmen, managing directors and other main
board directors of Britain's 500 largest companies.
The FT's coverage among the group rose from 81 per cent to 89 per cent last
year compared with 48 per cent for The Times, the next title.
The FT's regular readership among leading industrialists rose from 81 per
cent to 92 per cent. The Times was second with 42 per cent. On Sundays the
Sunday Times leads with 66 per cent, down from 75 per cent.
The survey was based on a sample of 110, representing a 53 per cent response
rate.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1843</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAB6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Road cash rules will change
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALISON SMITH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
RULES ON allocating money for local road and transport schemes in England
will be changed to enable councils to submit joint bids for big projects, Mr
John MacGregor, the transport secretary, said yesterday.
The move follows an agreed approach in deciding transport priorities for
next year from seven local authorities in the west Midlands.
Two of the authorities' top four priorities - but not the Midland Metro -
will go ahead next year.
Mr MacGregor told MPs he would start consulting local-authority associations
about bringing in the new arrangements in time for spending bids in 1994-95.
They are intended to allow some flexibility between the local grant
allocated for capital spending on roads and that for public transport. The
flexibility will be confined to less than half of the transport grant in the
first year, not least because of restrictions in the legislation.
The chance to submit joint bids is most likely to be taken up in areas where
more than one authority is involved, such as Tyneside. County councils'
priorities as highway authorities tend to remain within their own
boundaries.
The announcement came as Mr MacGregor gave details of how the Pounds 1.047bn
for capital spending on local roads in 1993-94 would be spent. Some Pounds
473m is already earmarked for existing commitments, but 41 significant
schemes will be started at a cost of Pounds 93m. Bridge works and structural
maintenance on main roads account for a further Pounds 310m.
Among the largest schemes to proceed is the Blackwater Valley route in
Hampshire and Surrey, costing Pounds 57m.
Mr MacGregor said the settlement 'demonstrates the government's priority of
maintaining strong capital investment' and emphasised the help it would
bring to the construction industry.
Mr John Prescott, the shadow transport secretary, welcomed the move to allow
joint bids from local authorities. The British Roads Federation said that
the government was contributing directly only Pounds 440m in grant, and that
local authorities would have to find more than Pounds 600m from their own
resources or from borrowing if the programme was to be realised.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1844</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAB5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Crusade under way to prevent a new pensions scandal: The
task facing the Goode committee
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PHILIP COGGAN and ANDREW JACK
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
FOR a sector committed to the long view, the pensions industry left its
responses to the government's Pension Law Review committee very late. About
200 replies were sent in the last two days before yesterday's deadline set
by the committee, chaired by Professor Roy Goode.
The impetus came with the collapse of Robert Maxwell's business empire late
last year and the news of the scale of money plundered from the pension
schemes of his former employees. It appears that more than Pounds 440m was
taken from the pension funds and either liquidated or loaned as collateral
through the private Maxwell companies to support escalating debts.
In the wake of the scandal, politicians and industry commentators have
raised questions over issues of control, ownership, management and scrutiny
of pension fund assets.
The Commons social security committee began to examine the issue, and the
government announced the creation of an independent panel to examine
occupational pension schemes.
Now the Goode committee has the task of wading through the 1,000 submissions
it has received - in response to a list of 81 questions sent out in
September - and the opinions expressed in three public meetings held with
scheme members.
With so many replies, there has been no time to analyse all the views
expressed in depth, but Mr Stefan Czerniawski, secretary to the committee,
said that three main themes had emerged - regulation, control and
compensation.
On the first issue, the Commons committee expressed concern yesterday that
over-regulation would cause employers to switch out of final-salary schemes
to money purchase schemes, where the pension depends on the fund's
investment performance.
Employers already face difficulties such as reduction of pension fund
surpluses, economic difficulties and forthcoming European Court rulings on
sex discrimination by funds.
Prudential, Britain's biggest life company, has, like others, called in its
submission for a single regulator to replace the bodies that oversee the
industry. Noble Lowndes, financial advisers, said some of the difficulties
'stem from the number of bodies exercising control over the way pension
schemes operate.' It adds: 'Confusion, conflict and we believe, the gaps in
control would be avoided by the creation of a single statutory regulatory
authority - a pensions commission.'
On the second issue, control, many scheme members were worried in the wake
of the Maxwell affair over the adequacy of management controls and
independent scrutiny to protect pension assets from fraud.
Price Waterhouse is among larger accountancy firms calling for greater
requirements for auditors to ensure that their concerns are clearly
communicated beyond the trustees to pension scheme members.
By contrast, Chantrey Vellacott, a smaller accountancy firm, suggests that a
more radical structural solution is required to counter potential conflicts
of interest.
It says the primary duties of pension fund administrators, auditors,
actuaries, investment managers and other professionals should be owed to the
trustees and members.
It argues that while there may be cost savings if pension schemes and
companies use the same advisers, they are more than outweighed by the
pressure that fees and conflicting demands from the different entities may
create.
The final report from the Commons committee says a complete ban on
self-investment (where funds invest in the shares of the parent company) is
not necessary, if pension funds are indepen-dent of the parent company.
It calls for a custodian committed to the interests of scheme members rather
than the employer, with a written agreement specifying the investment policy
of the fund and clear instructions on who has authority to give instructions
on payment and delivery.
The third issue, compensation, has already led to controversy: the
electricity supply pension scheme - the UK's second-largest pension fund -
has threatened to resign from the National Association of Pension Funds over
it.
The association proposed that scheme members should be paid compensation
however any shortfall in a scheme might occur, with the cost borne by the
industry as a whole. But Mr Mike Cannan, chief executive of the electricity
scheme, argued vehemently against compensation being paid, regardless of the
reason for the shortfall, and said other bodies than pension schemes should
be made to contribute.
The electricity scheme, like the Confederation of British Industry, wants
any compensation plan to be strictly limited. According to Sir Bryan Corby,
deputy president of the CBI: 'If such a scheme is introduced, it should only
be in respect of fraud only, and should not cover poor investment or
underfunding.'
Moreover, some in the industry feel that a compensation scheme should not be
the starting point, since the most important factor is to ensure proper
regulation.
Mr David Willetts, Tory MP for Havant, said yesterday that the select
committee would look closely at the City's response to Sir John Cuckney's
trust fund, which is trying to raise money to rebuild the Maxwell pension
assets, before deciding on the merits of a compensation scheme. In other
words, the City may face a choice of paying up now or paying up later.
Editorial comment, Page 20
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1845</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAB4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Ford halts graduate recruitment scheme
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CATHERINE MILTON, Labour Staff
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
FORD UK, the leader in the market for new cars, is to withdraw from the 1993
'milk round' system of interviewing university students for future jobs for
the first time for 18 years.
The company usually takes about 130 graduates a year, and is the largest
graduate recruiter known to have withdrawn from the 1993 round, according to
the Association of Graduate Careers Advisory Services.
Ford said yesterday it had halted all salaried recruitment 'in view of the
continuing weakness in the UK car market, which looks set to continue into
next year'. The company will continue to support its sponsorship programme
for undergraduates in which about 200 young people participate each year.
A leaked internal memorandum says that in 1975, when the company last
withdrew from the milk round, it suffered 'considerable loss of goodwill and
great difficulty in regaining our reputation as a progressive employer on
the university campuses'. Ford is expected to announce today that it is
cutting about 3,500 jobs at its UK car plants as part of job reductions
across its European operations, union sources said last night. Union leaders
are to meet Ford management today.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1846</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAB3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Sunday trade ruling expected
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE European Court of Justice will rule today on three cases referred to it
by the House of Lords, the High Court and a magistrates' court, all seeking
verification of the 1950 Shops Act, which outlaws most Sunday trading in
England and Wales.
B&amp;Q and five other retailers say the act is rendered illegal by European
Community rules prohibiting restrictions on cross-border trade.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1847</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAB2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / BT customers 'more satisfied'
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
MOST British Telecommunications customers believe the company gives good
value for money, a survey by Oftel, the regulatory body, says.
The 53 per cent figure, up from 46 per cent last year, reverses a trend over
recent years. Only 8 per cent of the 1,905 people polled last month said
they were dissatisfied with BT, down from 10 per cent last year. Twenty
seven per cent complained of poor value against 37 per cent last year.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1848</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAB1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Midland rejects lending criticism
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOHN GAPPER, Banking Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SIR PETER WALTERS, chairman of Midland Bank, warned Mr Norman Lamont, the
chancellor, yesterday that 'unfounded criticism' of banks over their
small-business lending might impair their ability to fund companies.
It was the first formal meeting of a series planned this week between bank
chairmen and Mr Lamont since the chancellor said he wanted to meet banks to
ensure they were passing on the full amount of base rate cuts.
Midland said Sir Peter had told Mr Lamont that the banks had the capacity to
finance business expansion when an economic recovery started, but that
criticism would damage their ability to do so.
The bank said Sir Peter had told Mr Lamont that its margins on lending to
500,000 small-business customers had narrowed over the past year and were
now below 3 percentage points above base rate.
The meeting with Sir Peter will be followed by meetings with Mr Andrew
Buxton, chief executive of Barclays Bank, and Sir Jeremy Morse, chairman of
Lloyds Bank.
The Bank of England has completed its survey of banks' small-business
lending margins based on the eight largest banks and has submitted the
results to the Treasury. The result might be announced after Mr Lamont's
meetings.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1849</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAB0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Council challenges government on contracting out
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW ADONIS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ONE OF England's smallest local authorities is seeking judicial review of a
government order requiring it to put its refuse collection contract out to
tender for a second time.
After a complaint from a company wishing to bid, the Environment Department
instructed Oswestry Council in Shropshire to re-tender. It said, the council
had wrongly included a clause in the tender binding contractors to maintain
the 17 employees' terms and conditions.
Mr Brian Catton, Oswestry's deputy chief executive and solicitor, said: 'I
believe we had to do so because of doubt over whether or not the 1981
transfer-of-undertakings regulations apply. If the regulations apply, then
any redundancy payments we made would have been ultra vires.
'I've had no end of inquiries from local authorities up and down the country
about our position.'
The troubles afflicting Oswestry - combined with further difficulties for
Dyfed County Council in Wales - highlight the growing confusion over whether
employees' terms and conditions must be respected when services are put out
to compulsory competitive tendering.
Oswestry's decision to challenge the government is based on advice that the
1981 regulations enshrining the European Community's 1977 Acquired Rights
Directive in British law may apply to councils. That would make them
vulnerable to legal action, particularly from employees made redundant as a
result of a contract going outside.
Dyfed last month awarded its cleaning contract to Initial Cleaning Services
and Office Cleaning Services. The contracts were due to start on New Year's
day.
When Dyfed issued redundancy notices to its 950 cleaners, Nupe, their union,
launched industrial tribunal proceedings on grounds of unfair dismissal.
That was based on the council's failure to provide information as required
under the 1981 regulations.
Acting on counsel's advice, Mr David Irving, the county secretary and
solicitor, put the contractors 'on notice' about the Nupe claims. Both
companies, acting on their own advice, said they believed the regulations
did not apply, but asked the county council to indemnify them in case they
did.
'We could not possibly write that kind of blank cheque, so had to withdraw
the contract,' Mr Irving said.
Dyfed now plans to reinstate the cleaners, and re-tender its contract with a
transfer-of-undertakings clause - making it liable to government action
similar to that meted out to Oswestry.
At least one of the contractors is considering taking Dyfed to court.
Ms Libby Glare-Williams, Initial Cleaning Services' company secretary, said
yesterday: 'We will have to take decisions on a case-by-case basis in the
future. We work on close margins and do not price on the basis of
undertakings being transferred. Nobody is quite sure what the position is at
the moment.'
Mr Roy Williams, assistant secretary at the Association of County Councils,
said local-authority associations were seeking a 'clear legal ruling' on the
position. 'Our view is that local authorities should be free to take
decisions without fear of action as in the case of Oswestry.'
The dispute will move to the Commons next month, when MPs will debate clause
26 of the Employment Bill. Companies and council associations say the
clause, which removes the exemption of undertakings 'not in the nature of a
commercial venture' from the 1981 regulations, will confuse the position
further.
The government says 'as a general rule' competitive tendering should be
unaffected by either clause 26 or recent court cases.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1850</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Free counselling for defaulting customers
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
BANKS, building societies and credit lenders will today be asked to back a
free counselling service for customers who default on loans.
Counselling centres would be funded by lenders' contributions of 15 per cent
of money recovered. The service has already received financial backing from
Barclays Bank and GE Capital.
If lenders back the plan, a pilot centre will be set up in Leeds from April,
with eight debt counsellors helping individuals draw up plans to repay
creditors over a set period.
The National Association of Citizens' Advice Bureaux believes that
counselling funded by creditors faces the danger of not being independent.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1851</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Fuel exploration
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
MR Tim Eggar, energy minister, awarded 22 licences yesterday for companies
to explore for oil and gas onshore in the UK.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1852</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Assessor for Ulster complaints
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
AN independent assessor of procedures for dealing with complaints against
the military has been appointed in Northern Ireland, the government
announced yesterday
The move follows pressure for greater protection against possible abuses of
human rights by troops in the province.
Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, announced the appointment of
Mr David Hewitt, an Ulster solicitor.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1853</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Court to rule on mushroom row
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE Court of Appeal will decide today whether sacked workers are free to
urge shoppers to boycott their former employers' mushrooms.
Middlebrook Mushrooms, a North Yorkshire subsidiary of food group Booker,
will argue that by urging shoppers not to buy its product, its former
employees were inducing a breach of contract between the supermarkets and
their mushroom supplier. They argue that if shoppers boycott the product,
the shop will cancel its contract with the producer.
Middlebrook Mushrooms dismissed the 89 women mushroom pickers after a
breakdown in talks over pay for weekend shifts.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1854</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Fringe benefits forecast to rise as pay is curbed
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID GOODHART, Labour Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE DOWNWARD pressure on public-sector pay bills as a result of the
government's 1.5 per cent pay rise limit for 1993 will lead to improvements
in 'non-pay' benefits, Incomes Data Services, the pay analyst, said
yesterday.
The IDS view, supported by some public-sector union officials, is that there
will be few direct breaches of the 1.5 per cent limit and that costs of
improvements in non-pay benefits will, where possible, be postponed into
future years.
In the private sector, the bulk of pay deals in October and November gave
rises slightly above inflation in the 4 per cent to 4.9 per cent range, but
IDS also reported a growing number of settlements in the 3 per cent to 3.9
per cent bracket. The pay reviews monitored ranged from a pay freeze at Wang
Computers, one of 50 so far this year in the private sector, to salary rises
averaging 5.2 per cent at Tate &amp; Lyle.
A number of January 1993 pay rises have already been agreed, ranging from a
1.5 per cent rise for manual workers at Carpets of Worth to a rise of 5.9
per cent in the thermal insulation industry in the second stage of a
two-year deal.
For 1993 as a whole, IDS is predicting private-sector pay rises at or
slightly above the rate of inflation. The organisation also detects a
narrowing of the normal gap between pay settlements and official earnings
statistics.
The earnings figures are usually 1 or 2 percentage points above average
settlements because they include bonuses and overtime, but also because they
include pay rises going back over 12 months.
'Part of the reason for the gap narrowing is that average earnings figures
are now measuring a year of low pay settlements reached against a background
of low inflation,' IDS says.
More than 80 per cent of companies in London and the south-east are still
operating executive bonus schemes in spite of the recession, an analysis by
PE International shows.
Incomes Data Services, 193 St John Street, London EC1V 4LS. By subscription.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1855</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Manufacturing output increases 0.3% in October
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By EMMA TUCKER, Economics Staff
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   A SMALL rise in manufacturing output in October
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
0.3 per cent - was fuelled by buoyant growth in chemicals and electrical
engineering.
The boost to chemicals came mainly from strong export growth, while output
was higher across the electrical engineering sector.
This was the first rise in manufacturing output since June, although output
has maintained roughly the same levels since the beginning of the year. The
latest official figures confirm that overall factory production remains
flat.
In the three months to the end of the October - a period the Central
Statistical Office says is a better measure of manufacturing trends - output
fell by a seasonally adjusted 0.2 per cent, and was 0.1 per cent lower
compared with the corresponding three months a year ago.
The biggest falls over the three months to October occurred in the metals
sector, where a sharp drop in steel production caused the output of metal
goods to fall 0.6 per cent compared with the previous month, and 2.5 per
cent compared with a year ago.
That was offset by robust car production. The sector enjoyed strong exports
in October for the second month running and almost maintained the level of
output achieved in September after August's very sharp fall.
In the three months to the end of October, output was 2.4 per cent lower
compared with the previous three months, but 5.4 per cent higher than the
same period a year ago.
Food, drink and tobacco production dropped 4.7 per cent over the three
months to October compared with the previous three months. That followed
exceptionally high output in May and June, when warm weather boosted sales
of soft drinks and beer. Output in the remaining manufacturing sectors was
flat.
Clothing and footwear production was at the same level between August and
October. The output of paper, printing and publishing has been unchanged
since June.
The 1.2 per cent rise in industrial output - which includes the output of
energy industries - was due to higher energy production. Oil and gas
extraction in the three months to the end of October was 8.6 per cent higher
than in the previous three months, mainly reflecting the very cold weather
in that month, one of the coldest Octobers on record. Other energy and water
supply output rose by 3 per cent over the same period.
PM upbeat, Page 10
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1856</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABTFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Large British companies suffered minor decline
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
BRITAIN'S large companies suffered a minor decline in their liquidity
position in the third quarter of this year, according to figures released
yesterday by the Central Statistical Office.
The CSO reported that the estimated liquidity ratio for all large UK
industrial and commercial companies was 122 per cent at the end of the third
quarter against 123 per cent at the end of June. The ratio, which measures
current assets maturing in less than a year as a share of liabilities that
have to be repaid in less than a year, was substantially higher than the 113
per cent level at the end of September 1991 and well above the level of the
late 1980s.
The liquidity ratio for large manufacturing companies slipped to 114 per
cent at the end of September from 115 per cent in June while that of
non-manufacturing companies, including oil companies, slipped to 132 per
cent from 134 per cent.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1857</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABSFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Lawyers seek to avert legal aid cut
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT RICE, Legal Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BARRISTERS and solicitors in England and Wales offered yesterday to accept a
legal-aid pay freeze next year if the government withdrew proposals outlined
in the Autumn Statement to cut legal-aid eligibility.
The offer was made by the Law Society, the Bar and the Legal Aid
Practitioner's Group in response to indications from Lord Mackay, the Lord
Chancellor, earlier this month that he would welcome 'suggestions on how the
legal-aid budget might be contained otherwise than I proposed'.
Lord Mackay's plans, including a reduced level of disposable income that
applicants can earn before being entitled to free legal aid, were attacked
by lawyers and consumer organisations as a severe limitation on access to
justice.
The Law Society estimates that 10m people will become ineligible for civil
legal aid.
Lord Taylor, the Lord Chief Justice, giving this year's Richard Dimbleby
lecture recently, said falling eligibility was a 'blot' on the justice
system.
The society, in a letter to Lord Mackay, called on the government to
withdraw the proposed cuts in eligibility and start urgent discussions on
substitute measures.
Lawyers believe ways can be found to contain costs within public-expenditure
targets that will be less damaging to the public.
The offer to freeze legal-aid pay is unlikely to be popular with grassroots
legal-aid lawyers who have complained loudly in recent years about erosion
of legal-aid fees in real terms.
Legal-aid pay rates are reviewed each April. This year lawyers received a 3
per cent increase in fees. The society said with rapidly rising overheads
that amounted to a pay cut of 5 per cent in real terms.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1858</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Shoppers delay Christmas spree
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER NORMAN, Economics Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
CONSUMERS APPEAR to be saving their Christmas shopping for the days
immediately before the holiday, a survey from the Confederation of British
Industry indicated yesterday.
The CBI's latest distributive trades survey, published yesterday, pointed to
a fall in retail sales volumes in November compared with the previous year.
However, a significant divergence emerged between large and small retailers.
While a majority of bigger retailers said business increased compared with
November 1991, a majority of smaller shops reported a decline. Mr Nigel
Whittaker, chairman of the CBI's distributive trades panel, said the wet
weather in November 'probably acted as a dampener on discretionary sales'.
Sales volumes for grocers, chemists, footwear and leather, furniture and
carpet stores were higher than in November last year. But durable household
goods, clothing, hardware, china and do-it-yourself stores, along with
off-licences, booksellers and stationers reported that business was down on
an annual basis.
'November continued to reveal mixed fortunes for retailers,' Mr Nigel
Whittaker said.
He said retailers expected business volumes to be virtually unchanged this
month from last year's levels. It was very difficult to predict the
Christmas trade, though. 'Every year people leave their Christmas shopping
later and later,' he said. 'There is everything to go for.'
The CBI's latest survey of companies in the retail, wholesale and motor
trades indicates that there will be further job losses and investment cuts
in the distributive trades over the next three months. On the other hand,
the outlook is favourable for consumers, with retailers reporting annual
price increases that are among the lowest since the CBI survey began in
1983.
Recent CBI surveys have been less optimistic about retail sales than
government figures, which have shown a modest underlying increase.
Mr Whittaker said yesterday that discrepancy, with weak consumer confidence
figures, justified caution about the outlook for consumer spending.
'However, with bank base rates at 7 per cent, the conditions appear to be in
place for a modest upturn in consumer demand in the new year,' he said.
The CBI survey showed that retailers hesitated to place orders with their
suppliers. Across the distributive trades as a whole, import penetration
fell because of a reduction of buying abroad by the wholesale and motor
trades. By contrast, retailers' deliveries covered by imports rose slightly
compared with a year ago.
Mr Whittaker said: 'Investment plans among retailers, wholesalers and motor
traders continue to deteriorate as business confidence weakens further. The
sharp job losses reported and expected across the distributive trades
reflect companies' determination to cut costs.'
The survey was conducted between November 17 and December 2. The 483
respondents cover 15,000 outlets in retailing, wholesaling and the motor
trades.
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
                      RETAIL SECTOR PERFORMANCE
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Per cent balances             Nov   Dec   Jan   Feb   Mar   Apr   May
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Retail total                    6    -7    13     9    16    18    22
Grocers                        67    43    46    30    38    60    48
Specialist food                23    -6   -38   -52    16   -30   -15
Off licence                   -26   -34   -59     0   -12   -13    -8
Clothing                       47    -9    56    54   -24    -2    21
Footwear and leather          -15   -44    77    48   -93    -4    33
Durable household goods        -5   -23    10    -6   -26    26   -33
Furniture and carpets          15    56    -7    53     4    70   -33
Hardware, china &amp; DIY         -20   -13    -7     6   -22    -5    36
Confectionery                  36   -15   -15    58     9    82     4
Booksellers &amp; stationers      -32   -48     6    19   -27   -28   -28
Chemists                       37    26     4    28    18    66    66
Other retail                  -24   -24    38    23   -45    12    12
Motor trades                  -50   -47   -42   -48   -43    -8    -8
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Per cent balances             Jun   Jul   Aug   Sep   Oct   Nov
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Retail total                   12   -18   -24     7   -18   -18
Grocers                        10     3     0    31    19     2
Specialist food               -62   -54   -65   -50   -28   -24
Off licence                    10    -3   -88  -100   -56   -47
Clothing                        8   -25   -27    42    -8   -18
Footwear and leather            1   -30    68    39   -49    11
Durable household goods       -50   -10    -2   -11    -1   -10
Furniture and carpets          -2   -43    33    48   -12    15
Hardware, china &amp; DIY         -10   -28   -22   -52    11   -38
Confectionery                  39    26   -57    37     4     0
Booksellers &amp; stationers      -61    -9   -18    -1   -39   -53
Chemists                       62    36    20   -28    58    79
Other retail                   30    13    -5     5   -23   -44
Motor trades                  -17   -44    15   -33   -30   -31
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: CBI Distributive Trades Sruvey
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Figures are balances; the numbers of traders reporting sales increases
on a year ago, less thos reporting decreases
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1859</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / World Trade News: Round and round go the Uruguay trade
reform negotiators
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By FRANCES WILLIAMS
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   GENEVA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
URUGUAY round negotiators are all dressed up and ready to go but someone has
called off the party. They winged their way to Geneva from all quarters of
the globe earlier this month in the expectation of stitching up the final
deals by Christmas. But the trade officials, meeting in the multilateral
round of talks under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, are
wondering when the real end-game will begin.
Hopes were raised high at the end of last month that the last lap had been
entered when US and EC trade negotiators resolved a year-long clash over
reform of farm trade. But it now seems clear that there will be no accord,
even on a provisional basis, by the end of the year.
However, negotiators have not given up hope that the wide-ranging talks,
spanning 15 broad trade areas, 28 separate accords and detailed country
commitments to open markets for specific goods and services, will be
completed before the US administration's negotiating authority from Congress
expires next March.
Since the US-EC settlement last month, governments involved in the
108-nation round have had to make up their minds whether to push for changes
to last December's draft 'final act' which sets out the rules to govern
world trade for the rest of the decade and beyond.
Many countries have problems with aspects of the text - but too much
tinkering could upset the delicate balance in the package between different
national and sectoral interests. Mr Arthur Dunkel, director-general of the
Gatt, has said the draft can only be changed by consensus.
That has not inhibited the US from raising a host of difficulties, to the
annoyance of trading partners. The EC, exhausted from internal wranglings
over its farm trade deal with Washington, does not much want to renegotiate
anything beyond agriculture.
To add to the confusion, all sides are indulging in a certain amount of
posturing to show the folks back home they are fighting their corner. But
amid the fog, the state of play in the negotiations can be dimly discerned:
Agriculture: The main dispute concerns plans to convert all farm import
barriers into tariffs which would be reduced over time - 'tariffication
without exception'. This is opposed by Japan and South Korea, which want to
keep their rice import bans, and by Canada, Switzerland and others which
operate farm supply management systems. They privately acknowledge that they
have no chance of winning their case - but they still hope to secure
compensating concessions. Market access: These country-by-country
negotiations, designed to cut overall tariffs by at least 30 per cent, have
been delayed as negotiating teams have waited for the EC to present a draft
list of new farm tariffs.
Meanwhile Washington and Brussels have still not settled arguments over
industrial tariffs. The EC is holding out for reductions in very high US
tariffs on textiles, ceramics and dyestuffs, while the US is pressing for
zero-for-zero deals on wood and paper products, non-ferrous metals,
electronics, fish and alcoholic drinks.
Anti-dumping and anti-subsidy rules: The US says it wants to re-open these
texts, which would tighten the rules for imposing anti-dumping and
countervailing duties on dumped imports that inflict injury on domestic
companies. Japan and other Asian exporters argue that industrial countries
are using such duties to harass legitimate trade.
Intellectual property: The US wants to strengthen protection granted to
pharmaceutical patents in developing countries. India has already served
notice that it would then press for faster liberalisation in the textiles
sector while the US is being urged by its textiles lobby to push back the
dismantling of the quota-driven protectionism of the multi-fibre arrangement
(MFA) from the proposed 10 to 15 years.
Services: The framework General Agreement on Trade in Services could be
complete by the end of this week, according to Gatt officials. But the
complex bilateral negotiations on reform of different services sectors and
specific market-opening measures are going slowly.
The US and EC are pressing Japan and Asian developing countries to go
further in liberalising financial services, while they continue to battle
between themselves over EC restrictions on imports of US and other foreign
audiovisual services such as films, videos and TV programmes.
Multilateral trade organisation: The US has questioned the need for an MTO
to implement the results of the round and give world trade rules the status
of international law.
It remains tantalisingly unknown which of these problems are for real, which
are being raised principally for domestic consumption, and which can be
successfully renegotiated. But the uncertainty makes it almost impossible
for frustrated negotiators to decide whether they should be making a final
push for settlement, or packing for Christmas.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1860</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Mexico hails doctor's release
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAMIAN FRASER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MEXICO CITY
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
MEXICO'S ambassador to the US said yesterday he was 'profoundly satisfied'
by the release of Dr Humberto Alvarez Machain, accused of aiding the torture
and murder of an agent of the US Drug Enforcement Agency.
Mr Gustavo Gustaco Petrocelli said: 'There can be no doubt that it was one
of the problems contaminating our relations with the US, which we want to be
respectful and mature.'
Dr Alvarez Machain, released on Monday after a Los Angeles judge ruled there
was insufficient evidence against him, arrived back in Mexico City yesterday
and was taken by security officers to an unknown destination. He had been
kidnapped by agents working for the DEA in 1990 to stand trial.
Mexico's foreign ministry said the release 'does not resolve the problem
that arose in bilateral relations' and would push for kidnappings to be made
illegal under the US-Mexico extradition treaty.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1861</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / US gives big debt relief to Salvador
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAMIAN FRASER and GEORGE GRAHAM
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MEXICO CITY, WASHINGTON
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
EL SALVADOR'S 12-year-old civil war was formally proclaimed over yesterday
as the US announced it would forgive a large share of the country's debts,
write Damian Fraser in Mexico City and George Graham in Washington.
Vice-President Dan Quayle announced the debt relief yesterday in El Salvador
at the official celebration of national reconciliation, which followed final
demobilisation of the former rebel army on Monday.
The US will forgive a total of Dollars 464m, representing 80 per cent of
outstanding food credits and 70 per cent of development assistance credits.
Interest on the rest will be payable in local currency for environmental or
child-care programmes.
The forgiveness amounts to more than 20 per cent of total foreign debt of
around Dollars 2.2bn, and will save an estimated Dollars 25m a year in debt
service.
Under January's peace accord, the FMLN rebels agreed to demobilise by the
end of October, but this was extended to December 15 after disputes about
land distribution and army reform.
From yesterday, the FMLN has become a legal civilian political party, ready
to compete in the 1994 presidential elections.
The US Treasury announced smaller debt forgiveness packages for Chile,
Uruguay and Colombia.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1862</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / World Trade News: Japan makes haste slowly in Vietnam -
Victor Mallet tracks a cautious commitment ahead of the west
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By VICTOR MALLET
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE popular Vietnamese word for motorcycle is 'honda': while the US agonises
about restoring relations with Hanoi, Japanese and other Asian companies are
deepening their involvement in the Vietnamese economy as it emerges from
decades of war and poverty.
American corporations will take heart from President George Bush's move on
Monday to allow them to open offices and sign (but not execute) contracts in
Vietnam, but the Japanese are several steps ahead. Not only are they
fulfilling contracts and doing an increasing amount of business in Vietnam,
they are already profiting from the renewal of Japanese aid.
Five weeks before Mr Bush's announcement, and three days after the US
presidential election, Japan quietly arranged a loan package of Y45.5bn
(Pounds 240m) to pay off some of Vietnam's debt arrears to Japan and to
finance Vietnamese imports. Japanese project aid for the repair of roads,
ports and other infrastructure is expected to follow.
Japanese trading companies are already working with Vietnamese officials and
Japanese consultants and construction companies to prepare project proposals
which could benefit from future Japanese aid.
'Now we are working for next year or the year after next,' says Mr Shuichi
Yamamoto, deputy general manager of Sumitomo's operations in Vietnam.
This year is busy enough. Japanese companies are importing to Vietnam
everything from monosodium glutamate and baby milk powder to chemicals and
steel, and exporting crude oil, coal, seafood and textiles to Japan.
Except in the oil industry, Japanese companies have so far been cautious
about commiting themselves to investment in Vietnam, and Taiwan and Hong
Kong have emerged as the most active foreign investors.
Japanese businessmen, however, say they are considering investments in
petrochemicals, power plants, property development and manufacturing.
In a small way, the Japanese are already investing in manufacturing.
Sumitomo, for example, is participating in a Dollars 1m-plus joint venture
with Vietnamese and Malaysian partners to modernise a factory producing
polypropylene sacks in the port of Haiphong, while Marubeni and other
Japanese investors are taking a share in a Dollars 4m instant noodle
factory.
The Japanese do not hide their enthusiasm for the skills and dedication  -
and low wages - of Vietnamese workers, and motor manufacturers are known to
be interested in establishing plants in Vietnam to add to the small assembly
operations already in existence in the country.
But it is not all plain sailing. Foreign companies in general, and Japanese
companies in particular, face an array of obstacles when it comes to doing
business in Vietnam:
The Japanese government and Japanese companies are still anxious not to
offend the US by undertaking high-profile projects in Vietnam. However, some
businessmen regard this as an old-fashioned view now that Vietnam has
withdrawn its troops from Cambodia and helped the US trace American
servicemen who went missing in action during the Vietnam war.
'Before, people were afraid of America, but now nobody's afraid,' says
Sumitomo's Mr Yamamoto. Mr Masao Hirooka of Mitsui disagrees. 'We must still
be very, very cautious,' he says. Mr Tsuyoshi Tanaka of Itochu points out
that the Japanese government itself is moving cautiously and has 'only the
one foot' in the Vietnamese door.
Business for everyone is restricted by the poor state of Vietnam's
infrastructure. For example the south, where most industry is located,
suffers from a severe shortage of electricity. Funds from the World Bank,
the International Monetary Fund and the Asian Development Bank, currently
blocked by Washington, are urgently needed.
Itochu found that Vietnamese white sand for export could compete with
Australian sand on the price of the product alone, but transport costs were
prohibitive because Vietnam's southern ports can only accommodate small
ships and loading equipment is poor.
Japanese and other businessmen frequently complain about inadequate
commercial laws and the Vietnamese tendency to renege on contracts. 'I have
suffered so much, normally from non-delivery,' says Mr Yamamoto. Japanese
companies find their business restricted by hundreds of millions of dollars
of bad debts owed by Vietnamese importers. The debts date back to the period
before late-1990.
Japanese companies seeking market share offered credit of up to two years -
some still do - but many letters of credit were not honoured; since 1990
letters of credit have generally been honoured, but most of the arrears and
accumulated interest have yet to be paid off.
Smuggling, often from Thailand or Singapore by way of Cambodia, undermines
investment plans. Instead of building factories in Vietnam, Japanese
companies make sure their wholesalers on the Thai-Cambodian border are well
supplied.
Add to these problems the lack of international schools and golf courses -
about which Japanese expatriates in Ho Chi Minh City complain bitterly - and
one might forgive the Japanese for throwing up their hands in despair and
going home.
Needless to say, they are doing nothing of the sort. Working closely with
the government in Tokyo, they are seeking to have the infrastructure
repaired and the bad debts paid off so they can really get down to business.
Apart from American businessmen themselves, it is the Vietnamese who are the
keenest to see the Americans return and rescue Vietnam from Japanese
dominance. Some of them are almost alarmed by the dedication with which
Japanese officials and businessmen are staking their claims in Vietnam.
'They take time because they are not in a hurry, because sooner or later
they will be the first, the best, but maybe the most disliked,' says one
Vietnamese banker.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1863</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / LA alert after riot area clash
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By AP
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   LOS ANGELES
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Police went on alert across Los Angeles after rocks and bottles were thrown
from a crowd in an area that was a flashpoint in the spring riots, AP
reports from Los Angeles. At least 12 people were injured and 60 arrested.
The disturbance was blamed by police on 'organised groups' taking advantage
of an earlier, peaceful protest.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1864</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Jamaica secures SDR109m credit
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CANUTE JAMES
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   KINGSTON
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
The International Monetary Fund has given Jamaica access to credits of
SDR109.1m (Dollars 153m) under an extended fund facility to be drawn down by
December 1995, writes Canute James in Kingston.
The Jamaican central bank said the money would support the government's
medium term economic programme, and that the policies agreed with the IMF
would be presented to parliament soon.
Mr PJ Patterson, prime minister, said recently he expected the extended fund
facility to be the last credit agreement Jamaica would have with the IMF.
The island's depleted foreign reserves would have been rebuilt by 1995.
Jamaica has had several IMF credit agreements since the mid-1970s, and owed
the Fund Dollars 337m at the end of last month.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1865</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Clinton favours a strong dollar: Incoming US administration
flies conservative fiscal colours
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL PROWSE
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   LITTLE ROCK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
A STRONG dollar and a relatively conservative fiscal policy seem likely to
form a central part of the Clinton administration's strategy for improving
long-term economic performance.
'I'm for a strong dollar,' declared President-elect Bill Clinton during a
debate about exchange rate policy at the economic conference in Little Rock,
the capital of his state of Arkansas. Mr Clinton, however, added the proviso
that the dollar could be strong in the long term only if supported by 'the
underlying competitive reality of our economy'.
Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the Treasury secretary designate, said he wanted the US to
'reinvigorate' the Group of Seven club of leading industrial countries and
help find ways of stimulating growth in Europe and Japan. But he signalled
that the US would not have credibility abroad unless it put its fiscal house
in order.
Mr Clinton's remarks on the dollar were a response to Professor Rudi
Dornbusch of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who urged a
substantial devaluation of the dollar against Asian currencies over the next
three years. Mr Dornbusch said financial markets were likely to anticipate a
stronger dollar as the US economy recovered but that 'we cannot afford
that'.
Mr Dornbusch said a devaluation against Asian currencies was as necessary
today as was the devaluation of the dollar against European currencies in
the 1970s following the collapse of the Bretton Woods exchange rate system.
Mr Clinton, however, seemed to lean towards the position of another speaker
Mr Jeffrey Garten, a professor at Columbia University, who said a weak
dollar was a 'quick fix that doesn't work'. Mr Garten pointed to the example
of Germany and Japan as countries that remained competitive despite
long-term currency appreciation.
Mr Bentsen seemed unimpressed by a call from Prof James Tobin, the Nobel
laureate from Yale University, for a fiscal stimulus of Dollars 60bn a year
for the next two years. 'I've become much more sympathetic to the executive
arm of government recently,' he said.
Mr Robert Rubin, nominated as head of the new White House National Economic
Council, pointedly asked Prof Tobin what impact a big fiscal stimulus would
have on business confidence and long-term bond yields. Most financial market
analysts fear the impact would be negative on both counts.
Mr Leon Panetta, the budget director designate, said Congress 'loves to pass
the sugar but hates the vinegar'. Any fiscal stimulus thus had to be tied
into a long-term deficit reduction programme.
Mr Clinton said reducing the growth of health care costs was the key to
long-term deficit reduction. This had to be a priority in the first six
months.
On regulatory and environmental policy, Mr Clinton said: 'my strong
preference is for market incentives over command and control.' He added that
he did not intend to 'micro-manage' the economy, having been on the
receiving end of oppressive federal regulations as a state governor. 'I know
what it is like to be governed.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1866</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Vodafone group wins Australian licence
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DANIEL GREEN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
AUSTRALIA has awarded an operator's licence for a mobile telephone network
to a group owned by Vodafone of the UK.
The Vodafone group, called Arena GSM, becomes the third licence-holder for
Australia, one of the fastest growing markets in the world.
Arena GSM is paying ADollars 140m for the licence and intends to invest
another ADollars 400m in the project.
It beat off three other shortlisted companies: Singapore Telecom and two
local operators Matrix Telecommunications and Voxson.
The new service is scheduled to start by next October and must be available
to 80 per cent of the population by the end of 1996, according to the terms
of the licence.
The latter also requires Australian interests to control more than half of
Arena GSM by 2003. Vodafone said it would wait until the business was
profitable - at least three years after the start of services - before
reducing its 95 per cent stake.
Arena GSM will be competing against existing licence-holders, Optus
Communications and the state-owned Australian and Overseas
Telecommunications Corporation.
Mr Bob Collins, Australia's communications minister, said that no more
licences would be issued until 1997.
The infrastructure for the new network is likely to be supplied either by
Ericsson or Sweden or Finland's Nokia. It will be based on the GSM digital
standard, the same as that used in a pan-European mobile network now being
built.
Vodafone, which a decade ago became one of the two original licensees for
the UK's mobile telephone network, is also bidding for Germany's third
mobile telecommunications licence. The result could be made public before
the end of this month, said Vodafone.
Vodafone - see Lex
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1867</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / World Trade News: Mongolia's credit rating put at risk over
debt to Japanese
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT THOMSON
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE Mongolian government is under increasing pressure to repay an instalment
on a Japanese government-backed Y8bn (Pounds 42m) loan for a steel mill
project that threatens to undermine its international credit rating.
Should it fail to repay about Y1bn, due yesterday, Japan, which takes a
tough line on non-repayment, is likely to increase trade insurance costs for
dealing with Mongolia, now taking tentative steps towards developing new
industries.
Funds were provided two years ago by the Export-Import Bank of Japan to buy
steel equipment through Itochu, the Japanese trading house, which must repay
the funds to the bank and is waiting on Mongolia.
Itochu said last night 'we are not yet worried', although Mongolia is
reported to be having difficulty raising the hard-currency. Reports suggest
payments have been delayed to Russian workers on the site at Darkhan, in the
north.
'We are in contact with our Mongolian office and we will not be uneasy
unless there is a delay for half a year or more. Even though Mongolia has
difficulties, they can afford to pay this money,' the trading house said.
Itochu has taken out trade insurance with the Ministry of International
Trade and Industry, which said that 'there should be no problem if the
payment delay is not too long'.
If Mongolia is unable to pay, the Japanese government will be put in an
awkward position, as it has taken a lead in encouraging the country's
development since its emergence from Moscow's political influence.
Mongolia relies heavily on help from Japan, which has indicated that it will
provide Dollars 50m in credits for a range of projects including a coal
mine, infrastructure development and a textile plant.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1868</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Indonesian power project stalls
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By WILLIAM KEELING
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   JAKARTA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
NEGOTIATIONS have stalled between the Indonesian government and Mission
Energy of the US over a Dollars 2bn power project, jeopardising government
plans to attract private sector investment into the national grid, industry
officials say.
In May, the government asked Mission Energy to form a consortium to build,
own and operate two 600MW coal-powered units at Paiton in East Java. It
would be the first private sector power plant linked to the national grid.
About Dollars 30bn of investment in power is required by the end of the
decade to keep pace with demand and the Paiton project is central to
government plans to raise a third of the total in the private sector.
Industry officials say, however, that three rounds of negotiations from
August to November between the government and the Mission Energy consortium
 -which includes Mitsui of Japan, General Electric of the US and Batu Hitam
Perkasa, an Indonesian coal mining company - have resulted in impasse.
The government has withdrawn a draft implementation agreement upon which
Mission Energy made its original bid and which the consortium requires to
raise offshore finance. That agreement covers items such as force majeure
risk, payment guarantees and dispute settlement rules.
Instead, government officials indicate that a 'comfort letter' of support
but falling short of a sovereign guarantee will be provided. There are
doubts whether this will satisfy prospective financiers.
Some industry officials believe the project's problems are more deep-rooted.
'President Suharto gave his commitment to Paiton in 1990, but other
government officials have been more reticent. No official has either the
authority or the will to make the necessary decisions to carry the project
forward,' said one.
Mission's bid technically lapses on December 31 and the company is
reportedly keen to raise its cost estimates following reappraisal of the
fuel efficiency of its coal supply.
Any change in the bid, however, may cause further delays. Presidential
elections and a cabinet reshuffle in March are also likely to obstruct an
early resolution to the impasse.
Negotiations for the plant are now unlikely to be concluded until late next
year, conceded one government official. This could disillusion bankers and
possibly lead to Mission Energy's withdrawal from the project, officials
say.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1869</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Jamaica secures credit from IMF
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CANUTE JAMES
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   KINGSTON
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
The International Monetary Fund has given Jamaica access to credits of
SDR109.1m (Dollars 153m) under an extended fund facility to be drawn down by
December 1995, writes Canute James in Kingston.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1870</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Immigrants pour into Canada
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT GIBBENS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Almost 225,000 immigrants, the highest level since 1957, swelled Canada's
total population to 27.2m last year, Robert Gibbens writes from Montreal.
Statistics Canada said the population increase was 1.5 per cent, highest in
the industrialised world. Europeans now represent only 25 per cent of total
immigrants.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1871</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Pilots strike on Indian Airlines
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By STEFAN WAGSTYL
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW DELHI
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Indian businessmen, trying to recover from the disruption of the Ayodhya
crisis, have run into a more familiar difficulty - a strike by pilots of
Indian Airlines, Stefan Wagstyl reports from New Delhi.
The state-owned domestic carrier has been operating only about 25 per cent
of its normal flights since most pilots went on strike on Friday, throwing
the timetable into chaos. The pilots want pay increases to close the gap
with the salaries paid by India's newly created private airlines.
Indian Airlines management retorts that the private carriers' pilots are
much more productive than those at Indian Airlines. The managers also say
the pilots' pay is already excessively high. An official estimates the
average pilot receives about Rs30,000 (Pounds 670) a month, or about ten
times as much as a booking clerk and three times as much as the airline's
chairman.
The dispute highlights the problems of liberalisation. The government has
authorised private companies to operate scheduled routes to promote
competition and raise standards of efficiency at Indian Airlines and at
Vayudoot, a smaller state-owned carrier.
Seven new carriers have taken to the skies, including Bombay-based East West
Airlines, the largest, which has challenged Indian Airlines on some of its
busiest routes.
Passengers have reported dramatic improvements in service on routes where
Indian Airlines has to compete with East West. But Indian Airlines complains
that East West can cream off the best routes whereas Indian Airlines is
required to serve all corners of a vast country.
Indian Airlines adds that East West is poaching pilots. The state carrier,
which has 570 pilots, has lost about 30 this year to East West and other
operators.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1872</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Myth of secularism comes to an end in Bombay : Shiraz Sidhva
on why India's commercial capital was least prepared for the violence after
Ayodhya
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
TO HELL with your secularism if it is at the cost of Hindus,' says Mr Bal
Thackeray, the founder of the Shiv Sena, Bombay's most militant political
party, sitting in his plush suburban home.
As rioting swept the city last week in the wake of the demolition of a
mosque at Ayodhya in northern India, it was clear that the Sena, a political
ally of the Hindu right-wing Bharatiya Janata Party, was not about to let
the city's Moslems get away with protesting against the destruction of the
mosque.
Calling a strike which paralysed the city on December 9, Sena supporters
targeted Moslems, mostly in the slums, where half Bombay's 12m people live.
The Hindu militants were spurred on by the indifference of the largely Hindu
police force in some places and blatant connivance in others. 'The police
have become the object of mistrust and hatred like never before in Bombay,'
said Mr George Fernandes, a senior opposition Janata Dal MP who toured the
riot-torn city.
The Shiv Sena (literally, army of Shivaji, the 17th century warrior leader
from the region, who fought the Mughal king Aurangzeb) was founded in
Maharashtra state, of which Bombay is the capital, in the 1960s, primarily
as an anti-communist movement, to combat the trade unions that controlled
the city's textile mills, railways, and banks.
Mr Thackeray, a former cartoonist and writer who changed his Indian name to
use that of the English writer he admires, strokes his granddaughter's hair
as he flatly denies responsibility for the violence in nearby Dharavi,
Asia's largest slum, where members of his organisation threatened Moslems
with daggers, forcing them to flee their homes. He insists his men are only
responding to the provocation by Moslems. 'If you slap me, why should I not
hit back?' he says.
The Sena has an estimated strength of 200,000, about 20,000 of whom are
actively militant, mostly unemployed youth. Sitting under the picture of a
growling tiger which is his party's symbol, he says: 'Every Maharashtrian is
a Shiv Sainik (soldier). Jai Maharashtra (Hail Maharashtra)]'.
Bombay, India's commercial capital, was the city least prepared for and
worst affected by the communal violence that swept India last week. The
city, which had previously scorned religious intolerance in other parts of
India and prided itself on being India's most cosmopolitan and secular, came
to a grinding halt for four days last week, as bloody clashes between
Moslems and Hindus left 215 dead and more than 1,000 injured, the highest
toll for any place in India (the country-wide toll was more than 1,100).
More than the business losses of an estimated Rs5bn (Pounds 110m) incurred
in Bombay last week. The events shattered the myth that Bombay was aloof
from politics and caste, unconcerned about anything but commerce. The city's
stunned residents were forced to accept that under Bombay's cosmopolitan
veneer lay a volatile mix of social tensions and communal polarisation.
Reports that over 150 deaths had been the result of indiscriminate police
firing, suggest a breakdown of the rule of law, with the police openly
exhibiting their sympathy to the Shiv Sena cause. Eyewitnesses and the
bodies of victims in morgues and hospitals testify that police shot people,
mostly Moslems, in the head and chest, aiming to kill rather than disperse
the mobs as they claimed.
While much of the violence wasconfined to the slums, buses were burnt and
windscreens smashed in affluent residential areas like the suburb of Bandra.
'Violence was something we'd only read about in the papers, it never
happened to us on our way to work,' said Mr Ajit Dayal, an investment
consultant.
What frightened most citizens was the state machinery's failure to control
the rioting, which police say started when Moslem processions began flooding
the streets protesting at the destruction of the mosque.
Mr Sudhakarrao Naik, the chief minister of the state ruled by the Congress
(I), took over 40 hours to return to Bombay from a party meeting he was
attending in Nagpur. Even Mr Sharad Pawar, the country's defence minister,
who comes from the state, admitted after a visit to the worst-hit areas that
confidence in the law and order machinery of the state had been badly
shaken, and that twice as many Moslems had been killed as Hindus.
Mr Shrikant Bapat, the Bombay commissioner of police, was unwilling to
accept claims that Moslems were deliberately targeted by his force. He says
the violence that broke out in the predominantly Moslem areas of Bhendi
Bazaar, Kurla, Govandi, Deonar and Dharavi was more than a spontaneous
reaction to the destruction of the shrine in Ayodhya, ascribing it to
rivalries in the city's vast underworld network headquartered in these
areas.
All the Moslem families of a section of sprawling Dharavi (population over
500,000) have been evacuated to safer areas, while Moslems, sometimes with
the help of their Hindu neighbours, keep guard in the slum's narrow streets,
in the absence of help from the police.
Another factor that has contributed to the rift between Hindus and Moslems
is the shrinking of job opportunities in the Thane-Belapur-Pune belt, where
77 per cent of Maharashtra's industrial workforce is concentrated. Official
estimates reveal that the number of registered educated unemployed youth in
the region has grown by 250 per cent in the last decade, as the population
continues to grow and industrial units have either closed (as in the case of
several textile mills) or been relocated in other areas of the state where
labour is cheaper.
It is no coincidence that the Sena is strongest here. Sociologists and
political analysts say unemployment has contributed to the growing
criminalisation in the state. 'It is always easy to blame a member from
another community or an outsider for depriving you of a job,' says Mr P
Sainath, a Bombay-based newspaper editor. 'The truth is, there are no jobs.'
Industrial workers have borne the brunt of the riots in several parts of
Bombay. 'We have never seen Bombay going up in smoke like this, and I have
lived here for over 50 years,' says Harish Bhau, a floor manager in a
textile mill.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1873</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOABAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Japanese machine orders fall 28.6%
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHARLES LEADBEATER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Japanese capital investment is continuing to fall steeply, according to
government figures published yesterday which show machinery orders in
October fell by 28.6 per cent from the month before, Charles Leadbeater
reports from Tokyo. The government's Economic Planning Agency said that
orders received by Japan's leading machinery makers were 30.7 per cent down
on the same month last year.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1874</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAA9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Algiers curfew worsens violence
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By FRANCIS GHILES
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
The curfew imposed on Algiers and surrounding provinces 12 days ago has led
to an escalation of violence, with five members of the security forces and
six Islamic militants losing their lives since the beginning of this week,
writes Francis Ghiles. The militants were killed early yesterday in a house
where they had found refuge near the Kouba mosque on the eastern side of
Algiers.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1875</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAA8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / Malawi dissidents condemn jailing
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   LUSAKA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
A group of Malawi dissidents yesterday condemned the jailing of their leader
and called for continued pressure on the government of President-for-life
Hastings Kamuzu Banda, Reuter reports from Lusaka.
The Alliance for Democracy (Aford) said in a statement issued in Lusaka that
the trial of its interim chairman, Mr Chakufwa Chihana, had been marked by
'unprecedented political interference in judicial proceedings'. Mr Chihana,
a trade unionist and long-time opponent of Mr Banda, was convicted in
Blantyre on Monday on two counts of sedition and jailed for two years.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-1876</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLPCOAA7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921216
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  16 DEC 92 / IDA plans to target poorest
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BERNE
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE International Development Association (IDA), provider of low-cost aid to
developing countries, said yesterday it would distribute more of its
resources to the world's poorest, least creditworthy countries, Reuter
reports from Berne.
The IDA, an arm of the World Bank, also said its 34 donor countries had
agreed to replenish IDA funds with SDR13bn (Pounds 11.8bn) over three years
from next July.
The IDA 'will reduce the share of its lending to countries able to access
international financial markets as well as IDA resources,' said Mr Ernest
Stern, World Bank managing director.
The countries likely to receive less of IDA's aid than in previous years
were China, India, Pakistan, and Nigeria.
The 34 donor countries met in Berne to complete the negotiations on the 10th
replenishment of IDA resources.
In Washington, Mr Lewis Preston, the World Bank's president, said in a
speech to the World Resources Institute, a Washington-based research group,
that his organisation's efforts to tackle other developmental and
environmental problems depended on its success in reducing poverty.
Mr Preston called on industrialised nations to help developing countries
attack the problems of unclean water, inadequate sanitation, soil
degradation and population control.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
