
<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-44914 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpjst010___94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-JST-94-010 </AU>
JPRS 
Science &amp; Technology 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Japan AIST Research Laboratory Plans </ABS>
<DATE1>   31 October 1993 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     1993 AIST Laboratory Research Plans </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    1993 AIST Laboratory Research Plans </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    International R&amp;D Cooperation </H4>

<F P=102> 94FE0219E Tokyo AGENCY OF INDUSTRIAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
in Japanese 31 Oct 93 pp 356-371 </F>

<F P=103> 94FE0219E </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo AGENCY OF INDUSTRIAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
in Japanese 31 Oct 93 pp 356-371 </F>

<F P=105> Japanese </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

  [Text] 
<H5>  1. Institute for Transfer of Industrial Technology (ITIT) </H5>
  The Institute for Transfer Industrial Technology Program 
(ITIT Program) is a series of programs involving AIST 
laboratories that is designed to promote cooperative 
international research in the mining and manufacturing 
industries which have received numerous requests from developing 
countries for technical assistance. The program is also designed 
to contribute to the economic growth of those countries (est. 
1973). The aim is to assist developing countries in determining 
research projects and improving their research capability which 
involves sending researchers from Japan or accepting researchers 
from developing countries for the purpose of assisting those 
countries in establishing their own research base. 
<H5>  2. Specific Programs </H5>
  (1) Cooperative International Research Program 
  This is a joint research program that is conducted between 
AIST research laboratories and research institutes in developing 
countries. 
  1 -- Special Research 
  These are joint research projects that are carried out 
between an AIST laboratory and an overseas research institute in 
which the research topic matches the field of research 
represented by an AIST laboratory and, at the same time, 
responds to the social needs of the developing country. 
  2 -- Transfer Research 
  It is often very difficult for technologies that have been 
developed in Japan to take root elsewhere even when a technology 
has been transplanted in fact to another country. Therefore, in 
order to promote effective technology transfers and have a 
particular technology take root, this type of research is 
designed to facilitate the technology transfer process by 
determining such things as whether improvements or further work 
is required of a given technology. 
  3 -- Developmental Research 
  In order to try to make more effective use of the industrial 
products produced by a developing country, this research program 
provides the future seeds for both special and transfer research 
by conducting a systematic analysis on the makeup of a country's 
industrial base, and examining the possibilities of expanding 
that base. 
  (2) Overseas Research Program To Investigate Technologies 
  This program involves conducting on-site surveys in order to 
identify areas of research and future cooperative research 
topics that are needed in developing countries. 
  (3) Mobile Researcher Programs 
  1 -- Trainee Acceptance Program 
  This program is designed to introduce and train technical 
specialists from developing countries at AIST research 
laboratories at the request of the Japan International 
Cooperation Agency. 
  2 -- Mobile Researcher Program (costs covered by Cooperative 
Research Program) 
  The following five programs have been assigned to the New 
Energy Development Organization which will try to beef up and 
strengthen the programs. 
  a. Fellow Researcher Invitation Program 
  This program is designed to promote effective research 
cooperation by inviting researchers from fellow research 
institutes to take part in joint research. 
  b. Specific Investigative Research Program 
  In this program, a comprehensive survey is done of the needs 
of industry in a given developing country and surrounding 
countries so that the research of the program contributes to 
effective economic growth of the developing country. 
  c. Research Management Invitation Program 
  This program will try to promote more effective research 
cooperation with developing countries by deepening mutual 
understanding and involves inviting six research managers to 
Japan and providing them with the opportunity to discuss the 
current status of research laboratories, research 
implementation, and R&amp;D. 
  d. Special Researcher Invitation Program 
  This program is designed to elevate the research level of 
developing countries by inviting up to seven researchers from 
developing countries who have produced extraordinary 
achievements in R&amp;D-related fields to take part in long-term 
joint research important to those countries. 
  e. International Symposium Program 
  This program will invite up to 12 researchers from 
developing 
countries, as well as researchers from advanced countries who 
share the same problems as developing countries, to attend an 
international symposium to exchange opinions in the form of 
lectures presented at the symposium on the status of research 
and problem areas in their respective countries. 
  (4) International Joint Research Cooperation Program 
  This program concerns research problems that cannot be dealt 
with merely by AIST laboratories in response to requests from 
developing countries. This program aims to make effective use of 
the R&amp;D potential of certain advanced countries to conduct 
joint 
research with developing countries on topics that have been 
mutually agreed upon by a government research institute in an 
advanced country and an AIST laboratory. 
  (5) Global Environmental Technologies Program 
  In this program, AIST research laboratories conduct joint 
R&amp;D 
with research institutes of developing countries in order to 
solve environmental problems on a global scale such as 
desertification, destruction of forests, and acid rain. 
  (6) Specific Key Research Cooperation Projects 
  In response to requests made by developing countries for 
advanced technical research cooperation, this program involves 
the use of advanced laboratories (experimental equipment) in 
joint research conducted between AIST research labs and overseas 
research institutes. In 1993, research cooperation will be 
extended to supporting industries in developing countries which 
have shown a certain urgency in terms of achieving economic 
independence. 



  FY93 Research Projects of International Research Cooperation Program 

(1) Special Research 

Research                 AIST Lab       Overseas Lab         Term 

1. Research to tackle    NIRE           China: Baitan        1990-93 
the problem of gas and                  Scientific 
coal dust ignition in                   Research Institute 
mines 

2. Research to develop   NIBH           Thailand: Asia       1991-93 
simple treatment                        University of 
methods for highly                      Engineering 
concentrated organic 
effluent 

3. Research on           GSJ            Mongolia: National   1991-94 
exploration and                         Geological Center 
development of                          - Geological 
underground resources                   Resources Research 
in Mongolia                             Institute 

4. Research on           NIMC           Costa Rica:          1991-94 
lignocellulose                          National 
polyurethane                            University 

5. Research on surface   MEL            South Korea:         1992-95 
processing and                          Industrial 
reforming technologies                  Technology 
                                        Research 
                                        Institute, 
                                        Mechanical 
                                        Research Lab 

6. Research on           NIMC           China: National      1992-94 
development of                          Industrial 
advanced polymer                        Technology 
composites                              Research Institute 


7. Research on coal      GSJ            Indonesia: Coal      1992-94 
field and coal                          Gas Technology 
property                                R&amp;D Center; 
characteristics                         Malaysia: 
                                        Geological Survey 
                                        Institute 

8. Research on weather   NIMC           Indonesia: Science   1993-96 
resistance of polymer                   Institute, Applied 
materials in low                        Physics R&amp;D 
latitude areas                          Center 

9. Research on methods   GIRI, Nag      Malaysia:            1993-95 
of designing and                        Industrial 
manufacturing                           Standards Research 
high-quality founded                    Lab, Foundry 
products                                Technology Unit 

10. Research on          GSJ            China: Geology and   1993-96 
characteristics of                      Mining Dept., 
moist environments in                   Geological 
arid and semi-arid                      Moisture Research 
parts of Chinese                        Lab 
continent 

11. Research on          ETL            Fiji: South          1993-96 
multifunctional system                  Pacific University 
that uses temperature 
differences in atoll 
regions of oceans to 
produce energy 

12. Research on          NIRE           Indonesia: Agency    1993-96 
effective uses of                       of Industrial 
unused tropical                         Development 
biomass                                 Cellulose Research 
                                        Lab 

13. Research on          GIRI, Hok      Thailand: Science    1993-96 
preventing pollution                    and Technology 
through use of                          Research Institute 
advanced adsorbents 

(2) Transfer Research 

Research                 AIST Lab       Overseas Lab         Term 

1. Research on           NRLM           South Korea:         1991-93 
standard substances                     National 
and means of measuring                  Industrial 
heat properties of                      Technology 
solid materials                         Research 
                                        Institute, 
                                        Scientific 
                                        Standards Research 
                                        Lab 

2. Research on raw       NIMC           Malaysia: Palm Oil   1991-93 
materials for chemical                  Research Lab 
industry from natural 
oils 

3. Research on           NRLM           Indonesia:           1993-95 
calibrating radiation                   Scientific 
thermometers in                         Research 
mid-to-high                             Institute, 
temperature range                       Metrology R&amp;D 
                                        Center 

(3) Developmental Research 

Research                 AIST Lab       Overseas Lab         Term 

1. Research to develop   NIMC           (not relevant)       1991-93 
paper with advanced 
features 


<H5>  Research Projects Profiled </H5>
  (1) Special Research 
  Research to tackle problem of gas and coal dust 
ignition in mines (1990-93) (NIRE) 
  Most of the energy needs in the People's Republic of China 
are supplied in the form of coal. At slightly less than 11 
metric tons, China boasts the world's largest annual output of 
coal. In recent years, most of the drilling for coal has been 
done in mines, and in view of the fact that work conditions have 
deteriorated as drilling has reached deeper levels, and the fact 
that there has been an upsurge in both the percentage of 
accidents and number of major mine disasters, government-related 
organizations have shown great concern over these matters and 
have given high priority to promoting R&amp;D on mine safety and 
security. 
  This project is meant to tackle the more serious accidents 
that are caused by the ignition of gas and coal dust in the 
mines, and look into the mechanism by which ignition is caused 
by metal sparks in mines and look for ways to prevent this from 
occurring based on studies with coal mine explosives. 
  This is the final year of this research project, so an 
effort 
will be made to put together a comprehensive study that includes 
the ignition characteristics of coal mined in China, the 
characteristics of gas and coal dust ignition caused by sparks 
produced in the collision of metals or by the heat generated by 
mechanical friction, and the characteristics of gas and coal 
dust ignition that is caused by abnormal blasting, all of which 
have been items carried out so far by experimental research. 
  Research to develop process for simple treatment of 
highly concentrated organic effluent (1991-93) (NIBH) 
  Effluent treatment has become a serious problem in Southeast 
Asian countries which are undergoing rapid industrialization. 
  However, it is almost impossible to introduce much of the 
effluent treatment equipment developed in Japan to these 
countries because the running costs are quite high and a great 
deal of expertise is needed for maintenance and upkeep of the 
equipment. 
  That being the case, this research will try to perfect a 
simple treatment method for highly concentrated effluent that is 
suitable for Southeast Asian countries by introducing techniques 
such as microorganism immobilization in a low-cost treatment of 
methane gas and by developing an "easy-to-maintain" method of 
treatment. 
  Research on exploration and development of underground 
resources in Mongolia (1991-94) (GSJ) 
  This is a basic research project carried out in cooperation 
with a research partner in Mongolia that is designed to promote 
a more modern and efficient means of exploring and developing 
the rich mineral and energy resources deposited in the 
mountainous plateaus of Mongolia. 
  This research will be divided into the following two 
segments 
according to objective and means: 
  (1) Research on mineral resource distribution and means of 
exploration 
  This segment will involve research on the interrelationship 
between magma activity and those base metals such as copper, 
lead, and zinc, as well as rare metals such as tungsten, tin, 
molybdenum, niobium, tantalum, and rare earth, and bring to 
light the distribution of those resources and appropriate 
methods of exploration. 
  (2) Research on coal and oil shells 
  This segment will have to do with geological research on the 
rich Mongolian coal beds and accompanying oil shells. 
  Research on lignocellulose polyurethane (1991-94) 
(NIMC) 
  In the coffee and sugar cane producing countries, such as 
Costa Rica and those located in the tropical and subtropical 
areas of the world, there are now no effective uses for the 
large quantities of secondary products such as coffee bean 
shells or bagasse produced from these products. More often than 
not these products are either used as fuel or left to stand 
alone. If coffee bean shells and bagasse were, however, to be 
converted to polyurethane by an appropriate means, quite 
valuable uses might be found for these products in buffers, heat 
insulation materials, and paints. That being the case, this 
research project will attempt to convert the secondary products 
described above that are produced in Costa Rica to a raw 
polyurethane material and try to find effective uses as a 
resource material for various industries. 
  Research so far has examined the constituent makeup of 
coffee 
bean shells and bagasse and examined these in solution form. A 
chemical and thermal analysis has also been done of 
lignocellulose solutions. 
  The research to be done in 1993 will involve a study on the 
process of making polyurethane from Costa Rican coffee bean 
shells and bagasse in solution, and a chemical analysis of the 
polyurethane obtained. 
  Research on surface processing and reforming technology 
(1992-95) (MEL) 
  As industrial technologies have become more 
internationalized, it is important that R&amp;D be conducted 
jointly 
with other countries including South Korea, one of the 
industrial powers of Asia, as it pertains to developing 
machining and other core industrial technologies and upgrading 
other technologies having to do with surface reforming, wear 
resistance, and lubrication. This project will be carried out 
jointly with the Industrial Technology Research Institute of 
Korea (KAITECH) and the Korean Institute of Machinery (KIMM) and 
will seek to upgrade cutting technology and improve the methods 
used to reform mechanical elements and wear-resistant surfaces, 
and along with that try to perfect a standard, recognized method 
of evaluating the performance of those technologies. 
  The details of the project will include developing a sensor 
signaling process for detecting machining states, which has been 
lacking in advanced cutting work and a control technology for 
optimum machining condition and tool locus, doing a study to 
optimize surface reforming involving plasma, etc., and 
perfecting a method of evaluating surface reforming film from a 
tribological perspective. In 1993, research will involve 
prototyping a tool with a sensor function that will be used to 
measure temperature characteristics and frequency response 
properties. Further research will include evaluating the 
tribological characteristics of surface reforming film in 
various types of gas atmospheres. 
  Research on development of advanced polymer composites 
(1992-94) (NIMC) 
  With the remarkable progress that various industries have 
made in South Korea, we believe that one of the next areas of 
importance will be advanced polymer composites. That would lead 
to the need to perfect a composite technology that would include 
a method of molding and evaluating the performance of 
composites, and to establish a base with respect to its 
commercialization. Meanwhile, consideration has to be given to 
the fact that thermoplastic resin composites are attracting a 
lot of attention because they are more easily recycled than 
conventional thermohardened resin composites. To deal with this, 
joint research will be conducted to develop an advanced 
fiber-reinforced thermoplastic composite and an advanced polymer 
alloy, and to try to upgrade composite technology and establish 
a base for commercialization. 
  Research so far has looked into the development and 
commercialization of a fiber array control and molding method, 
and investigated the interrelationship between the morphology of 
polymer alloys and impact resistance. 
  What will be done next is to study methods of arraying fiber 
reinforcement with the aim of improving impact resistance and, 
along with that, evaluating the method of molding composites and 
the dynamic characteristics of the material. A study will also 
be done on the interrelationship between the compatibility and 
morphology of the polymer alloy and between compatibility and 
dynamic characteristics. 
  Research on coal field and coal property 
characteristics (1992-94) (GSJ) 
  This is a research project that will contribute to the 
exploration and development of coal fields in Southeast Asia by 
shedding some light on the history of how sediment basins were 
formed in the coal fields of Sumatra, East Kalimantan, and 
Sarawak in Indonesia, and by elucidating the coal properties of 
each of those coal fields. 
  The project also involves the transfer of some Japanese 
technology to Indonesia concerning the analysis of sediment 
basins and the evaluation of coal properties. It also takes up 
the development of new technologies for evaluating coal 
properties and heat formation. 
  The research has been divided into two areas: 
  (1) Research on analyzing sediment basins 
  This will involve using techniques such as computer 
simulation and relative sediment analysis based on existing 
geographical data to shed light on the formation of the sediment 
basins. 
  (2) Research on coal properties 
  This will involve doing various types of analyses including 
a 
technical analysis on specimens of coal taken from actual sites 
in order to understand coal properties, and will also involve 
developing new technologies on the use of CO-MS in analyzing 
coal properties. The various data collected on coal properties 
will provide a better understanding of the formation of coal 
fields. 
  Research on weather resistance of polymer materials in 
low latitude areas (1992-96) (NIMC) 
  We are seeing more and more products being manufactured 
around the world in which polymer materials are being used in 
the making of that product, but the specifications of that 
material are best suited to mid-latitude areas, and very little 
data has been collected on material characteristics for 
low-latitude areas where the temperature and humidity are high 
and the sunlight is intense. Polymer materials do not hold up 
very well in low latitude areas, so it has become somewhat of an 
urgent matter to find materials having good durability and to 
perfect a technology for evaluating weather resistance, which 
would give some insight into material design. In this research, 
researchers will try to perfect a means of evaluating the 
weather resistance of poly-propylene, which is one of the main 
polymers being produced in Indonesia, giving special 
consideration to the high temperature and humidity found in low 
latitude areas. 
  The research this year will include measuring the radiation 
of the sun in the ultraviolet, visible, and infrared regions, 
and using a standard test piece for measuring energy (JIS K 
7200), identifying those factors which cause the breakdown of 
material in low latitudes by collecting data affecting the 
weather resistance of polymer materials. The research will also 
submit polypropylene test pieces in Indonesia and Japan to 
exposure and compare the breakdown behavior of each. 
  Research on methods of designing and manufacturing 
high-quality founded products (1993-95) (GIRI, Nag) 
  This research project is intended to promote the growth of 
both the mining and foundry industries in Malaysia, which play a 
role in supplying the essential goods and materials needed to 
improve the standard of living in Malaysia (machine parts and 
consumer goods). This will be a joint research project conducted 
with the Standards and Industrial Research Institute of Malaysia 
(SIRIM) and the Foundry Group (FG) and will involve research on 
effective uses of local raw materials and on foundry 
technologies that meet local product requirements. 
  The project will first include a local fact-finding survey 
and research on material design and systems in order to develop 
a foundry technology that is compatible with local materials, 
products, and the economic environment. The research then looks 
into the melting process inside an actual foundry for the 
purpose of trying to eliminate possible defects and improve 
product quality. Research will also be done on a molding process 
suited to product shape and material used. 
  The research this year will include a survey of locally 
produced raw materials such as palm oil and silica, which is 
obtained as a byproduct when mining tin, and also survey the 
market needs and supply status of locally made founded products. 
The results will then be used to develop a software package for 
analyzing material designs of founded products by personal 
computer. Further research will be done to commercialize the 
material design technology into a local manufacturing system for 
founded goods. 
  Research on characteristics of moist environments in 
arid and semi-arid parts of the Chinese continent (1993-1996) 
(GSJ) 
  In this project, research will be done to elucidate the 
characteristics of moist environments in dry desert areas. A 
particular effort will be made to gain a true understanding of 
the mechanism by which underground water flows and forms in 
areas populated by multiple rivers. Based on this research, the 
goal of the project is to help formulate policies for developing 
and preserving effective water resources in arid areas. 
  The research will mainly focus on the Gobi Desert in the 
autonomous southern region of Inner Mongolia in inland China 
where a local joint research survey will be conducted regarding 
the geology and moisture of the region and calculations will be 
made based on remote sensing devices as to the different 
lithofacies and levels of moisture in the soil. 
  The research concerning inland rivers will measure the flow 
rate and water quality changes through time for several rivers 
and then collect data on the origin and distribution of the 
underground water. In conjunction with this, a geological survey 
will be taken of river basins to determine the location of 
former rivers within the desert that were covered over by sand. 
The area is quite wide and difficult to access, so research will 
also be conducted using remote sensing data (JERS-1). 
  Research on multifunctional system that uses 
temperature differences in atoll regions of oceans to produce 
energy (1993-96) (ETL) 
  This is a research project in which researchers from both 
countries will jointly study the relationship between the living 
and social conditions in the unique atoll regions of the oceans 
which include the island of Fiji and the products that are 
produced from a multifunctional energy utilization system based 
on the temperature differential of the ocean (electric power, 
fresh water, heat and coldness, fishery products, and seaweeds). 
With the goal as perfecting a means of designing and evaluating 
such a system adapted to the atoll region, the following 
research will be conducted in order to elucidate the effects 
that a multifunctional energy utilization system, making use of 
the low-temperature and eutrophic properties and purity of 
deep-sea water, has on the living and social environment of Fiji 
based on actual on-site atoll conditions. 
  (1) Data will be collected in Fiji on social conditions 
related to the unique products and natural environment of the 
atoll region. 
  (2) Researchers from Fiji will be invited to Japan to deepen 
their knowledge of said technologies through hands-on research 
using a scaled down version of an ocean temperature differential 
power generation system, and ascertain what the system 
characteristics are for conditions on Fiji. 
  (3) Working jointly, the two research organizations will do 
a 
systematic study in order to refine the image of the 
multifunctional energy utilization system. 
  Research on effective uses of unused tropical biomass 
(1993-96) (NIRE) 
  In the tropical parts of Indonesia, there is an abundance of 
fast growing trees such as the eucalyptus as well as a poorly 
underused herbaceous biomass. There is also an enormous amount 
of agricultural wastes found in tropical regions, organic wastes 
from agricultural and forestry processing industries such as 
rice straw, bagasse, palm oil wastes, pulp wastes, and wood 
scraps and so forth that are left behind from the plywood 
industry. Most of these organic wastes are just discarded 
without being recycled and become a source of pollution. 
  Biomass, however, being a recyclable organic resource, has a 
major role to play in preserving the global environment by 
fixing CO[.sub]2[/] gas and preventing destruction of the 
CO[.sub]2[/] gas balance in the atmosphere. The aim of this 
research will be to examine the potential of biomass in the 
laboratory in terms of oil technology and to try to come up with 
new and more effective uses for biomass in which the rich supply 
of unused tropical biomass and agricultural wastes can be used 
as resources for manufacturing high value-added liquid fuel or 
as raw materials for the chemical industry. 
  The research this year will be to conduct a survey in 
Indonesia on the variety and availability of unused tropical 
trees and herbaceous biomass as well as agricultural wastes and 
organic wastes from the agricultural and forestry processing 
industries. Research will also examine the chemical composition, 
properties, and thermodynamic characteristics of each form of 
biomass and then study the suitability of each as liquid fuel or 
as raw material for chemicals. 
  Research on preventing pollution through use of 
sophisticated adsorbents (1993-96) (GIRI, Hok) 
  Developing effective uses for peat and lignite, which are 
deposited under the earth in large quantities in Thailand, has 
become an issue of national importance. Moreover, in Thailand, 
it is urgent that something be done about the spread of 
pollution in the air and water caused by the rapid 
industrialization of the country. 
  The aim of this research will be to develop a means of 
preventing pollution using sophisticated adsorbents based on 
joint ITIT research conducted from 1990 to 1992 on an active 
treatment technology for peat and lignite coal. 
  The work to be done this year will take place in Thailand 
and 
will involve holding discussions on research particulars, 
concluding a research agreement, conducting on-site surveys, and 
acquiring raw materials. Following that, researchers will 
investigate ways of improving performance and developing optimal 
adsorbent conditions based on a detailed characterization of the 
raw materials, and then will determine whether they can be used 
as resource materials in preventing pollution by testing gas 
adsorptivity and water treatment capability. 
  (2) Transfer Research 
  Research on standard substances and means of measuring 
heat properties of solid materials (1991-93) (NRLM) 
  South Korean industries are rapidly growing, and the raw 
material and energy industries, in particular, are in immediate 
need of a way of evaluating the thermal properties of materials, 
so the leadership of national research institutes in South Korea 
is demanding that a highly accurate means be developed for 
measuring heat properties. That being the case, this research 
will push to standardize and commercialize the laser flash 
method and other high-precision heat property measurement 
methods owned by the National Research Laboratory of Metrology 
and then transfer those technologies to the National Research 
Institute of Korea and the National Scientific Standards 
Research Institute of Korea. At the same time, research will 
verify the technology transfer by developing standard heat 
property substances as well as measure the heat properties of 
various materials needed for the growth of Korea's main 
industries. 
  In research this year, scientists will select standard 
substances from graphite, glassy carbon, and ceramics, which are 
candidate materials for standard thermal diffusivity substances 
based on results of high-temperature stability tests, and 
measure the thermal diffusivity of those materials. Researchers 
will then compare those measurements with the values obtained at 
the National Research Lab of Metrology for thermal diffusivity 
measurements of standard substances by equipment perfected for 
that purpose, and then verify that the technology transfer for 
the laser flash method of measuring thermal diffusivity has been 
completed. 
  Research on raw materials for chemical industry from 
natural oils (1991-93) (NIMC) 
  The aim of this research is to develop a technology for 
converting high-grade fatty acids, which are easily obtained 
from natural oils and secondary products, to high value-added 
industrial raw materials by means of hydrogenation and other 
types of reactions. The palm oil of Malaysia, which is a product 
of the tropical rain forest, is harvested six times a year, and 
contains a higher content of oil than any other type of 
oil-producing plant. Thus, one of the main features of palm oil 
is its stable supply as a raw material for the chemical 
industry. In this research, scientists will perform 
hydrogenolysis using a ruthenium-based catalyst based on a new 
sol gel method developed at this laboratory, and will try to 
convert the main components of palm oil, oleic acid and lauric 
acid, to a high-grade alcohol under mild conditions by 
conventional methods. In order to commercialize this research, 
however, the manufacturing cost of the catalysts must be reduced 
and the plant designs must be resolved based on high-pressure 
gas. 
  The work to be done this year in terms of commercializing 
this research will be to develop a low-cost catalyst to replace 
the rare metal ruthenium catalyst, and to conduct two studies on 
the design of a pilot plant, one on identifying potential 
problems and the other on economic calculations. 
  Research on calibrating radiation thermometers in the 
mid-to-high temperature range (1993-95) (NRLM) 
  A survey conducted as part of the ITIT research cooperation 
program found that there was a need to develop a domestic 
technology for measuring high temperatures and thermal radiation 
in the steel industry of Indonesia. 
  The Indonesian Scientific Research Institute and R&amp;D 
Center 
of Metrology employ four fixed temperature points as temperature 
standards and provide calibration services for thermocouples and 
high-temperature photothermometers, but they have a short 
history as far as research on measuring radiation temperature is 
concerned, and not much progress has been made either in 
equipment calibration. 
  Accordingly, there is need to perfect a means of measuring 
and calibrating temperatures in new radiation thermometers, and 
to do this, Japan's cooperation in research is essential. 
  That being the case, this research will include transferring 
a technology for calibrating radiation thermometers in the 
mid-to-high temperature range, perfecting a system for setting, 
maintaining, and managing high-temperature standards in Malaysia 
and maintaining a measurement control system, improving 
calibration technology in the mid-to-high temperature range 
while trying to upgrade industrial standards, and developing a 
commercial calibration system. 
  The research this year will attempt to develop the ideas for 
a high-temperature standards system having the requisite 
precision and to draw up a plan for a calibration system. 
  (3) Developmental Research 
  Research to develop paper with advanced features 
(1991-93) (NIMC) 
  This project will attempt to make use of pulp and active 
carbon which can be manufactured from scarcely used resources, 
such as agricultural wastes and peat found in abundant 
quantities in developing countries in Asia, Africa, and South 
and Central America as raw materials, in developing a paper 
having sophisticated features such as the ability to maintain 
freshness, be non-odorous, and be non-fading. This project will 
use the findings of this research to promote the growth of the 
packaging- and construction-related industries in those 
developing countries. 
  The research done so far includes a study of how active 
carbon is made from raw materials such as the fine dust attached 
to the fiber of the coconut shell, bagasse, and peat, and the 
conditions under which paper is made with active carbon. A test 
was also done on the adsorptive separation of ethylene, 
CO[.sub]2[/] gas, and amine gas by active carbon and paper 
containing active carbon. 
  The research this year will be to continue studying methods 
of chemically treating paper containing active carbon, zeolite 
powder, or a mixture of those powders for the purpose of further 
improving the characteristics of the paper for adsorptive 
separation of ethylene and amine gas which are significant 
factors in terms of maintaining freshness and being odor-free. 
In specific terms, scientists will use the reaction of ethylene 
in a halogen acid and acid solution to chemically treat an 
active carbon and zeolite powder, and an active carbon and 
zeolite paper with those chemicals and develop a powder and 
paper having high ethylene adsorptivity. Researchers will also 
conduct a study on chemical treatment methods with the aim of 
further improving the adsorptive separation properties of the 
that powder and active carbon paper with respect to 
CO[.sub]2[/] gas, amine gas, and sour gas. 



  1993 Research Projects from International Joint Research Cooperation 
Program 

Research             AIST Lab       Overseas Lab            Term 

1. Research to       GSJ            Great Britain:          1992-95 
explore mineral                     University of London 
resources of ocean                  Geological Survey 
plate fragments                     Institute; Indonesia: 
                                    National Tectonic 
                                    Engineering R&amp;D 
                                    Center 

2. Research on                      U.S.: Environmental     1993-95 
chemical                            Protection Agency, 
pollutants in                       Environmental 
Kuwait and Egypt                    Research Institute; 
                                    Kuwait: Kuwait 
                                    National Research 
                                    Institute; Egypt: 
                                    Mansura University 


  Research to explore the mineral resources of ocean 
plate fragments (1992-95) (GSJ) 
  The aim of this research project will be to develop a 
technology for exploring mineral resources, such as rare metals 
that are concentrated in ultrabasic rocks in the ocean plate of 
Indonesia, and to improve the joint research capability of 
Indonesia by working jointly with them to merge the structural 
analysis technology developed by the University of London with 
the mineral deposit exploration technology developed by the 
Geological Survey of Japan. 
  The research this year will concentrate on a study of the 
petrographic properties and geological age of the ultrabasic 
rocks and basalt, and on shedding some light on the distribution 
of lineaments and faults. 
  Research on chemical pollutants in Kuwait and Egypt 
(1993-95) (NIMC) 
  In Kuwait, there is a great deal of concern over the effects 
that pollution is having on the soil, groundwater, and coastline 
areas due to the encroachment of crude oil from oil drilling and 
the effects of the Persian Gulf War, and the same concern is 
also present in the delta region of the Nile River in Egypt over 
the pollution caused by the use of large amounts of agricultural 
chemicals. In those areas, it is necessary to study the 
environment and living organisms to get some idea of the degree 
of pollution, assess the danger for people to pollution, and 
then develop appropriate strategies to deal with those 
situations. 
  Japan has a long history of investigating environmental 
pollution, and the United States has enormous research 
capabilities to show the dangers of pollution. That being the 
case, the aim of this research project will be to survey the 
surface water, bottom sedimentation, groundwater, soil, and 
living organisms in both Kuwait and Egypt with respect to 
pollution caused by oil derivatives and chlorine compounds and 
to forecast the direction that pollution is taking in the 
future, along with evaluating the danger to human health, and to 
help both countries come up with some chemical means of dealing 
with those problems. 
  The research to be done this year in Kuwait will include 
joint research with the Kuwait Scientific Research Institute and 
will involve taking samples of the soil in the oil field areas 
and samples of the groundwater below the soil and ascertaining 
the degree of pollution caused by oil-related substances. The 
research in Egypt will be conducted jointly with Mansura 
University and will involve taking samples of the water, bottom 
sediment, fish, and other organic life from Lake Manzara at the 
mouth of the Nile River to get an idea of the actual status of 
organic chlorine-based chemical pollutants. Research will also 
be conducted jointly with the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency's Environmental Research Institute to do a study on what 
basic data is needed to evaluate the danger that chemical 
environmental pollution poses to human health. 



  1993 Research Projects from Global Environmental Research Cooperation 
Program 

Research               AIST Lab       Overseas Lab           Term 

1. Research on         NIMC, GIRI,    India: Central Arid    1990-93 
methods of greening    Hok            Zone Research 
using functional                      Institute; 
soil restoration                      Philippines: 
agents                                Industrial 
                                      Development Research 
                                      Institute 

2. Research on means   NIRE           Brazil: Bureau of      1990-93 
of preventing                         Mining 
widespread pollution 
in tropical rain 
forests brought on 
by mining 
development 

3. Research on means   NIRE, GIRI,    China: Baitan          1991-93 
of preventing acid     Hok            Scientific Research 
rain caused by                        Institute, Tohoku 
burning of coal                       Institute of 
                                      Engineering 

4. Research on water   GIRI, Osa      Philippines: Forest    1992-94 
purification using                    Product Research Lab 
simple activated 
charcoal 

5. Research on ways    NIRE           India: India           1992-94 
of predicting air                     University of 
pollution as it                       Science, India 
pertains to                           University of 
industrial sites                      Engineering 

6. Research on         NIMC           China: Sinkiang        1993-95 
treatment of wastes                   Industrial Design 
and recovery of                       Research Institute 
resources in leather 
industry 

7. Research on         GIRI, Chu      Brazil: Sao Paolo      1993-96 
assessing the                         University, Sao 
environmental impact                  Paolo Environmental 
of industrial wastes                  Improvement Research 
on tropical                           Institute 
coastlines 


  Research on methods of greening using functional soil 
restoration agent (1990-93) (NIMC, GIRI, Hok) 
  In southern Asian countries which have had rapid population 
growth, there is a noticeable increase in the level of 
deforestation and desertification due to human encroachment. The 
aim of this research will be to help preserve the global 
environment by restoring conditions in those areas so that the 
barren soil will grow plant life again, and to develop, in joint 
research with the Central Arid Zone Research Institute of India, 
an arid wasteland restoration agent having a water retention 
capability, a fertilizer retention capability, and be 
biocompatible. 
  The research this year will be to elucidate the retention 
and 
migration behavior of moisture and phosphates with respect to 
treating the barren soil with a restoration agent developed the 
year before to demonstrate the effectiveness of arid wasteland 
soil restoration agents. Further research will be done to 
elucidate the decomposition and dissolution of clay minerals and 
hydrophilic organic matter in order to study the stability of 
the arid wasteland soil restoration agent in the environment. 
(NIMC) 
  Making the earth green once again in areas that have been 
turned to desert by indiscriminate deforestation of tropical 
rain forests and expansion of farmlands is one of the important 
areas of work to preserve the global environment. 
  This will be a four-year research project conducted jointly 
with the Philippines, a country undergoing deforestation, whose 
main aim will be to develop a greening technology using a 
functional microcapsule that contains essential substances 
having soil regenerative properties. 
  The research this year will be done in Japan and will be to 
test manufacture the microcapsule by the spray-coating method 
and then to perform dissolution tests. The research done outside 
Japan will include a study of the manufacturing process as 
adapted to the Philippines based on research findings, and a 
microcapsule dissolution test on local soil. (GIRI, Hok) 
  Research on means of preventing widespread pollution in 
tropical forests that are brought on by mining developments 
(1990-93) (NIRE) 
  Due to the unique environment of the tropical forests, there 
are no technologies available at present to prevent pollution, 
brought on by mining developments, from taking place. For that 
reason, the ecosystem of plants and other living creatures in 
the tropical forests, which is necessary to maintaining the 
global environment, is in the process of being destroyed. In 
Brazil, companies employ a gold smelting method and mercury 
amalgam method. There is a great deal of concern in Brazil over 
the large quantities of mercury being used and the effects that 
the poor management of mercury have on the surrounding 
environment. For that reason, an appropriate solution must be 
found very quickly to prevent this type of pollution from 
spreading. 
  The aim of this project will be to develop a method of 
surveying local conditions based on previous surveys conducted 
on pollution by parties inside and outside the country, and to 
conduct a local survey on the Brazilian Amazon River region. The 
next step will be to conduct a joint analysis of that data and 
to try to find ways to prevent pollution. Research will also 
include as one of the pollution prevention measures a study on 
how to create a non-polluting smelting process. 
  The research this year will focus on studying local survey 
data on the effects mercury pollution has on the Tapajos River 
basin that branches off the Brazil-to-Paraguay Amazon River and 
analyze the results taken from that survey. Research will also 
include a study on the possibility of commercializing an 
alternative non-polluting smelting process. 
  Research on means of preventing acid rain caused by 
burning of coal (1991-93) (NIRE, GIRI, Hok) 
  Acid rain is becoming a serious problem in countries such as 
China. The main cause of acid rain is SO[.sub]x[/] and 
NO[.sub]x[/], which is produced by the burning of coal. With 
the expected increased use of coal in the future, it has become 
a matter of urgency that a technology be developed to prevent 
the production of those types of atmospheric pollutants. 
  That being the case, the purpose of this research will be to 
develop a method adapted to conditions in China that will remove 
the smoke emitted from the burning of coal, develop a clean 
preprocessing treatment for coal, and find a way of reducing 
SO[.sub]x[/] and NO[.sub]x[/] by switching to circulating 
fluidized bed combustion. 
  Specifically, researchers will try to keep production of the 
main culprits of acid rain, SO[.sub]x[/] and NO[.sub]x[/], 
to a minimum by using a typical type of Chinese coal, which 
researchers studied last year, and by following through on the 
research described below. 
  (1) Research on clean preprocessing treatment of coal 
  (a) Research in Japan 
  This research will involve trying to perfect a clean 
preprocessing treatment for coal by removing the inorganic 
sulfur by oil agglomeration of the carbon containing organic 
sulfur, the carbon containing inorganic sulfur, and the high ash 
content carbon, and by removing heteroelements of organic sulfur 
by treatment in a mild reducing atmosphere and hot water 
treatments. 
  (b) Research done outside Japan 
  This research will attempt to optimize the preprocessing 
treatment by conducting combustion tests on clean-burning coal 
to elucidate the optimum conditions for combustion. 
  (2) Research on reduction of SO[.sub]x[/]/NO[.sub]x[/] 
by circulating fluidized bed combustion 
  (a) Research in Japan 
  This research will attempt to perfect a method for 
across-the-board reduction of SO[.sub]x[/] and 
NO[.sub]x[/] by trying to find an optimum desulfurization and 
low NO[.sub]x[/] combustion method in circulating fluidized 
bed combustion of high-calorie Chinese coal. 
  (b) Research done outside Japan 
  This research will involve a study to find the optimum 
desulfurization and low NO[.sub]x[/] combustion method with 
respect to low-calorie Chinese coal with high sulfur content in 
order to elucidate the optimum conditions for combustion in a 
circulating fluidized bed boiler. 
  Research on water purification using simplified 
activated charcoal (1992-94) (GIRI, Osa) 
  The degradation of water quality in Southeast Asian 
countries, such as the Philippines, due to indiscriminate 
deforestation, generally unregulated discharge of effluent, and 
the discharge of untreated industrial effluent is becoming a 
source of great concern. Accordingly, Japan has been asked to 
provide the technical support in developing and building a 
simple and inexpensive water purification system for the 
Philippines that would be used to guard against the pollution 
described above and to provide a safe high-quality and 
intermediate-quality water supply. That being the case, 
researchers have started work developing and building a 
charcoal-based water purification system of the kind that has 
been popular in Japan. 
  More specifically, this research will attempt to perfect 
effective uses for simplified activated charcoal (sophisticated 
charcoal with activated carbon features) with the aim of 
protecting the water supply in the Philippines. Researchers will 
strive to develop a simple and inexpensive water purification 
system that uses activated charcoal to improve the quality of 
river water, waste water, and industrial effluent. Along with 
that, researchers will also try to find more effective uses for 
unused timber resources in the Philippines and improve the local 
technologies for global environmental preservation. 
<H5>  Specific Research </H5>
  Researchers will try to develop a manufacturing process for 
simplified activated charcoal by trying catalytic carbonization 
of various types of wood and investigating the relationship 
between the internal structure and function (decomposition of 
organic matter, and adsorption/desorption of heavy metals) of 
the simplified activated charcoal obtained. Meanwhile, research 
will also be done in the Philippines to assess the features of 
carbon as simplified activated charcoal by performing 
carbonization tests on locally obtained wood and using data 
obtained in Japan. 
  Research on ways of predicting air pollution as it 
pertains to industrial sites (1992-94) (NIRE) 
  There is some concern over the possible global effects of 
industrial activities taking place due to the industrialization 
of South Asian countries such as India. Moreover, the noticeable 
lack of any pollution prevention policies and the degree of air 
pollution caused by toxic industrial emissions makes it 
incumbent that a quick solution be found. This research will 
attempt to develop ways of predicting air pollution for the 
specific meteorological conditions of India and Southern Asia 
based on methods developed earlier in Japan for preventing 
atmospheric pollution brought on by industrial pollution. 
Moreover, it is essential that this method of predicting air 
pollution be able to deal with various meteorological conditions 
and emission sources so that it can be used for other developing 
countries. 
  Researchers will investigate the behavior and sources of 
acidic air contaminants in southern Asia such as sulfur dioxide 
gas and nitrous oxide. As part of that research, scientists will 
perform a diffusion test using local emission sources to 
elucidate the characteristics of air pollution in southern Asia, 
and using that data develop a method of predicting air pollution. 
  In 1993, researchers will continue the diffusion experiment 
from the previous year using local emission sources in an 
attempt to gather more data, and along with that will 
investigate the relationship between parameters and 
meteorological conditions in an atmospheric diffusion model for 
the dry season of India by elucidating the accumulated 
meteorological data from the diffusion tests done in the 
previous year. 
  Research on treatment of waste and recovery of 
resources in leather industry (1993-95) (NIMC) 
  Raising cattle is the main business in Sinkiang Province in 
China, thus the leather industry plays a very important role in 
that area. In recent years, however, China has complained of 
serious environmental problems, and one of the most serious 
problems is finding a way to treat the effluent from the leather 
industry. The effluent from the leather industry contains 
chrome, surface acting agents, lipids, proteins, and calcium 
salts, and cannot be purified simply by biological means. For 
that reason, the Sinkiang Industrial Design Research Institute 
has asked the National Institute for Materials and Chemicals to 
participate in joint research for the purpose of introducing a 
new waste water treatment technology. 
  The most difficult problem to deal with in the effluent 
being 
discharged by the leather industry is the chromium ions. 
Chromium ions are by no means the only toxic substances 
contained in the waste water, but they themselves are almost 
impossible to treat biologically when present in effluent. The 
aim of this project will be to study methods of treating the 
surface acting agents, oil components, and sulfur, which are the 
other toxic materials contained in the effluent, with the idea 
of removing the chromium ions in the effluent. In order to 
remove chromium ions, there is a question of cost that must be 
answered with regard to the precipitation treatment based on pH 
regulation, but it will be almost impossible to remove all the 
chromium ions, particularly when there are proteins in the 
effluent. The research in this project will primarily concern 
the adsorptive removal of chromium ions by a low-cost inorganic 
ion exchanger. 
  The research this year will include the adsorptive removal 
of 
chromium ions by titanium oxide and synthetic materials in 
particular and perfecting a way of synthesizing an optimum 
titanium oxide. Researchers will also conduct the same research 
on silicon oxide and make a comparison between commercial and 
synthetic products. A study will also be done on precipitation 
treatments in order to elucidate the problem areas in 
precipitation of actual effluent and to try to improve that 
method. 
  Research on assessing the environmental impact of 
industrial wastes on tropical coastlines (1993-93) (GIRI, 
Chu) 
  As industry has grown in Brazil, the quality of water along 
the coastlines of the country has been seriously affected by the 
increase in industrial effluent. The aim of this research will 
be to elucidate the marine structures that are characteristic of 
tropical coastlines from a physical, chemical, and biological 
perspective, and then show the effects that industrial effluent 
have on water quality. By doing that, researchers will try to 
perfect a method of evaluating the effects that industrial 
effluent have on water quality along tropical coastlines, 
thereby contributing to healthy industrial growth while 
maintaining good environmental conditions. 
  In Japan, a highly accurate method of evaluating the effects 
that industrial effluent have on the coastlines of temperate 
Japan has already been developed, but that method is not 
appropriate for the shoreline areas of Brazil. That being the 
case, researchers will try to ascertain what types of chemical 
substances and biological life exist within the currents and 
ocean waters considered part of the tropical coastline of 
Brazil, and then determine what modifications have to be made to 
the method developed in Japan for measuring biological effects 
so that it can be used for the coastline environment of Brazil. 
Additional research will include a study on ways of making 
improvements to the coastline environment in Brazil. 
  The research this year will focus on elucidating the water 
quality and current characteristics along the Brazilian coast. 



  1993 Specific Key Research Cooperation Program 

Research                AIST Lab       Overseas Lab          Term 

1. Research on          MEL            Singapore: South      1993-97 
sophisticated                          Sea Engineering 
metal-based                            School 
composites 


  Research on highly functional metal-based composites 
(1993-77) (MEL) 
  The industrial fields that deal with automotive mechanical 
elements and precision parts for electrical and electronic 
machinery are making a lot of progress in developing highly 
sophisticated metal-based composites that are used to make 
things lighter. 
  Singapore is a country trying to develop many of its own 
industries and has a growing need for composite materials. 
  The aim of this project will be to jointly develop a 
technology for manufacturing highly sophisticated metal-based 
composites and a technology for molding complex composite forms 
and microforms. 
  The research this year will include using a powder 
metallurgical method to design a metal-based composite 
exhibiting high relative strength and stiffness. 
  Using extrusion molding, HIP molding, and solidification 
molding processes such as impact molding, researchers will try 
to identify what the optimum conditions are for molding 
metal-based composites of high relative strength and stiffness. 
Researchers will also study heat treatment conditions in which 
metal-based composite of high relative stiffness exhibit 
superplasticity. 
  Using a powdered metal injection molding method that molds 
metal-based composite into complex forms and microforms, 
scientists will then do moldings tests to study the 
solidification molding process and molding conditions for a 
matrix made of metal-based composites. 
  Using the same method, scientists will then perform molding 
tests to study the solidification molding process and molding 
conditions for an abrasion-resistant metal-based composite. 
<H5>  (25) Research Cooperation Project Promotion Program </H5>
  This is a program that is basically designed to solve many 
of 
the basic problems shared by developing countries, which include 
the economic and social problems that developing countries face, 
by marshalling together the expertise of the national research 
laboratories in Japan with that of academic institutes and 
industrial research labs for the purpose of implementing 
comprehensive joint research with developing countries from the 
basic to the applied levels of research. 



  1993 Research Cooperation Program Research Projects 

Research             AIST Lab             Overseas Lab         Term 

1. Research on       ETL, International   China: Nanken        1987-94 
machine              Center for           Technology Center; 
translation system   Information          Thailand: NECTEC; 
to handle            Cooperation          Malaysia: Malaysia 
translation                               School of 
between                                   Engineering; 
neighboring                               Indonesia: 
countries [machine                        University of 
translation]                              Indonesia 

2. Research on       GIRI, Shikoku, New   China: China         1989-94 
technologies for     Energy &amp;         Institute of 
recovering           Industrial           Science, Marine 
valuable resources   Technology           Research 
from brackish        Development          Institute; Mexico: 
water [brackish      Organization         Bureau of Mines 
water]                                    and Resources 

3. Collaborative     NIBH, New Energy     Thailand: Science    1993-98 
research on          &amp; Industrial     and Technology 
sustaining and       Technology           Research 
preserving           Development          Institute, 
biological           Organization         Biotechnology and 
diversity                                 Genetic 
[biological                               Engineering 
diversity]                                Research Lab, et 
                                          al.; Indonesia: 
                                          Bandong University 
                                          of Engineering, 
                                          Bogoul University 
                                          of Engineering 


  Research on machine translation system to handle 
translation between neighboring countries (ETL) 
<H5>  Objective </H5>
  One of the major impediments in the way of transferring 
technologies from Japan to neighboring countries is the almost 
impossible task of mastering the Japanese language. That being 
the case, the aim of this project will be to develop a machine 
translation system to facilitate technical and cultural exchange 
between Japan and its neighboring countries and effectively 
transfer computer technologies. 
<H5>  Particulars </H5>
  This will be a national research project and involve the use 
of the world's first intermediate language system as a means of 
translating multiple languages. This system will be designed to 
handle Japanese, Chinese, Thai, Malaysian, and Indonesian. Using 
an intermediate language, it will analyze what has been said and 
translate this from the intermediate language to any of the 
languages mentioned above. 
  The work to be done in 1993 will be to make language 
descriptions more specific in terms of operative concepts. The 
research will try to expand and improve basic concepts, do a 
detailed analysis of the relationship with objects based on 
expanded usages and try to make the concepts even more specific. 
Researchers will also try to make the look-up system on usages 
even more specific, and design the system for general use. The 
project will also include a performance evaluation of the 
environment in which the prototype machine translation system is 
being developed as well as an evaluation of the intermediate 
stage system. 
  The research with other participating countries will involve 
continuing the cooperative research on an intermediate language 
by transferring researchers back and forth between countries, 
improving operative concepts in the intermediate language, and 
doing evaluations on each of the languages. 
  Research on technologies for recovering valuable 
resources from brackish water (GIRI, Shikoku) 
  The aim of this research cooperation project will be to 
assist Mexico and China in developing natural resources by 
conducting R&amp;D on a comprehensive system for systematically 
recovering valuable resources such as lithium, barium, bromine, 
and boron that can be found in the brackish salt manufacturing 
waters along the coast of Mexico and in the brackish natural gas 
waters and salt lakes of China. 
<H5>  Objective </H5>
  Research the following items in 1993. 
  (1) Research done in Japan 
  Do a study of column adsorption and desorption methods using 
an anionic adsorbent 
  Do a study of high-purity methods of separating and refining 
lithium as an element technology of lithium adsorptive 
extraction system. 
  (2) Research done outside Japan 
  Do a local survey on the factors needed to make an economic 
assessment of a recovery system for valuable resources 
  Collaborative research on sustaining and preserving 
biological diversity (NIBH) 
<H5>  Objective </H5>
  A great variety of living plants and animals inhabit the 
tropical areas of the earth, but those areas have been losing a 
major portion of their biological diversity in recent years due 
to tropical forests being cut down. The genetic resources found 
in the biological life forms of tropical areas is considered 
extremely important in the field of biotechnology. The aim of 
this project will be to conduct collaborative research on a 
technology for segregating, breeding, and preserving 
microorganisms and on ways to evaluate useful functions in order 
to enable the developing countries themselves to gather, 
preserve, and sustain the bioresources of those tropical areas. 
<H5>  Particulars </H5>
  Researchers will survey the current status of research in 
those countries on the diversity of biological life in tropical 
areas, and will discuss the specifics of research collaboration. 
Moreover, in Japan, researchers will try to segregate, breed, 
and assess the characteristics of useful microorganisms using 
specimens of microorganisms taken from tropical areas. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-44915 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpjst010___94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-JST-94-010 </AU>
JPRS 
Science &amp; Technology 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Japan AIST Research Laboratory Plans </ABS>
<DATE1>   31 October 1993 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     1993 AIST Laboratory Research Plans </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    1993 AIST Laboratory Research Plans </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Miscellaneous AIST R&amp;D Plans </H4>

<F P=102> 94FE0219F Tokyo AGENCY OF INDUSTRIAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
in Japanese 31 Oct 93 pp 430-442 </F>

<F P=103> 94FE0219F </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo AGENCY OF INDUSTRIAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
in Japanese 31 Oct 93 pp 430-442 </F>

<F P=105> Japanese </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

  [Text] 
<H5>  1992 Research Projects Funded by the Special Coordination </H5>
Fund for Promotion of Science and Technology 
<H5>  I. General Research </H5>
<H5>  1. Basic and leading-edge science and technology research </H5>
projects 
  (1) Substances and materials 
  (new research) 


    -  International joint research on developing a model for 
predicting the characteristics of advanced materials 
  -  Basic 
research on producing materials in a short time frame using a 
microgravity environment 
  -  Basic research on creating intelligent 
materials through manipulation of atoms and molecules 


    (ongoing research) 


    -  Research to develop technologies for generating, 
measuring, and utilizing extremely high vacuums 
  -  Research to 
develop technologies for generating and utilizing vacuum 
ultraviolet light 
  -  Basic research on ways to use host/guest 
reactions to create new functional materials 
  -  Basic research on 
material interconnections by forming ideal surfaces 
  -  Research on 
basic technologies concerned with non-destructive methods of 
quantitatively and intelligently evaluating materials and 
structures with high reliability 


    (second phase research) 


    -  Research on the measurement, evaluation, and control of 
element functions in substances and materials at microscopic 
level 
  -  Research on building data bases for R&amp;D on 
superconductive 
materials 


    (2) Life Sciences 
  (new research) 


    -  Research to develop ways to externally reveal 
abnormalities in brain functions 
  -  Research to develop basic 
technologies for the purpose of elucidating 
bionanostructures 


    (ongoing research) 


    -  Research to develop basic technologies for elucidating 
immune response mechanisms 
  -  Research on development of genetic 
engineering 
  -  Research to develop non-destructive means of 
performing measurements at the biomolecular level with high 
sensitivity and resolution 
  -  Research on development of new plant 
experiments 
  -  Research on basic technologies for elucidating the 
infiltration and metastasizing mechanism of cancer 
cells 
  -  Research on development of human gene mapping 
system 
  -  Research to develop basic technologies that elucidate the 
structure and function of sugar chains 
  -  Research on development 
of new animal experiments 


    (second phase research) 


    -  Research on developing methods of analyzing and 
controlling bio-information transmission mechanisms 


    (3) Global science and technology 
  (new research) 


    -  Development of basic technologies for upgrading remote 
sensing methods using microwave sensor data 
  -  International joint 
research to elucidate mechanism by which matter circulates in 
remote ocean areas 


    (ongoing research) 


    -  International joint research on atmospheric, oceanic, 
and climatic fluctuations in the Pacific Ocean 
  -  International 
joint research on elucidating desertification 
mechanism 
  -  International joint research to set up general 
observation system to elucidate major ocean 
circulations 
  -  International joint research on interaction of 
atmosphere, hydrosphere, and biosphere at the North Pole 


    (4) Other basic and leading-edge science and technology 
research projects 
  (new research) 


    -  Basic research to assist creativity in intelligent 
manufacturing 


    (ongoing research) 


    -  Research to develop basic sensor fusion 
technologies 
  -  Research on building self-organizing data-base 
system to assist R&amp;D creativity 


    (second phase research) 


    -  Research on fuzzy systems and applications in 
human/natural systems 


<H5>    2. Domestic and social sciences and technologies </H5>
  (ongoing research) 


    -  Research to upgrade methods for dealing with snowfall 
accumulations 
  -  General research to upgrade earthquake prediction 
methods for the Tokyo metropolitan area 
  -  International joint 
research to develop methods for forecasting landslides in 
volcanically active areas 


<H5>    II. Basic Human Research </H5>
<H5>  1. Interministerial research </H5>
  Research in which international and interministerial 
research 
groups are formed around research leaders at national research 
laboratories 
  (ongoing research) 


    -  Basic research on using PET to analyze information 
transmission mechanisms inside the brain 
  -  Research on 
characteristics of electromagnetic radiation as warning signal 
of tectonic destruction 
  -  Development and application of methods 
for measuring the abundance and isotropic carriers of elements 
that exist inside microscopic specimens 
  -  Research to develop 
system for introducing genes to specific loci 
  -  Elucidation of 
specialized regulating mechanism and species specific properties 
associated with formation of animal immune systems 
  -  Research on 
elucidation of higher RNA structures and functions and applied 
research on synthetic ribozymes 
  -  Research on functional materials 
with higher biological compatibility 
  -  Research on mechanism by 
which substances migrate in a free surface 
  -  Basic research to 
elucidate mechanism of high carbon coordination number 
  -  Research 
on analyzing and evaluating the effects of intensive cancer 
treatments 
  -  Biochemical research on new physiologically active 
factors contributing to mechanism which regulates 
circulation 
  -  Research on elucidating structure and function of 
hormone bonding proteins by developing high sensitivity analysis 
techniques 
  -  Research on elucidating structure and information 
processing mechanism of the brain/nervous systems in 
invertebrates 
  -  Research on ways to measure and evaluate thermal 
properties of advanced film and fiber materials 
  -  Research on 
magneto-optical effects of non-equilibrium substances 


<H5>    2. Domestic and regional mobile research </H5>
  Research in which regional research groups are formed around 
regional core organizers based on the collaboration of 
government, industry, and academia 
  (new research) 


    -  Ecological landscape research on catchment basin 
management in the context of preserving higher natural 
ecosystems (Hokkaido) 
  -  Research on using biotechnology to develop 
useful resources from natural ecosystems of Toyama 
(Toyama) 
  -  Research on cleaning up the urban environment starting 
with water for domestic uses 


    (ongoing research) 


    -  Research on technologies for measuring and finding uses 
for bioradicals 
  -  General R&amp;D on specific ceramic structures 
formed by colloid processing 
  -  Research to elucidate 
mangrove-based ecosystems 
  -  Research to upgrade methods of 
monitoring the lake and marsh environments of Lake Biwa and 
improving water quality (Shiga Prefecture) 
  -  Basic research on 
creating intelligent inorganic compounds and organic 
composites 
  -  Research on elucidating the drought-resistance 
features in plants and their application to desert greening 


<H5>    III. Key International Research Exchange </H5>
  Convening international workshops for the purpose of 
promoting the exchange international research based on 
cooperation agreements in science and technology 
<H5>  IV. Key International Joint Research Projects </H5>
  International joint research at individual research 
laboratories based on cooperation agreements in science and 
technology 
<H5>  V. Interdisciplinary Research Exchange </H5>
  Promoting areas of debate for the purpose of setting off 
interactions between researchers working in different fields in 
government, industry, and academia both inside and outside Japan 
<H5>  VI. Key Basic Research </H5>
  Basic research at national research laboratories for the 
purpose of creating the seeds for new innovative technologies 
<H5>  VII. Surveys and Analyses </H5>
<H5>  1. Basic surveys for drafting science and technology policies </H5>


    -  Survey on promotion of key policies 


    (new surveys) 


    -  Science and technology activities oriented toward the 
next century 
  -  Cultivating/ensuring supply of technical 
specialists 
  -  Creating a competitive research environment 
  -  Policies 
for strengthening/beefing-up cooperation in science and 
technology among Asian-Pacific countries 
  -  Current status of U.S. 
government supported R&amp;D 


    (ongoing surveys) 


    -  Survey of policies promoting joint use of research 
equipment and facilities at national research 
laboratories 
  -  Surveys promoting basic sciences and R&amp;D in key 
fields 


    (new surveys) 


    -  Future direction of R&amp;D in leading-edge basic science 
and technology 


    (ongoing surveys) 


    -  Survey on direction and growth of technology in 
Japan 
  -  Survey on interdisciplinary research in natural sciences 
and human and social sciences 


<H5>    2. Surveys on selection of general research topics </H5>
  (new surveys) 


    -  Development of functional conversion materials by 
forming gradient structures 
  -  Basic survey on ecomaterials for the 
purpose of protecting the global environment and making a more 
relaxed work environment 
  -  Survey on basic technologies for 
developing photon sensing for extreme environments and the uses 
thereof 
  -  Survey on molecular design and precision synthesis of 
pharmacologically active substances 
  -  Survey to elucidate the 
energy and substance fluctuations in the oceans 
  -  Survey on 
developing basic technologies for revolutionizing earth 
observation methods 


<H5>    VIII. Emergency Research During Fiscal Year </H5>
  Responding to emergency situations that occur during fiscal 
year (includes emergency commissioned research) 



  Research Projects With AIST Participation 

Research                        Term             Particulars 

I. General Research 1. Basic    1992-94 (Phase   In order to ensure the 
and leading-edge science and    I)               reliability of advanced 
technology                                       materials having outstanding 
(Substances/Materials)                           functions and 
1--International joint                           characteristics, this 
research to develop models                       research will attempt to 
which exhibit characteristics                    elucidate the physical and 
of advanced materials                            chemical phenomena that form 
                                                 the basis of those 
                                                 characteristics, and along 
                                                 with that construct a model 
                                                 that predicts the material 
                                                 characteristics. 

2--Basic research on            1992-94 (Phase   Using a drop tower which 
producing materials in short    1)               lends itself to producing a 
time periods in microgravity                     workable microgravity 
environment                                      environment on earth both in 
                                                 terms of economic factors 
                                                 and operability, this 
                                                 project will attempt to (1) 
                                                 research technologies that 
                                                 involve short-term use of a 
                                                 microgravity environment, 
                                                 and (2) do basic research on 
                                                 creating materials involving 
                                                 short-term use of a 
                                                 microgravity in order to 
                                                 come up with new materials 
                                                 exhibiting a quality and 
                                                 functionality not previously 
                                                 seen before. 

3--Basic research on creating   1992-94 (Phase   With the increased demand 
intelligent materials through   I)               for more diversity and 
manipulation of atoms and                        sophistication in materials, 
molecules                                        and to meet the demand for 
                                                 developing advanced 
                                                 intelligent materials, i.e. 
                                                 those materials which 
                                                 respond intelligently to 
                                                 environmental conditions, 
                                                 this research will focus on 
                                                 (1) the use of atom spin 
                                                 coordination and structural 
                                                 control, (2) the use of spin 
                                                 coordination in chemical 
                                                 reactions, (3) the use of 
                                                 hemoprotein, and (4) 
                                                 developing basic 
                                                 technologies for creating 
                                                 intelligent materials 
                                                 through the use of polymers. 


4--Research to develop          1993-95 (Phase   In order to perfect a 
technologies for generating,    II)              technology for generating, 
measuring, and utilizing                         measuring, and utilizing 
extremely high vacuums                           extreme high vacuums, which 
                                                 will be indispensable in the 
                                                 development of future 
                                                 materials used in science 
                                                 and technology fields, i.e. 
                                                 superlattices, this research 
                                                 will concentrate on (1) 
                                                 fabricating an advanced 
                                                 super-high vacuum pump and 
                                                 vacuum materials, (2) 
                                                 fabricating an advanced 
                                                 cold-cathode vacuum gauge 
                                                 and laser-beam excitation 
                                                 vacuum gauge, and (3) 
                                                 fabricating and applying an 
                                                 advanced drive mechanism and 
                                                 advanced surface properties. 


5--Research to develop          1993-95 (Phase   Vacuum ultraviolet light 
technologies for generating     II)              (wavelength: 2 to 200 nm) is 
and utilizing vacuum                             expected to form the 
ultraviolet light                                foundation for raising the 
                                                 technological level of many 
                                                 science and technology 
                                                 fields, i.e., substances and 
                                                 materials, information and 
                                                 electronics, and life 
                                                 sciences. In that context, 
                                                 this joint research project 
                                                 will focus on (1) developing 
                                                 a technology for generating 
                                                 vacuum ultraviolet light, 
                                                 (2) developing optical 
                                                 elements, and (3) developing 
                                                 a basic technology for 
                                                 utilizing vacuum ultraviolet 
                                                 light. 

6--Basic research on ways to    1990-92 (Phase   In order to create materials 
use host/guest reactions to     I)               with the same structure and 
create new functional                            shape but a completely 
materials                                        different composition, or 
                                                 materials with the same 
                                                 composition but a completely 
                                                 different shape and 
                                                 structure, and perfect a 
                                                 basic technology for 
                                                 creating new functional 
                                                 materials and substances, 
                                                 this research will focus on 
                                                 creating materials by (1) 
                                                 composition conversion 
                                                 technology, and (2) 
                                                 composition-structure 
                                                 conversion technology using 
                                                 ion exchange host-guest 
                                                 reactions. 

7--Basic research on material   1990-92 (Phase   In order to develop a 
interconnections by creating    I)               process by which solid 
ideal surfaces                                   interfaces can be obtained 
                                                 with a given 
                                                 structure/function by 
                                                 synthesizing a method of 
                                                 fabricating and assessing 
                                                 surfaces and interfaces at 
                                                 the atomic level, this 
                                                 research will attempt (1) to 
                                                 develop theories and 
                                                 evaluate ideal surfaces and 
                                                 interfaces, and (2) create 
                                                 interfaces by means of ideal 
                                                 surface control. 

8--Research on basic            1991-93 (Phase   In order to perfect a basic 
technologies concerned with     I)               technology for quantitative, 
non-destructive methods of                       intelligent, non-destructive 
quantitatively and                               methods for evaluating 
intelligently evaluating                         materials and structures 
materials and structures with                    requiring high reliability, 
high reliability                                 this research will focus on 
                                                 (1) quantitative, ultrasonic 
                                                 non-destructive measurement 
                                                 methods, (2) mathematical 
                                                 models based on elastic wave 
                                                 theories, (3) applied 
                                                 artificial intelligence, and 
                                                 (4) development of prototype 
                                                 system for common board 
                                                 technology. 

9--Research on the              1992-93 (Phase   With a lot of attention 
measurement, evaluation, and    II)              focused on methods for 
control of element functions                     directly evaluating the 
in substances and materials                      function of materials and 
at the microscopic level                         substances themselves at the 
                                                 microscopic level, this 
                                                 research will focus on 
                                                 measuring and evaluating (1) 
                                                 surface element functions, 
                                                 (2) particulate and 
                                                 interface element functions, 
                                                 and (3) quantum size 
                                                 functions. The aim will be 
                                                 to develop a new method for 
                                                 measuring and evaluating 
                                                 element functions in very 
                                                 small microscopic areas 
                                                 while trying to improve 
                                                 advanced electronic, ion, 
                                                 and optical methods. 

10--Research on constructing    1992-93 (Phase   It is a matter of great 
data bases for use in R&amp;D   II)              urgency to effectively and 
on superconductive materials                     efficiently perfect a 
                                                 unified technology for 
                                                 evaluating superconductivity 
                                                 properties and quickly relay 
                                                 that data to parties inside 
                                                 and outside Japan, so the 
                                                 purpose of this research 
                                                 will be to (1) standardize 
                                                 an evaluation and 
                                                 measurement technology for 
                                                 all the properties in 
                                                 superconductive materials, 
                                                 and (2) develop a prototype 
                                                 data base. 

(Life Sciences) 1--Research     1992-94 (Phase   This research will attempt 
to develop a basic technology   I)               to develop an experimental 
for elucidating                                  system that will include 
bionanostructures                                direct observation by 
                                                 scanning microscope as a 
                                                 basic technology for 
                                                 elucidating the mechanism by 
                                                 which functions are 
                                                 exhibited at the nanometer 
                                                 level in a biomolecular 
                                                 complex made up of proteins 
                                                 with the aim being to 
                                                 uncover important functions 
                                                 in living organisms. 

2--Research on development of   1991-93 (Phase   In order to develop basic 
non-destructive means of        II)              technologies for performing 
performing measurements at                       non-destructive measurements 
the biomolecular level with                      of biological tissues and 
high sensitivity and                             substances at the 
resolution                                       biomolecular level, this 
                                                 research will concern itself 
                                                 with (1) developing a 
                                                 real-time method of 
                                                 measurement based on optical 
                                                 science and technology, and 
                                                 (2) creating a more advanced 
                                                 NMR technology using stable 
                                                 isotopes. 

3--Research on development of   1990-92 (Phase   In order to systematically 
new plant experiments           I)               elucidate plant functions 
                                                 and create an applied 
                                                 technology base, this 
                                                 research will focus on 
                                                 developing new experiments 
                                                 whose aim will be to (1) 
                                                 elucidate generation and 
                                                 specialization mechanisms, 
                                                 (2) elucidate environmental 
                                                 response mechanisms, and (3) 
                                                 elucidate genes and genome. 

4--Research on basic            1990-92 (Phase   With the aim of developing a 
technologies for elucidating    I)               basic technology for 
the infiltration and                             elucidating the 
metastasizing mechanism of                       infiltrating, metastasizing, 
cancer cells                                     and secondary tumor forming 
                                                 mechanisms of cancer cells, 
                                                 this research will focus on 
                                                 how to analyze the (1) 
                                                 infiltration mechanism of 
                                                 cancer cells, (2) metastasis 
                                                 mechanism of cancer cells, 
                                                 and (3) formation mechanism 
                                                 of secondary tumors, and try 
                                                 to come up with basic 
                                                 knowledge and a technology 
                                                 for effectively controlling 
                                                 those processes. 

5--Research to develop basic    1991-93 (Phase   With the aim of developing a 
technologies for elucidating    I)               common basic technology for 
the structure and function of                    elucidating the 
sugar chains                                     biosynthesizing function and 
                                                 mechanism by which functions 
                                                 are identified in sugar 
                                                 chains, this research will 
                                                 focus on the (1) development 
                                                 of a technology for 
                                                 analyzing sugar chain 
                                                 functions that is linked to 
                                                 genetic engineering, (2) 
                                                 development of a technology 
                                                 for reconfiguring, 
                                                 recombining, and modifying 
                                                 sugar chains, and (3) 
                                                 development of structural 
                                                 analysis technology for 
                                                 complex sugar chains. 

(Global Science and             1992-94 (Phase   There has been a strong 
Technology) 1--Research to      I)               desire for more 
develop basic technologies                       sophistication and diversity 
for upgrading remote sensing                     in the use of remote sensing 
methods using microwave                          in the field of global 
sensor data                                      environmental monitoring 
                                                 involving the use of various 
                                                 optical and microwave 
                                                 sensors in satellites, 
                                                 therefore, this research 
                                                 will attempt to (1) develop 
                                                 a multiple-purpose remote 
                                                 sensing technology, (2) hold 
                                                 joint international R&amp;D 
                                                 on environmental 
                                                 fluctuations in the tropical 
                                                 regions of the earth, and 
                                                 (3) upgrade the use of 
                                                 remote sensing in monitoring 
                                                 the oceans. 

2--International joint          1992-94 (Phase   With the aim being to 
research to elucidate the       I)               increase biological 
mechanism by which matter                        productivity, and to 
circulates in remote ocean                       elucidate the mechanism by 
areas                                            which substances circulate 
                                                 in the oceans, this research 
                                                 will be conducted mainly 
                                                 around the East China Sea 
                                                 and will try to (1) 
                                                 elucidate the process by 
                                                 which substances derived 
                                                 from land and biological 
                                                 sources circulate in the 
                                                 oceans, and (2) will involve 
                                                 joint international research 
                                                 to elucidate the 
                                                 sedimentation and transport 
                                                 processes along the ocean 
                                                 bottom. 

3--International joint          1989-92 (Phase   Desert regions comprise 
research on elucidating         I)               one-third of the total land 
desertification mechanism                        area of the earth and are 
                                                 growing at the rate of 
                                                 60,000 square kilometers 
                                                 each year, thus there have 
                                                 been demands made to inquire 
                                                 into this phenomenon from a 
                                                 geoscientific perspective 
                                                 and develop basic 
                                                 technologies to stop this 
                                                 from occurring. Therefore, 
                                                 in cooperative joint 
                                                 research with China, this 
                                                 project aims to (1) 
                                                 elucidate the history of 
                                                 desert formation, (2) 
                                                 analyze the desertification 
                                                 status-fluctuation 
                                                 mechanism, (3) elucidate the 
                                                 relation between 
                                                 desertification and climate, 
                                                 (4) elucidate the ecosystem 
                                                 maintenance/recovery 
                                                 mechanism in semi-arid 
                                                 areas, and (5) simulate the 
                                                 desertification mechanism in 
                                                 order to prevent its 
                                                 occurrence. 

4--International joint          1990-92 (Phase   In order to elucidate the 
research to set up general      I)               major influences the oceans 
monitoring system to                             are believed to be having on 
elucidate major ocean                            global climatic changes, 
circulations                                     particularly major ocean 
                                                 circulations extending 
                                                 across wide areas deep under 
                                                 the oceans, these activities 
                                                 will be part of an 
                                                 international joint research 
                                                 project known as WOCE (World 
                                                 Ocean Circulation 
                                                 Experiment) and will focus 
                                                 on (1) using observation and 
                                                 analysis to elucidate the 
                                                 actual condition of major 
                                                 ocean circulations, (2) 
                                                 major ocean circulation 
                                                 research by mathematical 
                                                 models, and (3) observation 
                                                 systems needed for 
                                                 elucidating major ocean 
                                                 circulations. 

5--International joint          1990-92 (Phase   With the objective being to 
research on interaction of      I)               observe North Pole regions 
atmosphere, hydrosphere, and                     believed to be most notably 
biosphere at the North Pole                      affected by global 
                                                 fluctuations, i.e. global 
                                                 warming and ozone layer 
                                                 depletion, this research 
                                                 will involve (1) monitoring 
                                                 various atmospheric 
                                                 phenomena, (2) monitoring 
                                                 processes by which heat, 
                                                 water, and materials are 
                                                 transported in the 
                                                 hydrosphere, (3) elucidation 
                                                 of climatic and 
                                                 environmental fluctuations 
                                                 from the ice floor, (4) 
                                                 ascertaining plant 
                                                 conditions, and analyzing 
                                                 and evaluating their effects 
                                                 on the hydrosphere, and (5) 
                                                 predicting and evaluating 
                                                 global-scale changes. 

(Other Basic/Leading-Edge       1992-94 (Phase   In order to support 
Science and Technology)         I)               individual and 
1--Basic research to assist                      organizational creativity in 
creativity in intelligent                        intelligent manufacturing 
manufacturing operations                         activities in scientific and 
                                                 technical fields, this 
                                                 project will involve basic 
                                                 research on (1) a system 
                                                 that supports individual 
                                                 creativity based on the 
                                                 knowledge and 
                                                 characteristics of the 
                                                 individual, (2) a system 
                                                 that effectively supports 
                                                 organizational creativity in 
                                                 the R&amp;D process from the 
                                                 management level down, and 
                                                 (3) a system to support 
                                                 creative numerical 
                                                 simulation. 

2--Research to develop basic    1991-93 (Phase   In order to perfect sensor 
sensor fusion technologies      I)               fusion (integration and 
                                                 merging of information from 
                                                 multiple sensors), which is 
                                                 indispensable in the 
                                                 automation and technical 
                                                 advancement of various 
                                                 equipment such as 
                                                 intelligent robots and 
                                                 medical equipment and apply 
                                                 the basic structure thereof, 
                                                 this research will focus on 
                                                 (1) basic structure of 
                                                 sensor fusion, (2) sensor 
                                                 fusion engineering, and (3) 
                                                 basic medicine tracing 
                                                 technology, which is a 
                                                 typical use of sensor 
                                                 fusion. 

3--Research on building         1991-93 (Phase   In order to create an 
self-organizing data-base       I)               information system with 
system to assist R&amp;D                         highly developed human 
creativity                                       interfaces that enable 
                                                 multi-variable indeterminate 
                                                 information to be stored, 
                                                 managed, referenced, and 
                                                 presented in an innovative 
                                                 visual manner to 
                                                 researchers, and a system 
                                                 operation that does not 
                                                 become a burden to the 
                                                 researcher, this research 
                                                 will concentrate on (1) 
                                                 information resourcing 
                                                 formats, (2) basic 
                                                 self-organizing data base 
                                                 systems, and (3) advanced 
                                                 data base applications. 

4--Research on fuzzy-logic      1992-93 (Phase   This research will have 
systems and applications in     II)              great benefits for human 
human and natural systems                        society and industry. It has 
                                                 to do with "fuzzy" logic 
                                                 system applications that are 
                                                 able to deal quantitatively 
                                                 with previously 
                                                 unquantifiable ambiguous 
                                                 information originating 
                                                 primarily from human beings. 


2. Domestic and social          1991-92 (Phase   In order to elucidate the 
sciences and technologies       II)              phenomenon of snowfall 
1--Research to upgrade                           accumulation and improve the 
methods for dealing with                         environment in which people 
snowfall accumulations                           in snowfall regions live, 
                                                 this research will (1) 
                                                 elucidate the mechanism 
                                                 which causes snow to fall 
                                                 based on the latest 
                                                 monitoring methods and study 
                                                 the possibility of 
                                                 regulating snowfalls, and 
                                                 (2) develop snow treatment 
                                                 methods using ground heat 
                                                 and snow removal methods 
                                                 using snow transport 
                                                 pipelines. 

2--International joint          1990-92 (Phase   In order to develop ways of 
research to develop methods     I)               forecasting the possibility 
for forecasting landslides in                    of landslides in 
volcanically active areas                        volcanically active regions 
                                                 directly in the line of 
                                                 danger from volcanic 
                                                 eruptions, and in areas 
                                                 where there is large-scale 
                                                 sedimentation movement and 
                                                 disaster intensity is 
                                                 extremely high due to 
                                                 topographical instability of 
                                                 steeply-inclined stratified 
                                                 structures, this research 
                                                 will focus on (1) locales 
                                                 where landslides have 
                                                 occurred, (2) the 
                                                 sedimentation process, and 
                                                 (3) disaster evaluation 
                                                 methods. 

II. Basic Human Research 1.     1991             Research in which 
Interdisciplinary                                international and 
                                                 interministerial research 
                                                 groups are formed around 
                                                 research leaders at national 
                                                 research labs 

2. Domestic/regional research   1991             Research in which regional 
                                                 research groups are formed 
                                                 around regional core 
                                                 organizers based on the 
                                                 collaboration of government, 
                                                 industry, and academia 

III. International Joint        1992             In order to live up to our 
Research                                         role as one of the advanced 
                                                 countries in the world and 
                                                 meet the expectations of the 
                                                 world community, AIST will 
                                                 take an active and 
                                                 comprehensive role in 
                                                 promoting cooperative 
                                                 international research. To 
                                                 do that, it will promote 
                                                 international joint research 
                                                 between independent 
                                                 governmental research 
                                                 laboratories in Japan and 
                                                 independent research 
                                                 institutions in other 
                                                 countries by arranging 
                                                 various science and 
                                                 technology cooperation 
                                                 agreements. 

IV. Key Basic Research          1992             This area will focus on 
                                                 promoting basic research at 
                                                 national research labs so as 
                                                 to emphasize the independent 
                                                 creativity of researchers 
                                                 and to develop innovative 
                                                 technologies. 

V. Surveys and Analyses 1.      1992             In order to promote the key 
Drafting science and                             policies expressed in the 
technology policies 1--Survey                    government's 18th annual 
on promotion of key policies                     report on science and 
                                                 technology, this research 
                                                 will perform a comprehensive 
                                                 survey to ascertain the 
                                                 current status and future 
                                                 prospects of science and 
                                                 technology. 

VI. Emergency Research During   1992             The aim of this research 
Fiscal Year 1. Emergency                         will be to gain an 
research 1--Emergency                            understanding of seismic and 
earthquake research around                       tectonic fluctuations and 
Nishiomote Island                                the temperature 
                                                 abnormalities that accompany 
                                                 earthquake activities in the 
                                                 area surrounding Nishiomote 
                                                 Island, and to analyze the 
                                                 geological and tectonic 
                                                 structures in order to 
                                                 contribute to research on 
                                                 earthquake predictions. 





  1992 Revised MITI Science and Technology Special Coordination Fund Budget (&yen; 
000) 

                   Research                       Laboratory (Budget) 

1                  (General Research)             Government Industrial 
                   International joint research   Research Institute, Nagoya 
                   on developing models that      (687); Industrial Products 
                   exhibit characteristics of     Research Institute (8,188); 
                   advanced materials             Mechanical Engineering Lab 
                                                  (8,342); Fermentation 
                                                  Research Institute (9,184); 
                                                  Government Industrial 
                                                  Research Institute, Osaka 
                                                  (2,607); National Chemical 
                                                  Laboratory for Industry 
                                                  (2,346); Electrotechnical 
                                                  Laboratory (7,917) 

2                  Basic research on producing    Government Industrial 
                   materials in short time        Research Institute, Nagoya 
                   periods in microgravity        (12,946); Electrotechnical 
                   environment                    Laboratory (17,148); 
                                                  Government Industrial 
                                                  Research Institute, Osaka 
                                                  (13,322); Geological Survey 
                                                  of Japan (9,720); National 
                                                  Chemical Laboratory for 
                                                  Industry (5,156) 

3                  Basic research on creating     Fermentation Research 
                   intelligent materials          Institute (19,685); 
                   through atomic/electronic      Government Industrial 
                   manipulation                   Research Institute, Nagoya 
                                                  (11,036); Mechanical 
                                                  Engineering Lab (8,720); 

4                  Research to develop            Electrotechnical Laboratory 
                   technologies for generating,   (28,897) 
                   measuring, and utilizing 
                   extremely high vacuums 

5                  Research to develop            National Chemical 
                   technologies for generating    Laboratory for Industry 
                   and utilizing vacuum           (32,731) 
                   ultraviolet light 

6                  Basic research on ways to      Government Industrial 
                   use host/guest reactions to    Research Institute, Tohoku 
                   create new functional          (20,135); National Chemical 
                   materials                      Laboratory for Industry 
                                                  (11,642) 

7                  Basic research on material     Government Industrial 
                   interconnections by creating   Research Institute, Osaka 
                   ideal surfaces                 (9,922); Natural Research 
                                                  Laboratory of Metrology 
                                                  (46,593); Mechanical 
                                                  Engineering Lab (19,312) 

8                  Research on basic              Mechanical Engineering Lab 
                   technologies concerned with    (20,089); Natural Research 
                   the non-destructive            Laboratory of Metrology 
                   quantitative and intelligent   (7,775) 
                   evaluation of materials and 
                   structures with high 
                   reliability 

9                  Research on measurement,       National Chemical 
                   evaluation, and control of     Laboratory for Industry 
                   element functions in           (20,308); Electrotechnical 
                   substances and materials at    Laboratory 81,216 
                   the microscopic level 

10                 Research on constructing       Electrotechnical Laboratory 
                   data bases for use in          (2,874) 
                   R&amp;D on superconductive 
                   materials 

11                 Research to develop basic      National Chemical 
                   technologies for the purpose   Laboratory for Industry 
                   of elucidating                 (27,000); Electrotechnical 
                   bionanostructures              Laboratory (10,003) 

12                 Research to develop            Mechanical Engineering Lab 
                   non-destructive means of       (30,560); National Chemical 
                   performing high-sensitivity    Laboratory for Industry 
                   and high-resolution            (4,112) 
                   measurements at the 
                   biomolecular level 

13                 Research on development of     Fermentation Research 
                   new plant experiments          Institute (3,956) 

14                 Research on basic technology   Fermentation Research 
                   for elucidating the            Institute (7,435) 
                   infiltration and 
                   metastasizing mechanism of 
                   cancer cells 

15                 Research to develop basic      National Chemical 
                   technology for elucidating     Laboratory for Industry 
                   the structure and function     (7,397) 
                   of sugar chains 

16                 Research to develop basic      Natural Research Laboratory 
                   technology for upgrading       of Metrology (6,571); 
                   remote sensing methods using   Geological Survey of Japan 
                   microwave sensor data          (10,305); National Research 
                                                  Institute for Pollution and 
                                                  Resources (6,136) 

17                 International joint research   Geological Survey of Japan 
                   to elucidate the mechanism     (32,220); Government 
                   by which matter circulates     Industrial Research 
                   in remote ocean areas          Institute, Chugoku (2,577) 

18                 International joint research   Geological Survey of Japan 
                   on elucidating                 (5,536) 
                   desertification mechanism 

19                 International joint research   Geological Survey of Japan 
                   to set up monitoring system    (13,543); Electrotechnical 
                   to study major ocean           Laboratory (16,925) 
                   circulations 

20                 International joint research   National Research Institute 
                   on interaction of              for Pollution and Resources 
                   atmosphere, hydrosphere, and   (1,303) 
                   biosphere at the North Pole 

21                 Basic research to assist       Electrotechnical Laboratory 
                   creativity in intelligent      (10,535); Industrial 
                   production activities          Products Research Institute 
                                                  (11,293) 

22                 Research to develop basic      Industrial Products 
                   sensor fusion technologies     Research Institute (8,594); 
                                                  Electrotechnical Laboratory 
                                                  (42,986) 

23                 Research on building           Electrotechnical Laboratory 
                   self-organizing data-base      (61,476) 
                   system to assist R&amp;D 
                   creativity 

24                 Research on fuzzy-logic        Industrial Products 
                   system and applications in     Research Institute (9,238); 
                   human and natural systems      Electrotechnical Laboratory 
                                                  (958); Government 
                                                  Industrial Research 
                                                  Institute, Chugoku (3,526); 
                                                  National Research Institute 
                                                  for Pollution and Resources 
                                                  (1,199) 

25                 Research to upgrade methods    Government Industrial 
                   for dealing with snowfall      Research Institute, Tohoku 
                   accumulations                  (2,720); Natural Research 
                                                  Laboratory of Metrology 
                                                  (2,178) 

26                 Basic research to upgrade      Geological Survey of Japan 
                   methods of predicting          (32,062) 
                   earthquakes in urban areas 

27                 International joint research   Geological Survey of Japan 
                   to develop methods for         (23,593) 
                   forecasting landslides in 
                   volcanically active areas 

28                 (Interministerial Basic        Fermentation Research 
                   Research) Research to          Institute (34,875) 
                   elucidate higher RNA 
                   structures and functions and 
                   applied research on 
                   synthetic ribozymes 

29                 Research on highly             Research Institute for 
                   biocompatible functional       Polymers and Textiles 
                   materials                      (34,676) 

30                 Research on ways to measure    Natural Research Laboratory 
                   and evaluate thermal           of Metrology (57,145) 
                   properties of advanced film 
                   and fiber materials 

31                 Research on magneto-optical    Electrotechnical Laboratory 
                   effects of non-equilibrium     (60,944) 
                   substances 

32                 Basic research on catalytic    Government Industrial 
                   action of metal and            Research Institute, Osaka 
                   heterojunctions                (43,833) 

33                 Innovative enteric canal       Fermentation Research 
                   peptide and elucidation of     Institute (69,160) 
                   genetic function 

34                 (Domestic and Regional         Government Industrial 
                   Research) General R&amp;D on   Research Institute, Kyushu 
                   specific ceramic structures    (14,944) 
                   formed by colloid processing 


35                 Research to elucidate          Government Industrial 
                   mangrove-based ecosystems      Research Institute, Kyushu 
                                                  (8,470); Government 
                                                  Industrial Research 
                                                  Institute, Chugoku (5,674) 

36                 Research to upgrade methods    Electrotechnical Laboratory 
                   of monitoring the lake and     (6,784); Government 
                   marsh environments of Lake     Industrial Research 
                   Biwa and improving water       Institute, Chugoku (5,972) 
                   quality 

37                 Basic research on creating     Electrotechnical Laboratory 
                   intelligent inorganic          (8,283); Government 
                   compounds and organic          Industrial Research 
                   composites                     Institute, Osaka (9,101) 

38                 (International Joint           Mechanical Engineering 
                   Research) Research on          Laboratory (5,833) 
                   extremely low-temperature 
                   two-phase flow in 
                   microgravity environment 

39                 Data processing with new       Mechanical Engineering Lab 
                   optical elements               (2,462) 

40                 Research on chemical           National Chemical 
                   conversion and functional      Laboratory for Industry 
                   upgrade of carbohydrates       (4,530) 

41                 Research on high-temperature   National Chemical 
                   method of hydrogen             Laboratory for Industry 
                   enrichment using inorganic     (4,015) 
                   film 

42                 Research on functions of       National Chemical 
                   gaseous carbon products        Laboratory for Industry 
                                                  (4,128) 

43                 Research on applications of    Government Industrial 
                   graphite nanocomposites and    Research Institute, Osaka 
                   metallic particles made from   (5,188) 
                   intergraphite compounds 

44                 Research on microdesign of     Government Industrial 
                   hydrogen-occluded alloy        Research Institute, Osaka 
                   surfaces                       (4,263) 

45                 Signaling mechanism of cell    Fermentation Research 
                   division                       Institute (5,039) 

46                 Research to create             Geological Survey of Japan 
                   geophysical models of the      (6,626) 
                   White Island volcano in New 
                   Zealand 

47                 Research on particle-shaped    Geological Survey of Japan 
                   substances in the Pacific      (6,154) 
                   Ocean and Indian Ocean 

48                 Research on high-quality       Electrotechnical Laboratory 
                   superconducting X-ray          (7,186) 
                   detection elements 

49                 Research on boiling            Electrotechnical Laboratory 
                   two-component fluids in a      (6,855) 
                   microgravity environment 

50                 Optimization and compression   Industrial Products 
                   characteristics of bolted      Research Institute (3,733) 
                   joints in layered composite 
                   materials 

51                 Research on biodegradable      Industrial Products 
                   polymers made up of natural    Research Institute (3,080) 
                   polymer components 

52                 Research on long-distance      National Research Institute 
                   transport by measuring         for Pollution and Resources 
                   acidic substances on Cheju     (6,164) 
                   Island 

53                 Basic research on combined     Government Industrial 
                   system for thermal             Research Institute, 
                   decomposition and combustion   Hokkaido (4,693) 
                   of coal 

54                 Research to evaluate           Government Industrial 
                   metal-based composite          Research Institute, Kyushu 
                   materials                      (4,437) 

55                 Research to evaluate stress    Government Industrial 
                   corrosion cracking in          Research Institute, Chugoku 
                   materials                      (2,198) 

56                 (Key Basic Research) 60        379,529 
                   Items 

57                 ("Soft" Research) Survey of    Agency of Industrial 
                   current status of U.S.         Science and Technology 
                   government supported R&amp;D   (9,916) 


58                 (Emergency research)           Geological Survey of Japan 
                   Emergency research on          (10,752) 
                   earthquake activities in 
                   areas surrounding Nishiomote 
                   Island 

                   Total                          1,681,077 


<H5>  2. Other AIST Lab-Related Policies </H5>
<H5>  1. Promotion of Cooperative International Research </H5>
  There has been a trend taking place in recent years among 
countries of attaching great importance to so-called 
technological diplomacy. Technology is more often than not 
becoming the centerpiece of conversation between national 
leaders at local and international conferences. 
  As international acclaim for Japanese manufacturing 
techniques has grown, so too have the number of requests from 
advanced countries in Europe and North America to exchange 
technologies, which until recently thought they had very little 
to learn from Japan. Japan is continually being asked to take an 
active role at the international level and to enact policies 
that allow for exchanges of technology with developing countries. 
  Japan has also been asked to intensify the work it is doing 
to foster cooperative science and technology agreements between 
the United States and Japan, and to step up the work it is doing 
on global environmental issues where there has been much 
worldwide concern. 
  In that context, in FY93, AIST will extend invitations to 
foreign researchers to come to Japan in order to bolster its 
international research exchange programs and international 
research cooperation agreements involving global environment 
related technologies. In addition, it will enact some new 
programs as part of the New Energy and Industrial Technology 
Development Organization (NEDO) project to promote international 
industrial technologies. 
  (1) Promotion of International Joint Research and Research 
Cooperation 
  1--Specific International Joint Research Programs 
  AIST will try to promote joint R&amp;D programs between its 
national research laboratories and those research institutes in 
advanced countries which share the same concerns. As for general 
research projects in 1993, in addition to the three research 
projects being continued from the previous year, there are also 
three new joint research projects. With regard to international 
joint research on global environmental issues, in addition to 
the two projects from the previous year and one new project, 
there will be one new project having to do with multi-country 
frameworks for conducting specific joint research projects. 
  2--Cooperation Agreements with Developing Countries 
  a. International Trade and Industry Technology Program (ITIT 
Program) 
  This program has to do with resolving research issues and 
improving research with developing countries by applying the 
research potential of national research laboratories to 
cooperative research in the mining and manufacturing fields 
where the strongest requests have been made by developing 
countries. 
  In 1993, AIST will set up a new research cooperation program 
consisting of specific key research topics in which it will lend 
its technical support to developing countries to help them 
develop supporting industries essential to achieving economic 
independence. AIST also intends to upgrade and strengthen its 
research programs having to do with global environmental 
technologies in order to cope with the worldwide demands 
concerning environmental pollution, i.e. destruction of forests, 
acid rain, etc., that have become of increasing concern in 
recent years. 
  b. Research Cooperation Program 
  [Research cooperation on machine translation system for 
neighboring countries] 
  This program focuses on the development of a machine 
translation system that can provide translations between 
Japanese, Chinese, Thai, Malaysian, and Indonesian. It will be 
used to help resolve various economic and social issues shared 
by developing countries. 
  [Research cooperation on technology for recovering valuable 
resources from brackish water] 
  This is an R&amp;D program that focuses on developing a 
comprehensive system for systematically recovering valuable 
resources such as lithium, barium, bromine, magnesium, and boron 
which can be found in brackish water from Mexican salt 
manufacturing plants and Chinese salt water lakes. 
  [Research cooperation on preserving and sustaining 
biological 
diversity] 
  This is an R&amp;D program in which AIST labs will conduct 
cooperative research with Southeast Asia which has rich tropical 
rain forests, and is designed to enable them to harvest, 
preserve, and sustain the bioresources that exist in those rain 
forests. 
  (2) International Research Exchange Program 
  This is a research program that invites foreign researchers 
from countries that have exhibited the strongest interest in 
such programs. It will involve increasing the number of young 
foreign researchers invited to national research laboratories 
from countries that have indicated a particularly strong 
interest. The program also investigates the possibility of those 
researchers being accepted by private research institutes, which 
then will decide the subject matter to be researched. 
  The program also provides various support services such as a 
Japanese language training program, lifestyle adjustment advice, 
housing accommodations, and personal references in order to 
assist the foreign researchers in adjusting to the new lifestyle 
of Japan and to ease their acceptance at AIST laboratories. 



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|(Budget) (unit: million yen)                                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Promotional Activity     |FY92 Budget Proposal     |FY91 Budget              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1. International joint r-|445                      |(384)                    | 
|esearch and internationa-|                         |                         | 
|l research cooperation   |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|(1) Special internationa-|117                      |(94)                     | 
|l joint research program-|                         |                         | 
|s [general accounts]     |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|(2) Cooperation with dev-|328                      |(290)                    | 
|eloping countries        |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1--International industr-|300                      |(265)                    | 
|ial technology research  |                         |                         | 
|programs [ODA]           |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|2--Programs promoting re-|28                       |(25)                     | 
|search cooperation progr-|                         |                         | 
|ams (research lab portio-|                         |                         | 
|n) [ODA]                 |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|2. International researc-|258                      |(216)                    | 
|h exchange programs [gen-|                         |                         | 
|eral accounts]           |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Lab costs                |23                       |(19)                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Outside lab costs        |234                      |(197)                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Total                    |703                      |(600)                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


<H5>  2. Program Promoting Basic Research Facilities </H5>
  As R&amp;D in the area of industrial technologies has 
increased, 
the facilities required to conduct that R&amp;D have gotten 
larger 
and become more specialized. This has made it cost ineffective 
for individual companies and research organizations to purchase 
advanced research and development facilities. This program, 
based on private funding alone, provides companies with the 
facilities and researchers they will need to conduct advanced 
research. 
  The operation and upkeep of the facilities is based on the 
law pertaining to industrial technology R&amp;D (1988 Law No. 
33), 
and is carried out by corporations designated by the New Energy 
Development and Industrial Technology Organization (NEDO). 
  Completed Projects Outlined 
  (1) Underground Zero-Gravity Experimental Research Center 
(location: Kami-Sunagawa, Hokkaido) 
  The center is made from an existing shaft of an old coal 
mine 
and equipped with vertical free-fall equipment and is used to 
conduct various types of short-term (10 seconds) zero-gravity 
experiments. The center was founded in March, 1989, and a 
portion of the facility was opened for public use in 1991. 
  (2) Super High-Temperature Materials Research Center 
(locations: Ube City, Yamaguchi Pref.; Tajimi City, Gifu Pref.) 
  These are two facilities that were built for the express 
purpose of conducting research and evaluation on the physical 
properties and functions of materials under very high 
temperatures. 
  (3) Mining and Manufacturing Applied Research Center on 
Marine Life Uses (locations: Kamaishi City, Iwate Pref.; 
Kiyomizu City, Shizuoka Pref.) 
  These centers were built for conducting research on marine 
life uses for the mining and manufacturing industries. The 
center was founded in November, 1988, and opened for use in 1990. 
  (4) Ion Engineering Center (location: inside Kansai Cultural 
Science Research City in Hirakata, Osaka) 
  This facility was built for conducting research on ion beam 
applications for industry. It was founded in November, 1988, and 
opened for use in 1992. 
  (3) Laser Application Engineering Center (location: Nagaoka 
City, Niigata Prefecture) 
  This facility was built for doing research on laser 
applications in industry. The center was founded in March, 1990, 
and fully opened for use in 1992. 
  Furthermore, for the leading-edge basic investigative 
research programs of the type that would make use of the 
research facilities opened in 1992, we have selected those 
leading-edge basic research projects which have the possibility 
of being tied to R&amp;D in the future which would make use of 
those 
facilities, and have started investigative research on ways of 
implementing uses of those basic research facilities. 
  In 1993, NEDO has been allocated &yen;300 billion in general 
grant money. 
<H5>  3. Regional Technology Exchange Program </H5>
  (policies regarding research exchange and technology 
mergers) 
  As science and technology have evolved, regional companies 
have become more actively involved in research and development. 
This has created new research and technology needs rooted in the 
unique industrial characteristics of those particular regions. 
In that context, the expectations placed on national research 
laboratories established in respective regions of the country 
are growing every year. In truth, however, those expectations 
have not been met because the research laboratories in those 
areas lack the necessary human and technical resources. 
  Looking back at the rapid progress made in recent years in 
science and technology, we take note of how specialized research 
has become and the fact that mergers have taken place between 
various research fields. In order to make the best use of 
limited human and financial resources in those national research 
laboratories and conduct effective research, this program will 
try to identify the "seeds" of new research and give more 
careful thought to research projects and how they relate to new 
theories and phenomena. 
  For that reason, this program will try to address regional 
research and technology needs by examining the research 
potential existing in both regional research laboratories and 
Tsukuba research laboratories. 
  With regard to specific activities, the program will send 
top-level researchers from AIST for temporary periods of time to 
places doing leading research in those particular regions. These 
researchers will try to ascertain the direction of research and 
the research needs in those particular regions by conducting 
experiments and holding discussions at those research facilities. 
  (Program Outline) 
  (1) Regional Research and Technology Needs 
  To deal with regional research and technology needs in each 
geographical region, local research laboratories in each region 
have been conducting research by establishing research topics 
that concern the particular needs of their respective region. In 
certain cases where difficulties have been encountered 
implementing this research, AIST research labs offer the support 
of researchers working in Tsukuba research laboratories who try 
to help them solve the particular problems at their 
laboratories, thereby providing an effective and appropriate 
response to the regional needs of these research laboratories. 
  In addition, certain researchers from Tsukuba research 
laboratories are assigned for fixed periods of time (a few 
years) as research exchange officers to regional research 
laboratories, and several times a year for periods of a few 
weeks each. These researchers are sent to their assigned 
regional research laboratory to provide general research 
assistance, e.g. identifying research projects. More 
specifically, by putting those researchers in a research 
advisory role, this program tries to improve the research 
potential in particular research fields at particular research 
laboratories. It targets personnel development and tries to deal 
appropriately with the research and technology needs of each 
research laboratory. 
  (2) Centralized Research Labs With Researchers From Various 
Labs 
  The program seeks to identify the "seeds" of new research 
related to particular research fields by having researchers from 
research laboratories with different advanced research agendas 
discuss the problems they are confronted with in their fields of 
study for fixed periods of time at a centrally located place. 



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|(Budget: unit - million yen)                                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|General Account          |FY92 Budget Proposal     |FY91 Budget              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Policies promoting resea-|29                       |(27)                     | 
|rch exchange and technol-|                         |                         | 
|ogy mergers              |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


<H5>  4. Japan Key Technology Center Program </H5>
  In November, 1985, the Japan Key Technology Center was 
opened 
in order to promote experimental research. It was designed 
primarily to support basic and applied research by private 
industry which accounts for around 80 percent of the R&amp;D 
expenditures in Japan. The FY93 budget proposal to fund such 
programs, which are its main activities, is &yen;28.5 billion. 
This contains &yen;26 billion for funding the special industrial 
investment account, and &yen;20 billion for loan recovery. 
  The total 1992 budget for programs was &yen;28.5 billion 
with 
&yen;26 billion being earmarked for the special industrial 
investments and &yen;2.5 billion for loan recovery. 
  Below, we list the basic activities of the Japan Key 
Technology Center. 
  (1) Capital Investment Program 
  This program invests in corporations which have been 
established jointly by two or more corporations. The companies 
must conduct experimental research on basic technologies 
beginning at the basic and applied research stage (investment 
ratio under 70 percent). 



  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of New Investments (unit: investments)                             | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|              |FY89          |FY90          |FY91          |FY92          | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|R&amp;D proje-|3 (1)         |3 (1)         |3 (2)         |5 (3)         | 
|cts (includes |              |              |              |              | 
|mining and ma-|              |              |              |              | 
|nufacturing f-|              |              |              |              | 
|ields)        |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|New media com-|4             |0             |0             |0             | 
|munication, T-|              |              |              |              | 
|eletopia      |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Total         |7             |3             |3             |5             | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  (2) Loan Program 
  This program makes conditional interest-free loans to 
companies conducting experimental research related to basic 
technologies starting mainly from the applied research stage 
(loan ratio under 70 percent). 



  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of New Loans (unit: loans)                                         | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|              |FY89          |FY90          |FY91          |FY92          | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Loans (includ-|26 (11)       |34 (13)       |29 (12)       |22 (11)       | 
|es mining and |              |              |              |              | 
|manufacturing |              |              |              |              | 
|fields)       |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  (3) Joint Research Mediation Program 
  This program provides mediation in experimental research 
projects to assist private companies in concluding joint 
research agreements on basic technologies with national research 
laboratories. 
  (4) Overseas Researcher Invitation Program (International 
Research Cooperation Japan Trust Program) 
  This program uses public trust funds to extend invitations 
to 
top overseas researchers. 
  (5) Basic Technologies Information Program 
  This program is designed to collect a wide variety of 
information on basic technologies that are in the possession of 
national research institutions. The information is then 
repackaged and redistributed. 
  (6) Survey Program 
  This program conducts various surveys in order to help 
promote experimental research on basic technologies in the 
private sector. 



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Budget (unit: million yen)                                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Activity                 |FY93 Budget Proposal     |FY92 Budget              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1. Industrial capital in-|260 215 45               |(260) (220) (40)         | 
|vestment special account |                         |                         | 
|Includes: Capital invest-|                         |                         | 
|ment Loans               |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|2. Self-funding Includes:|60 20                    |(56) (25)                | 
| Loan recovery           |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|3. Program total Include-|280 215 65               |(285) (220) (65)         | 
|s: Capital investment Lo-|                         |                         | 
|ans                      |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


<H5>  5. Research Findings and Technology Surveys and PR </H5>
  (1) Research Findings 
  The research findings obtained through both research 
laboratories operated by the Agency of Industrial Science and 
Technology (AIST) and through various AIST-commissioned R&amp;D 
programs are the licensed property of the Agency of Industrial 
Science and Technology, and gaining access to those findings is 
done by paying an appropriate royalty for their use. Obtaining 
access to those results has gotten easier recently, particularly 
for overseas parties wanting that information. In FY93, 
therefore, AIST will try to disseminate its research findings 
over a wider area by stepping up PR and mediation activities on 
AIST industrial property rights. It will also try to prevent 
improper use of those rights by implementing proper control 
measures regarding their property rights. 
  (2) Technical Surveys and PR 
  In order to sustain sound economic growth in the face of 
environmental changes brought about by Japanese industry both 
inside and outside Japan, it is essential that technology be 
developed in a comprehensive and effective manner. When it comes 
to promoting the development of technology, AIST must draft 
comprehensive and relevant technical policies and increase the 
level of recognition and understanding of those policies and 
measures. To do that, the following steps are being taken: 
  1--Technical Surveys 
  This involves doing surveys on R&amp;D trends both inside 
and 
outside Japan, evaluating the development of a technology, 
trying to come up with the best ways to make research 
predictions, and incorporating this information into the 
planning and drafting of technical policies. 
  2--PR 
  In addition to conducting PR related to preparation and 
distribution of materials related to AIST operations and 
achievements, this involves consolidating technical materials 
from both inside and outside Japan. 
  (3) Developing Computer Applications 
  In addition to operating the Computer Application Research 
Association established by the AIST executive committee and the 
investigative research on technical problems faced in 
specialized fields which must increase the use of the computers 
in government bureaus and ministries, this program is aimed at 
developing such things as fuzzy logic applications, methods of 
assessing the introduction of software, and computer 
applications. It also includes promoting the use of research 
findings and trying to improve applied computer technologies and 
other new technologies. 
  (Reference) 
  In terms of the technical issues that administrative fields 
are facing in implementing the use of the computer, the Applied 
Computer Technology Research Association, which was formed in 
1968 and has a technical staff of 610 members spread throughout 
29 ministries and agencies, will undertake the following 
activities with the help of the people responsible and 
knowledgeable about computer applications in ministries and 
agencies to conduct multifaceted investigative research. 
  1--Survey on present status and trends inside and outside 
Japan regarding latest computer applications. 
  2--Computer applications that can be shared by various 
ministries and agencies. 
  3--Technical exchanges between ministries and agencies in 
order to raise the level of computer applications. 
  4--Dissemination and use of research findings by joint 
announcements and PR releases. 



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|(Budget (unit: million yen))                                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Activity                 |FY93 Budget Proposal     |FY92 Budget              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1. Research findings     |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|(1) Administrative costs |43                       |(41)                     | 
|and processing costs for |                         |                         | 
|domestic filing          |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|(2) Overseas application |145                      |(122)                    | 
|costs on government-owne-|                         |                         | 
|d patents                |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|(3) Research expense on  |3                        |(3)                      | 
|patent infringement prot-|                         |                         | 
|ection                   |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Total                    |191                      |(166)                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Includes: General accoun-|174                      |(159)                    | 
|ts                       |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Special accounts         |17                       |(16)                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|2. Promotion of technica-|                         |                         | 
|l surveys and PR activit-|                         |                         | 
|ies                      |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|(1) Technical surveys an-|25                       |(25)                     | 
|d PR activities          |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|(2) Focus groups on indu-|2                        |(2)                      | 
|strial technologies      |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|(3) Surveys and developi-|5                        |(5)                      | 
|ng research management s-|                         |                         | 
|ystem and forecasting sy-|                         |                         | 
|stem for inside/outside  |                         |                         | 
|Japan                    |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Total                    |33                       |(33)                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|3. Developing computer a-|37                       |(37)                     | 
|pplications              |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-44916 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpjst010___94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-JST-94-010 </AU>
JPRS 
Science &amp; Technology 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Japan AIST Research Laboratory Plans </ABS>
<DATE1>   31 October 1993 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     1993 AIST Laboratory Research Plans </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    1993 AIST Laboratory Research Plans </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    FY92 Joint Research of AIST Labs and Japanese Companies, </H4>


<TEXT>
Other Labs 

<F P=102> 94FE0219G Tokyo AGENCY OF INDUSTRIAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
in Japanese 31 Oct 93 pp 473-491 </F>

<F P=103> 94FE0219G </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo AGENCY OF INDUSTRIAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
in Japanese 31 Oct 93 pp 473-491 </F>

<F P=105> Japanese </F>
CSO 

  [Text] 



  1992 Joint Research Projects 

AIST Lab             Research Project          Research Partner         Term 

;38;1 National       R&amp;D on secondary      Nagano Instrument        07-01-88 - 
Research             low-vacuum pressure       Manufacturing, Ltd.      03-31-93 
Laboratory of        standard 
Metrology 

                     Development of CAMPS      Yamashiro Precision      11-01-89 - 
                     compatible ceramic        Manufacturing, Ltd.      03-31-93 
                     injection molding 
                     system 

                     Research on sensitive     Rion Co., Ltd.           07-01-90 - 
                     calibration method for                             03-31-92 
                     supersonic search unit 

                     Research on               Tokyo Seimitsu Co.,      07-01-90 - 
                     three-dimensional         Ltd.                     03-31-93 
                     measurement system 

                     R&amp;D on helical        NEC Instrument           08-01-90 - 
                     standard flow meter       Industries               03-31-93 

                     Development of magnetic   Anritsu Corporation      10-01-90 - 
                     temperature sensor                                 03-31-93 

                     Research to improve       Nippon Tairan, Co.,      01-01-91 - 
                     reliability of gas flow   Ltd.                     03-31-93 
                     meters 

                     Research on pressure      Oval Engineering Co.,    04-15-91 - 
                     measurement techniques    Ltd.                     03-31-93 
                     and apparatus 

                     Research on frequency     Komatsu, Ltd.            04-15-91 - 
                     constriction                                       03-31-93 
                     stabilization in 
                     titanium-sapphire 
                     lasers 

                     Research on scanning      Nikon Corporation        06-01-91 - 
                     probe microscope for                               03-31-93 
                     observing organic film 

                     Research on practical     Kumamoto University      06-01-91 - 
                     application of AE         Engineering Department   03-31-93 
                     sensor calibration 
                     method used in civil 
                     engineering to 
                     quantitatively analyze 
                     cracking by AE method 

                     Research on super         Tokyo University         07-01-91 - 
                     high-vacuum AFM           Engineering Department   03-31-93 


                     Research on technology    Nobeyama Cosmic Radio    07-01-91 - 
                     for measuring shape of    Observatory              03-31-93 
                     megastructures 

                     Research on technology    Suzuki Corporation       07-01-91 - 
                     for applying                                       03-31-93 
                     measurement of 
                     phase-conjugated waves 

                     Research on precision     Nikon Corporation        08-01-91 - 
                     measurement of                                     03-31-93 
                     distances using 
                     photoconducting wave 
                     path modulators 

                     Research on means of      Osaka Gas Co., Ltd.      08-01-91 - 
                     detecting combustible                              03-31-93 
                     gas by optical methods 

                     Research on means of      Chemical Inspection      08-12-91 - 
                     analyzing concentration   Association              03-31-93 
                     of highly pure standard 
                     CO[.sub]2[/] gas 

                     Research to test          Nesshin Co., Ltd.        08-20-91 - 
                     characteristics of                                 03-31-92 
                     industrial high-temp 
                     platinum resistance 
                     thermometer 

                     Research to develop       Chino Corporation        09-10-91 - 
                     low-resistant high-temp                            03-31-93 
                     platinum resistance 
                     thermometer 

                     Research on               Ibaraki University       11-01-91 - 
                     high-sensitive infrared   Engineering Department   09-30-93 
                     detection using 
                     metallic 
                     superconductors 

                     Research on               Sumitomo Precision       11-01-91 - 
                     micromachining for        Products Co., Ltd.       03-31-93 
                     micromachines 

                     Research to develop and   Nihon Keiryo Kiki        04-15-92 - 
                     find applications for     Kogyo Rengokai           03-31-93 
                     high sensitivity sonic 
                     venturi nozzles 

                     Research on evaluating    Denki Kagaku Keiki       04-20-92 - 
                     characteristics and       Co., Ltd.                03-31-93 
                     calibrating 
                     industrial-type thermal 
                     flow meter 

                     Research on               Idec Izumi Corporation   04-20-92 - 
                     semiconductor lasers                               03-31-93 
                     and the applied 
                     technologies thereof 

                     Research to evaluate      Tsubari Kaseiki Co.,     06-15-92 - 
                     micronanometer            Ltd.                     03-31-93 
                     calibrating devices 

                     Research on optical       Ishikawajima-Harima      08-03-92 - 
                     quality control           Heavy Industries Co.,    03-31-93 
                     technology                Ltd. 

                     Research on technology    Yokogawa Electric        08-03-92 - 
                     for measuring the                                  03-31-93 
                     frequency of 1.55 
                     semiconductor laser 

                     Miniaturization           Nikon Corporation        08-03-92 - 
                     research on                                        03-31-93 
                     differential 
                     interferometer that 
                     magnifies optical path 
                     difference 

                     Research to measure       National Space           08-17-92 - 
                     reflective properties     Development Agency       03-31-93 
                     of rendezvous radar 
                     cube corner reflector 
                     array 

                     Research on functional    Nihon Chemical           09-16-92 - 
                     stability of laser        Engineering Co., Ltd.    03-31-93 
                     frequencies 

                     Research on method of     Matsushita               11-04-92 - 
                     evaluating                Inter-Techno Co., Ltd.   03-31-93 
                     accelerometer 
                     characteristics using a 
                     Davis bar 

                     Research on methods of    Ibaraki University       11-04-92 - 
                     evaluating highly                                  03-31-93 
                     viscous materials by 
                     precision measurement 
                     of elastic viscosity 

                     Research on long-period   Tokyo University         11-16-92 - 
                     tremor resistant system   Cosmic Radiation         03-31-93 
                                               Research Lab 

                     Research to develop       Nachi-Fujikoshi          12-07-92 - 
                     quality engineering       Corporation              03-31-93 
                     software and 
                     incorporate in system 
                     engineering 

                     Research to measure       Sumitomo Metal           01-05-93 - 
                     spectral emissivity of    Industries, Ltd.         03-31-93 
                     cold steel sheet 
                     surface 

                     Research on               Japan Atomic Energy      01-25-93 - 
                     high-temperature          Research Institute       03-31-93 
                     characteristics of 
                     nuclear fusion reactor 
                     materials 

                     Research on               Hitachi Ltd.             01-28-93 - 
                     microdimensional                                   03-31-93 
                     standards for electron 
                     beam measuring devices 

                     R&amp;D on modifiable     Yamazaki Mazak           02-22-93 - 
                     integrated                Corporation              03-31-93 
                     manufacturing system 

;13;1 Mechanical     Research on ways to       Next Generation          02-25-87 - 
Engineering          adapt logic programming   Computer Technology      03-31-93 
Laboratory           environments for          Development 
                     creating intelligent      Organization 
                     processing systems in 
                     machine design and 
                     manufacture 

                     R&amp;D on                Mitsui Engineering and   02-15-90 - 
                     fluid-injected gas        Shipbuilding Co., Ltd.   03-31-93 
                     engines 

                     Research on               Olympus Optical Co.,     10-08-90 - 
                     low-temperature           Ltd.                     03-31-93 
                     ultrasonic microscope 
                     scanner 

                     Research on formal        Japan Computer           12-01-90 - 
                     draft of CAD/CAM data     Graphics Association     03-31-93 
                     conversion processing 
                     system 

                     Axially laminated C/C     Toho Rayon Co., Ltd.     09-01-90 - 
                     rotor prototyping and                              03-31-93 
                     strength analysis 

                     R&amp;D on diesel         Riken Corporation        11-01-91 - 
                     exhaust gas trap                                   03-31-93 
                     regeneration technology 


                     Research on advanced      Machine Technology       01-06-92 - 
                     surface modification      Association              03-31-93 
                     technology 

                     Research on               Toyo Engineering         02-01-92 - 
                     comprehensive model for   Corporation              03-31-92 
                     building 
                     next-generation 
                     production systems 

                     Research on high-speed    Ishikawajima-Harima      05-01-92 - 
                     particle testing and      Heavy Industries Co.,    03-31-93 
                     processing methods        Ltd. 

                     Research on design and    Japan Industrial         06-15-92 - 
                     prototype of aircraft     Technology Association   03-31-93 
                     that fly through the 
                     stratosphere 

                     Research on               Micromachine Center      09-01-92 - 
                     micromachine materials                             03-31-93 

                     Research on ways of       Nissan Motor             11-01-92 - 
                     controlling steering in   Corporation              03-31-93 
                     automated vehicles 

                     Research on LPG diesel    Ishikawajima-Shibaura    10-01-92 - 
                     engines                   Machinery Co., Ltd.      03-31-93 

;36;1 National       R&amp;D on new            Konica Corporation       04-25-89 - 
Institute of         photosensitive                                     12-31-92 
Materials and        materials 
Chemical Research 

                     Research on use of high   Konica Corporation       08-01-90 - 
                     pressure to synthesize                             03-31-93 
                     heterocyclic compounds 
                     containing nitrogen 

                     R&amp;D on new            Research Inst. of        10-01-90 - 
                     compression-type heat     Innov. Technologies      03-31-92 
                     pump refrigerants         for the Earth 

                     Research on               Research Institute of    12-01-90 - 
                     high-efficiency           Innovative               03-31-93 
                     CO[.sub]2[/] separation    Technologies for the 
                     film                      Earth 

                     Biodegradable plastics    Research Institute of    01-07-91 - 
                     R&amp;D                   Innovative               03-31-93 
                                               Technologies for the 
                                               Earth 

                     Research on               Shin-Kobe Electric       04-15-91 - 
                     hydrogen-occluded alloy   Machinery Co., Ltd.      03-31-93 
                     electrodes for use in 
                     nickel-hydrogen 
                     batteries 

                     Research to develop       Hebinome Machine         05-01-91 - 
                     ceramic molds for         Industries Co., Ltd.     03-31-93 
                     forming advanced 
                     composite materials 

                     Research on               Seed Co., Ltd.           05-15-91 - 
                     photochemical treatment                            03-31-92 
                     of plastic film 

                     R&amp;D on new            Seed Co., Ltd.           07-10-91 - 
                     fluoroplastic materials                            03-31-93 


                     Basic research to         Petroleum Energy         08-01-91 - 
                     improve low-temperature   Center                   03-31-93 
                     activation of catalysts 
                     in M85 diesel auto 
                     mufflers 

                     Research on acoustical    Hitachi Construction     08-01-91 - 
                     characteristics of        Machinery Co., Ltd.      03-31-93 
                     polymer materials 

                     Developing ways of        National Institute of    08-01-91 - 
                     using biopolymer          Sericulture and          03-31-93 
                     materials                 Entomological Science 

                     Research pertaining to    Advanced Chem.           09-03-91 - 
                     R&amp;D on advanced       Processing Technology    03-31-92 
                     chemical processing       Research Assn. 
                     pertaining to light 
                     reactions, film 
                     formation, electrode 
                     interface reactions, 
                     combined reactions, 
                     synthesis of furan 
                     resin derivatives, and 
                     means of diagnosing 
                     reactions 

                     Development of            UCC Uejima Coffee Co.,   11-01-91 - 
                     polyurethane for use as   Ltd.                     06-30-92 
                     raw material in 
                     extracting coffee lees 

                     R&amp;D on                Biotechnology            12-01-91 - 
                     endocytosis-type          Development Research     03-31-93 
                     molecular recognition     Cooperative 
                     drake reaction system 

                     Research on impact        Tokyo University         01-20-92 - 
                     reaction mechanism and    Engineering Department   03-31-93 
                     sintering of 
                     intermetallic compounds 


                     In R&amp;D to develop     Petroleum Energy         04-01-92 - 
                     NO[.sub]x[/] removal       Center                   03-31-93 
                     system based on 
                     precious metal 
                     composite oxide 
                     catalyst, includes 
                     basic research on 
                     NO[.sub]x[/] catalysts 
                     as well as research to 
                     upgrade catalysts 

                     Research to               Nippon Oil, Shukko       04-01-92 - 
                     analyze/assess            Kyosan, Kosumo Oil,      03-31-92 
                     chemically functional     Kyoa Oil, Nippon 
                     materials by means of     Mining, General 
                     synchrotron orbital       Sekiyu, Tonen, Showa 
                     radiation                 Shell 

                     Research on new           Shokubai Kasei Kogyo     04-10-92 - 
                     catalysts for upgrading   Co., Ltd.                03-31-93 
                     coal liquefaction oil 

                     Research to seek out      Nippon Sanso K.K.        04-13-92 - 
                     suitable cylinder                                  03-31-93 
                     material for storing 
                     arsine gas 

                     Research to synthesize    Nippon Koshuha Ltd.      04-13-92 - 
                     cubic tungsten                                     03-31-93 
                     carbonate by thermal 
                     plasma method 

                     Structural research on    Institute for Solid      04-28-92 - 
                     carbonaceous substances   State Physics, U of      03-31-92 
                     under very high           Tokyo 
                     pressure using Raman 
                     scattering 

                     Research on safety        National Space           06-01-92 - 
                     management of solid       Development Agency       03-31-93 
                     rocket propellants 

                     Research to synthesize    Mitsui Toatsu            06-01-92 - 
                     silicate compounds by     Chemicals, Inc.          03-31-93 
                     double-sealed 
                     dehydrogenation 

                     Research on structural    Mitsui Toatsu            06-01-92 - 
                     design and analysis of    Chemicals, Inc.          03-31-93 
                     organically dispersed 
                     non-linear 
                     photoelectronic 
                     materials 

                     Research on separation    Petroleum Energy         06-01-92 - 
                     of dicyclic and           Center                   03-31-93 
                     tricyclic aromatics 
                     using polymer film 

                     Research to prototype     Shinko Electric          07-01-92 - 
                     oxide films by gas        Industries Co., Ltd.     03-31-93 
                     synthesis method 

                     Research to synthesize    Nippon Steel Chemical    07-10-92 - 
                     aromatic alcohol from     Co., Ltd.                03-31-93 
                     aromatic carboxylic 
                     acid 

                     Research on adsorbents    Science U of Tokyo,      07-16-92 - 
                     and isolating agents      Science/Engineering      03-31-92 
                     for complex proteins      Dept. 

                     Basic research to         Advanced Chemical        07-20-92 - 
                     produce microscopic       Processing Research      03-31-93 
                     particulate by hybrid     Assn. 
                     high-frequency plasma 
                     method and research on 
                     non-destructive 
                     analysis of graded 
                     materials 

                     Research to generate      Kumamoto University      08-12-92 - 
                     convergent shock waves                             03-31-93 

                     Research on               Senken Fine Chemicals    08-31-92 - 
                     aryl-alkyl-carboxylic     Co., Ltd.                03-31-93 
                     acid and reduction 
                     catalysts from esters 
                     thereof 

                     Research to develop       Japan R&amp;D Center     10-01-92 - 
                     coating methods by        for Metals               03-31-93 
                     electromagnetic 
                     acceleration method 

                     In R&amp;D to upgrade     Human Lifestyle          10-09-92 - 
                     operations of             Research Center          03-31-93 
                     commercial nuclear 
                     power plants, research 
                     having to do with 
                     configuration, 
                     measurement, and 
                     evaluation of 
                     touch-sensitive facial 
                     heating elements 

                     Research on shock         Nippon Oil and Fats      11-01-92 - 
                     induced chemical          Co., Ltd.                03-31-93 
                     reactions based on 
                     real-time analysis 

                     Research to predict       Nissan Motor             11-17-92 - 
                     properties of ringed      Corporation              03-31-93 
                     nitramine compounds 

;24;1Government      Research on use of        Hyogo Pref. Industrial   07-01-90 - 
Industrial           glass and carbon-fiber    Technology Center,       03-31-93 
Research             reinforced plastic        Asahi Glass Co.,         Tr&gt; processing 
Institute, Osaka     (CFRP) in large-scale     Nippon Sheet Glass       materials [key 
                     construction projects     Co., Nippon Steel        regional 
                     [joint public-private     Corporation, Toho        technology 
                     sector research]          Rayon Co., Toray         R&amp;D] Office, 
                                               Industries, Nippon Oil   Fukui Ind. Tech. 
                                               Co., Mitsubishi          Center, Shiga Ind. 
                                               Chemical Industries,     Tech. Center, 
                                               Mitsubishi Rayon Co.,    Wakayama Ind. 
                                               Mitsubishi Heavy         Tech. Center, 
                                               Industries               Kyoto Small-Medium 
                                                                        Business Research 
                                                                        Center, Osaka Ind. 
                                                                        Tech. Research 
                                                                        Institute, Osaka 
                                                                        Municipal Ind. 
                                                                        Research 
                                                                        Institute, Hyogo 
                                                                        Ind. Research 
                                                                        Center, Okayama 
                                                                        Ind. Research 
                                                                        Ctr., Saga 
                                                                        Ceramics Research 
                                                                        Institute, Ion 
                                                                        Research Institute 


                     R&amp;D on basic marine   Biotechnology            10-01-92 - 
                     life technologies         Development Research     03-31-93 
                     [R&amp;D on methods of    Cooperative 
                     manufacturing advanced 
                     chemical (marine life) 
                     products] 

                     Research on internal      Osaka Gas Co., Ltd.      04-20-92 - 
                     connector materials for                            03-31-93 
                     lanthanum chromite 
                     solid electrolyte fuel 
                     cell 

                     Research on carbon        Shikibo, Ltd.            04-01-91 - 
                     hybrids to form 3D                                 03-31-93 
                     latticework 

                     Development of on-site    Toyo Tire and Rubber     10-01-90 - 
                     foam adsorbents and       Co., Ltd.                03-31-93 
                     evaluation of oil 
                     adsorptivity 

                     Research to elucidate     Petoka Co., Ltd.         04-01-91 - 
                     internal structure of                              03-31-93 
                     pitch carbon fibers 

                     Research to evaluate      Power Reactor and        10-30-92 - 
                     long-term durability of   Nuclear Fuel             03-31-93 
                     glassified waste          Development Corp. 
                     products 

                     Research on carbon use    Osaka Gas Co., Ltd.      04-15-91 - 
                     in lithium storage                                 03-31-93 
                     batteries 

                     Research to evaluate      Research Institute of    07-01-92 - 
                     high-temp properties of   Carbon Materials         03-31-93 
                     carbon and carbon 
                     composites 

                     Research on technology    Asahi Glass, HOYA        12-01-90 - 
                     for analyzing             Corp., Mitsui Toatsu     03-31-93 
                     microstructures           Chemicals, Matsushita 
                     [R&amp;D on non-linear    Electric 
                     photoelectronic 
                     materials] 

                     Research on a new solid   Kansai Electric Power    02-01-91 - 
                     electrolyte fuel cell     Co., Osaka Gas Co.,      03-31-93 
                                               Yanmar Diesel Engine 
                                               Co., Nisshin Electric 
                                               Co. 

                     Study on complete         Research Institute of    04-01-91 - 
                     system for generating     Innovative               03-31-93 
                     large amounts of          Technologies for the 
                     hydrogen (R&amp;D on      Earth 
                     effective uses of 
                     CO[.sub]2[/] fixing by 
                     contact hydrogenolysis) 


                     R&amp;D on                Osaka Pref. Industrial   09-02-91 - 
                     heat-resistant            Technology Research      03-31-93 
                     composites                Institute, Fukui 
                     [leading-edge regional    Industrial Technology 
                     technology R&amp;D]       Center, Wakayama 
                                               Industrial Technology 
                                               Center, Osaka Gas 

                     Research on ceramic       Nihon Kenmazai Kogyo     06-01-92 - 
                     flame-coated materials    Co., Ltd.                03-31-93 
                     and flame-coated film 

                     Research on               Adv. Chemical            10-01-91 - 
                     correcting/evaluating     Processing Technology    03-31-93 
                     film catalysts [R&amp;D   Research Assn. 
                     on advanced chemical 
                     processing] 

                     Research on catalytic     Research Corporation     02-01-92 - 
                     characteristics of        of Japan (JRC)           03-31-93 
                     semiconductors and 
                     precious metal 
                     composite structures 
                     [independent creative 
                     research training 
                     program entitled "Light 
                     and Matter"] 

                     Research on controlling   Adv. Chemical            07-20-92 - 
                     orientation properties    Processing Technology    03-31-93 
                     of perovskite oxide       Research Assn. 
                     films [R&amp;D on 
                     advanced chemical 
                     processing 
                     technologies] 

                     Research on reactions     SEC Co., Inc.            07-01-92 - 
                     of carbon materials                                03-31-93 

                     Research on prototyping   Toyota Motor             10-01-92 - 
                     hydrogen-occluded alloy   Corporation              03-31-93 
                     electrode 

                     Research on               Engineering Research     11-17-92 - 
                     super-high-temperature    Assn. for SST-HST        03-31-93 
                     adiabatic coating         Propulsion System 

                     Research to analyze       Nissin Trading Co.,      12-01-92 - 
                     materials by FT Raman     Ltd.                     09-30-93 
                     scattering method 

                     Research on design        Research Institute of    12-17-92 - 
                     manual for                Innovative               03-31-93 
                     environment-friendly      Technologies for the 
                     catalysts                 Earth 

                     R&amp;D on chemical       Foundation of Osaka      12-25-92 - 
                     processing of advanced    Science/Technology       03-31-93 
                     biomaterial               Center 

;24;1 Government     Research to develop       Midori Juji              07-01-91 - 
Industrial           vessel-organ contrast                              03-31-93 
Research             mediums 
Institute, Nagoya 

                     Research on               Ibaraki University       07-01-91 - 
                     microstructural control                            03-31-93 
                     of ceramic composites 

                     Research on               Mitsubishi Gas           08-30-90 - 
                     high-temperature          Chemical Co., Inc.       03-31-93 
                     properties of ceramics 

                     Research to synthesize    Tokem Products Co.,      10-15-90 - 
                     nitrous                   Ltd.                     03-31-93 
                     perfluoroalkylbromides 

                     Research to develop new   Nihon Oil and Fats       06-15-90 - 
                     fluoroactive compounds    Co., Ltd.                03-31-93 

                     Research on measurement   Nuclear Fuel             08-01-88 - 
                     of uranium oxide          Industries Co., Ltd.     03-31-93 
                     melting point 

                     Research to               Nippon Kayaku Co.,       12-18-90 - 
                     synthesize/evaluate       Ltd.                     03-31-93 
                     fluoro-derivatives of 
                     natural physiologically 
                     active substances 

                     Research on advanced      Chuo Equipment and       12-04-91 - 
                     ceramic bioreactor        Engineering Co., Ltd.    03-31-93 
                     system 

                     Research on               Nissei Electric Co.,     11-20-91 - 
                     high-performance          Ltd.                     03-31-93 
                     thermistor 

                     R&amp;D on                Int'l.                   10-01-91 - 
                     superconducting           Superconductivity        03-31-93 
                     ceramics                  Technology Center 

                     Research on reducing      Nissan Motor             06-01-92 - 
                     NO[.sub]x[/] by            Corporation              03-31-93 
                     electrically charged 
                     catalyst 

                     Research to develop       Aiwa Corporation, Kato   06-15-92 - 
                     photocatalytic water      Kikai Seisakusho         03-31-93 
                     treatment device 

                     Research on selective     Amano Seiyaku Co.,       07-01-92 - 
                     optical divisioning by    Ltd.                     03-31-93 
                     fluorocompound enzymes 
                     having plant growth 
                     control activity 

                     Research to analyze gas   Japan Foundry            07-15-92 - 
                     generated from casting    Association              03-31-93 
                     molds when casting 

                     Research on laser         Saito Kogyo Co., Ltd.    08-01-92 - 
                     machining of ceramics                              03-31-93 

                     Research on whisker       Otsuka Chemical Co.,     08-17-92 - 
                     surface reforming         Ltd.                     03-31-93 

                     Research on ceramic       Techno Chubu Co., Ltd.   09-03-92 - 
                     surfaces using a laser                             03-31-93 

                     Research on manufacture   Daito Co., Ltd.          10-01-92 - 
                     of porous ceramic                                  03-31-93 
                     openings using atomized 
                     oxide 

                     Research to               Cosmo Research           11-10-92 - 
                     commercialize             Institute, Cosmo         03-31-93 
                     reverse-shift catalysis   Engineering Co., Ltd. 


                     Research to synthesize    Akita University,        12-01-92 - 
                     fluorous liquid crystal   Tokem Products Co.,      09-30-93 
                     compounds                 Ltd. 

                     Research on               Petroleum Energy         12-01-92 - 
                     fiber-reinforced SiC      Center                   03-31-93 
                     composite using a 
                     silicon precursor 

                     Research on composition   Kutani Kiln Research     04-01-92 - 
                     of clays with weak        Institute, Ishikawa      03-31-93 
                     plasticity and the        Pref., Tajimi City 
                     methods of shaping        Ceramic Design 
                     those clays               Institute 

                     Research on molding       Daido Steel Co., Fuji    04-01-92 - 
                     near net shapes by        Electric Co., Nissan     03-31-93 
                     casting                   Chemical Industries 

                     R&amp;D on synthesis of   Artificial Clay Assn.,   12-01-92 - 
                     artificial clay for new   Mie Ceramics Research    03-31-93 
                     ceramics (synthesis       Lab, Ishikawa 
                     technologies for          Industrial Research 
                     artificial clay)          Lab, Toyama Industrial 
                     (applied technologies     Technology Center, 
                     for artificial clay)      Gifu Ceramics Research 
                                               Lab, Shiga Pref., 
                                               Shigaraki Ceramics 
                                               Research Lab, Aichi 
                                               Pref., Seto Ceramics 
                                               Center 

;26;1 National       R&amp;D pertaining to     Biotechnology            06-25-90 - 
Institute of         finding and               Development Research     03-31-93 
Bioscience and       manufacturing useful      Cooperative 
Human Technology     substances 

                     Research on secretory     Nippon Oil Co., Ltd.     04-25-90 - 
                     production of human                                03-31-93 
                     lysozyme by yeast 

                     Research on               Sankyo Corp              10-26-90 - 
                     physiologically active                             03-31-93 
                     platinum compounds 

                     Research on secretory     Higashi Nippon Gakuen    04-22-91 - 
                     production of             University               03-31-93 
                     carboxypeptidase Y by 
                     yeast 

                     R&amp;D on                Biotechnology            04-01-92 - 
                     exocytosis-type           Development Research     03-31-93 
                     molecular recognition     Cooperative 
                     and reactive control 
                     system 

                     Research on synthesis,    Biotechnology            11-05-92 - 
                     utilization, and          Development Research     03-31-93 
                     remodeling of complex     Cooperative 
                     sugars using 
                     biotechnology 

                     Development of            Tortoise shell           01-29-92 - 
                     replacement materials     Association of Japan     03-31-93 
                     for tortoise shell by 
                     integrating natural 
                     insect polymers 

                     R&amp;D on producing      Petroleum Energy         10-01-90 - 
                     valuable substances by    Center                   03-31-93 
                     microorganic conversion 
                     of oil distillates, 
                     i.e. polynuclear 
                     aromatic hydrocarbons 

                     Research to search for    Petroleum Energy         10-01-90 - 
                     more effective            Center                   03-31-93 
                     microorganisms as it 
                     pertains to functional 
                     group compounds from 
                     oil components 

                     Research to search for    Hokuren Agricultural     11-10-92 - 
                     physiologically           Cooperative              03-31-93 
                     functional substances 
                     in water extracted from 
                     beefsteak (shiso) 
                     leaves 

                     Research on breakdown     Marine Biotechnology     04-13-92 - 
                     of sulphur compounds by   Research Institute       03-31-93 
                     oceanic bacteria 

                     Research on interaction   Tabai Espec              04-12-91 - 
                     between liver cells and   Corporation              03-31-93 
                     organ cells 

                     Research to look at       Marine Biotechnology     06-25-90 - 
                     R&amp;D on basic marine   Research Institute       03-31-93 
                     life technologies 

                     R&amp;D on photolytic     Biotechnology            04-01-92 - 
                     system based on           Development Research     03-31-93 
                     physical chemistry        Cooperative 

                     Research on a new         Taiyo Fishery Co.,       04-15-92 - 
                     lectin in an American     Ltd.                     03-31-93 
                     crab species that 
                     specifically binds 
                     sialic acid 

                     Research to investigate   Research Institute of    12-18-91 - 
                     and make improvements     Innovative               03-31-93 
                     to photosynthesizing      Technologies for the 
                     microorganisms            Earth 

                     R&amp;D on                Research Institute of    12-19-90 - 
                     biodegradable plastics    Innovative               03-31-93 
                                               Technologies for the 
                                               Earth 

                     Research on               Toyo Engineering Co.,    04-30-91 - 
                     agglutinating ability     Ltd.                     03-31-93 
                     of yeast 

                     Research to improve       Godo Shusei Co., Ltd.    06-08-90 - 
                     functional                                         03-31-93 
                     characteristics of 
                     yeast 

                     Research to develop       Showa Sangyo Co., Ltd.   04-12-91 - 
                     advanced enzymes                                   03-31-93 

                     Basic research on         Maekawa Seisaku Co.,     02-18-92 - 
                     multiplication factor     Taisho Pharmaceutical    03-31-93 
                     of liver cells that       Co. 
                     come from spleen 

                     Research on mechanism     Aichi Medical            11-19-91 - 
                     by which blood vessels    University               03-31-93 
                     are formed and the 
                     differentiation of 
                     endovascular cells 

                     Research to improve       Polar Chemical           01-01-93 - 
                     functionality of          Industries Co., Ltd.,    03-31-93 
                     physiologically active    Sankyo Corp. 
                     substances using 
                     synthetic polymers 

                     Research concerned with   Biotechnology            08-01-92 - 
                     R&amp;D on building an    Development Research     03-31-93 
                     integrated genetic        Cooperative 
                     information data base 
                     and the use thereof 

                     Research on new           Kawazumi Chemical        06-01-92 - 
                     materials for             Industries Co., Ltd.     03-31-93 
                     channeling blood based 
                     on plasma agglutination 


                     Research concerned with   Engineering Center for   10-09-92 - 
                     R&amp;D on applications   Human Activities         03-31-93 
                     of human sensory 
                     measurements 

;47;1                Research on basic SOR     Sortech Co., Ltd.        09-01-86 - 
Electro-technical    technology                                         03-31-93 
Laboratory 

                     Research on usability     Electronic Dictionary,   10-14-86 - 
                     of fractional data in     Research Institute of    03-31-93 
                     electronic dictionaries   Japan 


                     Research on methods of    Next-Generation          02-12-88 - 
                     adapting theoretical      Computer Technology      03-31-93 
                     programming environment   Dev. Org. 
                     to creation of 
                     intelligent software 

                     Research to elucidate     Int'l.                   10-01-88 - 
                     the electronic            Superconductivity        03-31-93 
                     structure of              Technology Center 
                     high-temperature 
                     superconductors used in 
                     supercomputers 

                     Research on methods of    University of Tsukuba    07-06-89 - 
                     analyzing/assessing                                03-31-93 
                     material with 
                     high-intensity 
                     low-speed positive 
                     electron beam 

                     Research on               Sanyo Denki Co., Ltd.    10-11-89 - 
                     stereovision                                       03-31-93 
                     applications for 
                     industrial robots 

                     Research to develop and   University of Tsukuba    02-20-90 - 
                     evaluate functional                                03-31-93 
                     devices 

                     Research on SQUID         Superconductor Sensor    06-08-90 - 
                     micromagnetism            Research Institute       03-31-93 
                     measurement system 

                     Research on gaseous       Tokyo University         06-14-90 - 
                     thin film formation       Engineering Department   03-31-93 
                     process 

                     Research on mechanism     Tokyo Institute of       06-14-90 - 
                     by which silicon film     Technology               03-31-93 
                     is formed using plasma 

                     Research on marine        Sumitomo Electric        07-05-90 - 
                     fiber-optic               Industries, Ltd.         03-31-93 
                     distribution sensor 
                     technology 

                     Research on growth        University of Tsukuba    07-25-90 - 
                     process of film                                    03-31-93 
                     elements 

                     Research on dynamic       Chino Corporation        08-20-90 - 
                     characteristics of                                 06-30-92 
                     magnetic lattices in 
                     new superconducting 
                     materials 

                     Computer simulation of    University of Tsukuba    11-06-90 - 
                     solid phase epitaxial                              03-31-93 
                     growth and calculation 
                     of electronic structure 
                     of SiO[.sub]2[/]/Si 
                     interface 

                     Development of            Dainichi Seika Colour    04-15-91 - 
                     molecule-dispersed        and Chemicals Mfg.       03-31-93 
                     functional organic        Co., Ltd. 
                     photomaterials and 
                     elucidation of 
                     mechanism by which 
                     non-linear phenomena 
                     appear 

                     R&amp;D to develop new    Information Processing   04-19-91 - 
                     structural models for     Association (IPA)        03-31-93 
                     software 

                     Development of            Central Research         05-01-91 - 
                     magnetically shielded     Institute of Electric    03-31-93 
                     superconducting           Power Industry 
                     galvanometer 

                     Development of            Japan Space              05-14-91 - 
                     innovative machining      Environment Usage        03-31-93 
                     processes through         Promotion Center 
                     short-term use of 
                     microgravity 
                     environments 

                     Research on radiation     Japan Atomic Energy      05-18-92 - 
                     damage to silicon         Research Institute       03-31-93 
                     carbide layered 
                     structures (IV) 

                     Research to elucidate     Hosei University         07-19-91 - 
                     structure of radiation                             03-31-93 
                     defects in CaAs 

                     Research to assess        Japan Electric           09-02-91 - 
                     precision of standard     Instrument Inspection    03-31-93 
                     secondary voltage         Station, Advantest 
                     generators based on       Co., Ltd., Yokogawa 
                     Josephson-effect          Electric Corp., 
                     voltage standard          Yokogawa-Hewlett 
                                               Packard, Furugu Co., 
                                               Ltd. 

                     Fabrication and           Hiroshima University     09-13-91 - 
                     microscopic evaluation    Engineering Department   03-31-93 
                     of semiconductor 
                     materials 

                     Research on methods of    Science University of    10-01-91 - 
                     analyzing aerosol         Tokyo                    03-31-93 
                     components 

                     Spectroscopic crystal     NEC Corporation          11-15-91 - 
                     processing and                                     03-31-93 
                     ultra-high-sensitive 
                     measure of film 
                     impurities 

                     Development of III-V      Nippon Mining Co.,       11-30-91 - 
                     family compound           Ltd.                     03-31-93 
                     semiconductor LED 
                     materials by ion 
                     injection 

                     Photoelectric             Institute of Physical    01-10-92 - 
                     separation of ions by     and Chemical Research    03-31-93 
                     synchrotron irradiation 


                     Dynamics of               Research Corporation     02-03-92 - 
                     interactions caused by    of Japan (JRC)           03-31-93 
                     intense photoexcitation 
                     of highly concentrated 
                     dispersed molecular 
                     aggregate systems 

                     Research on integrated    Toyo Engineering         09-01-92 - 
                     model for building        Corporation              03-31-93 
                     next-generation 
                     production system 

                     Formation of              Tsukuba University       05-13-92 - 
                     semiconductor film by                              03-31-93 
                     undulating irradiation 

                     Transient responses by    Japan Atomic Energy      05-18-92 - 
                     microscopic ion beam in   Research Institute       03-31-93 
                     semiconductor PN 
                     junctions 

                     Photochemical reactions   Himeji Institute of      06-01-92 - 
                     using helical undulator   Technology               06-30-92 


                     Research on method of     Advantest Sendai         05-01-92 - 
                     bonding milliwave and     Research Institute       03-31-93 
                     Josephson junction 
                     arrays 

                     R&amp;D on method of      Japan Atomic Energy      07-01-92 - 
                     treating graphite         Research Institute       03-31-93 
                     surfaces by plasma CVD 
                     method 

                     Research to evaluate      Telecommunication        07-10-92 - 
                     the surfaces and          Research Institute,      03-31-93 
                     interfaces of             Tohoku U 
                     functional devices 

                     Research on highly        Kisarazu Industrial      07-10-92 - 
                     sensitive sub-milliwave   Technology Institute     03-31-93 
                     receiver which uses 
                     superconductivity 

                     Electronic structure of   National Research        09-01-92 - 
                     organic superconductors   Institute for Metals     03-31-93 


                     Research on visualizing   Toshiba Corporation      09-08-92 - 
                     fluid phenomena that                               03-31-93 
                     accompany interfacial 
                     phenomena 

                     Development of UV spare   Mitsubishi Heavy         10-01-92 - 
                     ionized high-voltage      Industries Co., Ltd.     03-31-93 
                     XeC1 laser 

                     Basic research on real    New Information          10-01-92 - 
                     world computing           Processing Development   03-31-93 
                                               Organization 

                     Research on parallel      Tokyo University,        11-02-92 - 
                     object directional        Science Dept.            03-31-93 
                     signaling system for 
                     parallel computers 

                     Research to assess        Data Processing          12-07-92 - 
                     object directional        Promotion Council        03-31-93 
                     distributed processing 
                     environment 

                     Research on object        Mitsubishi Research      11-02-92 - 
                     directional distributed   Inst., Sharp Corp.,      03-31-93 Tr&gt; basic 
                     processing environment    Sharp Business           high-temperature 
                                               Computer Software,       device 
                                               Toyo Information         technologySupport 
                                               Systems, Nihon Unisys,   Center and 
                                               Fuji-Xerox Information   microwave-band 
                                               Systems                  antennae (1 
                                                                        GH[.sub]2[/] - 
                                                                        18GH[.sub]2[/]) 

                     Research on temperature   Kyoshin Advantech Co.,   01-21-93 - 
                     coefficient of            Ltd.                     03-31-93 
                     ultra-precise 
                     low-resistance wiring 
                     standard and the yearly 
                     fluctuations and 
                     improvements thereof 

                     R&amp;D on executable     Data Processing          02-01-93 - 
                     formula-specific          Promotion Council        03-31-93 
                     signaling system 
                     CaFeOBJ 

                     Research to express       Daikin Industries Co.,   03-01-93 - 
                     functions of heart by     Ltd.                     03-31-93 
                     non-invasive 
                     measurement 

;28;1 National       Research to upgrade       Hazumagumi, Ltd.,        10-02-89 - 
Institute for        control blasting and      Hatori Kensetsu Co.,     03-31-93 
Resources and the    demolition methods        Ltd., Nippon Kayaku 
Environment                                    Co., Ltd., Nippon 
                                               Steel Corp., 
                                               Mechanical and 
                                               Electronic Inspection 
                                               Ctr. 

                     Research on behavior      Geol. Survey of Japan,   07-01-92 - 
                     and stabilization of      Nishimatsu               03-31-93 
                     large-scale base rock     Construction, 
                     wall surfaces             Ohbayashi, Hazumagumi, 
                                               Mitsui Construction 
                                               Co., Takekattsu 
                                               Construction Co., 
                                               Ryoko Mining Co., 
                                               Chichibu Cement Co. 

                     Research on erosion of    Mitsui Mining and        05-29-89 - 
                     concrete by seawater      Smelting Co., Ltd.       03-31-93 

                     Research on removal of    Fuji Electric Co.,       07-17-89 - 
                     less concentrated         Ltd.                     03-31-93 
                     nitrous oxides 

                     Research to develop       Nippon Steel Chemical    07-20-89 - 
                     means of separating       Co., Ltd., Kobe Steel,   03-31-93 
                     heterocompounds in        Ltd. 
                     liquefied coal oil and 
                     the applications 
                     thereof 

                     Research to develop       Toho Oribin Industry     04-04-90 - 
                     high value-added          Co., Ltd.                03-31-93 
                     process for 
                     serpentinite 

                     Research on synthesis     Ulvac Corporation        04-04-90 - 
                     and carbonization of                               03-31-93 
                     polyimides by vapor 
                     deposition 
                     polymerization method 

                     Research to develop       Central Research         06-11-90 - 
                     spherical hydraulic       Institute of Electric    03-31-93 
                     crushing technique        Power Industry, Abiko 
                                               Research Institute 

                     Basic research on         Kyushu U,                11-01-90 - 
                     long-term rock            Environmental Systems    03-31-93 
                     transformation and        Engineering Research 
                     fracturing                Center 

                     Research to develop       Tokyo U Engineering      11-01-90 - 
                     device which uses         Dept., Tokyo Electric    03-31-93 
                     plasma in decomposition   Power Co., JEOL, 
                     of freon                  Nippon Steel Corp., 
                                               Nittetsu Tech. Info. 
                                               Center 

                     Development of advanced   National Chemical Lab    12-12-90 - 
                     hydrogen catalysts        For Industry (NCLI),     03-31-93 
                                               Research Institute of 
                                               Innovative 
                                               Technologies for the 
                                               Earth 

                     Research on methods of    Ebara Corporation        04-12-91 - 
                     thermochemically                                   03-31-93 
                     treating organic wastes 


                     Research on methods of    Riken Corporation        04-22-91 - 
                     treating nitrous oxides                            06-30-92 


                     Research to generate      Taisei Corporation       08-05-91 - 
                     elastic waves by                                   03-31-93 
                     precision blasting 

                     Basic research on         Muroran Institute of     10-01-91 - 
                     mechanical motion         Technology, Eng. Dept.   03-31-93 
                     control system 

                     Basic research on         Tohoku U, Engineering    10-01-91 - 
                     mechanical motion         Dept.                    03-31-93 
                     control system 

                     Basic research on         Yamagata U,              04-10-92 - 
                     abrasive mixing           Engineering Dept.        03-31-93 
                     mechanism in very 
                     high-pressure waterjet 
                     nozzles 

                     Basic research on         Tohoku U, Reactive       04-10-92 - 
                     separation and refining   Chemistry Dept.          03-31-93 
                     of organic compounds by 
                     the pressure 
                     crystallization method 

                     Basic research on         Central Research         05-27-92 - 
                     analytic algorithm for    Institute of Electric    03-31-93 
                     analyzing concentration   Power Industry, Komae 
                     of greenhouse gases       Research Institute 

                     Research to study         Chiba Institute of       07-01-92 - 
                     catalytic reaction        Technology               03-31-93 
                     between paraffin and 
                     CO[.sub]2[/] 

                     Research to study         Asahi Chemical           07-20-92 - 
                     atmospheric chemical      Industry Co., Ltd.       03-31-93 
                     reactions of organic 
                     halide compounds 

                     Research on CO[.sub]2[/]   Tokyo Inst. of           07-28-92 - 
                     gas fixing and oil        Technology, Basic        03-31-93 
                     conversion by seaweeds    Engineering Dept. 

                     Research on ways of       Chemical Products        08-01-92 - 
                     analyzing composition     Research Association     03-31-93 
                     of microbiological 
                     groups in active 
                     pollutants 

                     Research on activation    Nippon Kattan Ekika      08-01-92 - 
                     of brown coal by          Co., Ltd.                03-31-93 
                     preprocessing 

                     R&amp;D on new            Research Institute of    08-02-92 - 
                     refrigerant for           Innovative               03-31-93 
                     compression-type heat     Technologies for the 
                     pump                      Earth 

                     Research to develop       Coal Mining Research     09-01-92 - 
                     non-combustion and        Center                   06-30-93 
                     flameproofing 
                     technologies 

                     Research on method of     Power Reactor and        09-01-92 - 
                     evaluating changes in     Nuclear Fuel             03-31-93 
                     physical properties       Development Corp. 
                     that come with drilling 


                     Analysis of data from     Mitsubishi Heavy         12-10-92 - 
                     new processes having to   Industries Co., Ltd.     03-31-93 
                     do with surveys on 
                     development of coal 
                     hydrogasification 
                     technology 

;13;1 Government     Evaluation of process     Hokkaido U,              04-09-92 - 
Industrial           by which film is formed   Engineering Dept.        03-31-93 
Research             on amorphous chalgonite 
Institute,           semiconductor 
Hokkaido 

                     Research on medical       Sapporo Meiwa            04-09-92 - 
                     diagnosis system          Hospital, Rakuno         03-31-93 
                     involving information     Gakuen University, 
                     transmission              Shiwaku Co., Ltd. 

                     Research on heat pumps    Maekawa Manufacturing    04-09-92 - 
                     for colder regions        Co., Ltd.                03-31-93 

                     Pilot study of coal       Coal Mining Research     04-09-92 - 
                     preprocessing             Center, Japan            03-31-93 

                     Research to develop       Government Industrial    04-09-92 - 
                     highly selective          Research Institute,      03-31-93 
                     metallic element          Tohoku, Mitsubishi 
                     separation materials by   Chemical Industries, 
                     upgrading molecule        Ltd., Hitachi Chemical 
                     recognition function      Co., Ltd., Nippon 
                                               Sosui Co., Ltd., Sara 
                                               Kogyo Co., Ltd., Asaka 
                                               Riken Kogyo Co., Ltd. 

                     Perfecting solid          Hokkaido Takigawa        04-09-92 - 
                     fermentation farm         Livestock Research Lab   03-31-93 
                     by-product feed 
                     technology 

                     Research on ways to       Yokohama Rubber Co.,     05-06-92 - 
                     evaluate durability of    Ltd.                     03-31-93 
                     snow tires 

                     Research to generate      Yamatake-Honeywell       07-01-92 - 
                     new particle-dispersed    Co., Japan Steel Works   03-31-93 
                     composite alloys in       Co. 
                     microgravity 
                     environment 

                     Study of relationship     Hitachi, Ltd., Babcock   08-03-92 - 
                     between nuclear           Hitachi, Ltd.            03-31-93 
                     reactivity and raw 
                     material properties, 
                     and coal and char 
                     reactivity 

                     Advanced uses of          North Kawakami           10-01-92 - 
                     bioresources in colder    Cooperative Starch       03-31-93 
                     regions                   Plant; Okhotsk 
                                               Cooperative Starch 
                                               Factory; Snow Brand 
                                               Milk Products Co., 
                                               Sapporo Research 
                                               Institute; Mitsui 
                                               Toatsu Chemicals, 
                                               Hokkaido Plant; 
                                               Hokkaido Forestry 
                                               Research Lab; Hokkaido 
                                               Livestock Research 
                                               Lab; Aomori Pref. 
                                               Industrial Technology 
                                               Center; Tamazukuri 
                                               Co.; Hokuren 
                                               Agricultural 
                                               Cooperative; Hokko 
                                               Chemical Industries 
                                               Co.; Hayasaka Riko Co. 


                     Research to develop       Engineering              10-01-92 - 
                     mild gas manufacturing    Advancement              03-31-93 
                     system that uses peat     Association of Japan 

                     Research on the           Center for Coal          11-24-92 - 
                     production/reduction of   Utilization, Japan       03-31-93 
                     N[.sub]2[/]O from 
                     fluidized bed 
                     combustors 

                     Evaluating the            Mitsubishi Heavy         12-16-92 - 
                     gasification              Industries, Ltd.         03-31-93 
                     characteristics of 
                     hydrofined char 

Government           Research on synthesis     Mitsubishi Gas           07-01-90 - 
Industrial           and functionality of      Chemical Co., Ltd.,      03-31-93 
Research             inorganic composite       Kohpu Chemical Co., 
Institute, Kyushu    polymers                  Ltd., Teika Co., Ltd. 

                     Research to develop new   Saga Industrial          07-10-90 - 
                     pottery clay using        Research Lab, Nagasaki   03-31-93 
                     low-fired pottery         Industrial Ceramics 
                     stones as raw material    Technology Center, 
                                               Kumamoto Industrial 
                                               Technology Center, 
                                               Kagoshima Industrial 
                                               Technology Center, 
                                               Amakusa Pottery 
                                               Cooperative, Oita 
                                               Pottery Cooperative 

                     R&amp;D on technologies   Asuku Co., Ltd., Aso     10-13-88 - 
                     pertaining to fine        Cement Co., Ltd., Ueda   03-31-93 
                     element materials of      Lime Manufacturing 
                     coal                      Co., Ltd., Okutama 
                                               Industries, Ltd., 
                                               Onoda Cement Co., 
                                               Ltd., Kawai Lime, 
                                               Ltd., Kurimoto Steel 
                                               Works, Ltd., Sumitomo 
                                               Cement Co., Ltd., 
                                               Chichibu Lime, Ltd., 
                                               Toyo Denka Kogyo, 
                                               Ltd., Nitchin Co., 
                                               Ltd., Nippon Kakoh 
                                               Seishi K.K., Fukuoka 
                                               Industrial Technology 
                                               Center, Saga 
                                               Industrial Technology 
                                               Center, Kumamoto 
                                               Industrial Technology 
                                               Center, Oita 
                                               Industrial Research 
                                               Institute, Okinawa 
                                               Industrial Research 
                                               Institute, Okayam 
                                               Industrial Technology 
                                               Center 

;20;1 Government     R&amp;D on recycling      Kagawa Prefecture,       12-01-88 - 
Industrial           system for composite      Shin-Kochi Heavy         03-31-93 
Research             materials 1--Research     Industries, Ltd., 
Institute, Shikoku   on dismantling,           Skikoku Kiki Co. Ltd., 
                     crushing, and             Shikoku Passenger 
                     classifying FRP waste     Train Co., Ltd., 
                                               Nissin Kikai Co., 
                                               Ltd., Hashimoto 
                                               Special Industries 
                                               Co., Ltd., Mitsui 
                                               Engineering and 
                                               Shipbuilding Co., 
                                               Ltd., Tatemitsu 
                                               Industries, Ltd. 

                     R&amp;D on recycling      Nihon Spindle            12-01-88 - 
                     system for composite      Manufacturing Co.,       03-31-93 
                     materials 2--Research     Ltd. 
                     on dismantling, 
                     crushing, and 
                     classifying FRP waste 

                     R&amp;D on recycling      Ehime Prefecture,        12-01-88 - 
                     system for composite      Kochi Prefecture,        03-31-93 
                     materials 3--Research     Okura Industries, 
                     on recycling FRP waste    Ltd., Daiki Co., Ltd., 
                     (direct uses)             Marusen Kagaku Co., 
                                               Ltd. 

                     R&amp;D on recycling      Kochi Prefecture,        12-01-88 - 
                     system for composite      Tokushima Prefecture,    03-31-93 
                     materials 4--Research     Toyo Denka Kogyo Co., 
                     on recycling FRP waste    Ltd., Toyo Engineering 
                     (disintegration uses)     Works, Ltd., 
                                               Shin-Kochi Industries, 
                                               Ltd. 

                     Research on development   Mogami Denki Co.,        08-04-88 - 
                     of acidic                 Ltd., Pioneer            03-31-93 
                     polysaccharide fiber      Electronic Corporation 
                     functions and 
                     applications in 
                     electronic and acoustic 
                     materials 

                     Research on development   Kanai Juyo Kogyo Co.,    08-04-88 - 
                     of biodegradable sheets   Ltd.                     03-31-93 
                     1--Developing 
                     technology for 
                     manufacturing fiber 
                     sheet molding 

                     Research on development   Oishi Sangyo Co.,        05-29-89 - 
                     of biodegradable sheets   Ltd., Izeki Noki Co.     03-31-93 
                     2--Development of         Ltd. 
                     technology for 
                     manufacturing 
                     industrial molding 

                     Research on development   Nishikawa Rubber         05-29-89 - 
                     of biodegradable sheets   Industries, Ltd.         03-31-93 
                     3--Development of 
                     technology for 
                     manufacturing porous 
                     molding 

                     Research on development   Okura Industries, Ltd.   05-29-89 - 
                     of biodegradable sheets                            03-31-93 
                     4--Development of 
                     technology for 
                     manufacturing 
                     industrial sheets 

                     Research on development   Aisero Kagaku Co.,       05-29-89 - 
                     of biodegradable sheets   Ltd.                     03-31-93 
                     5--Development of 
                     technology for 
                     manufacturing 
                     industrial sheets 

                     Research on inorganic     Toyo Denka Kogyo Co.,    06-11-90 - 
                     phosphorous textiles      Ltd.                     03-31-93 

                     Research on               Takamitsu Co., Ltd. 
                     applications for 
                     insoluble alginate 
                     fiber that contains 
                     bacterial-resistant 
                     zeolite 

                     Research on development   Tokushima Prefecture,    06-14-90 - 
                     of more advanced          Kagawa Prefecture,       03-31-93 
                     flame-coating process     Kochi Prefecture, 
                                               Okayama Prefecture 

                     Research on ion and       Tokushima University,    05-17-91 - 
                     laser beam based metal    Industrial Junior        03-31-93 
                     finishing                 College, Tokushima 
                                               University Engineering 
                                               Department 

                     Research on use of        Shin-Niihama             09-05-91 - 
                     laser beams to obtain     Industrial High School   03-31-93 
                     high functionality in     and College, Sumitomo 
                     powder-based surfaces     Heavy Industries 
                                               Forging Co., Ltd. 

                     Research on replacement   Tortoise shell           01-27-92 - 
                     materials for tortoise    Association of Japan     03-31-93 
                     shell based on 
                     development of natural 
                     polymer compounds 

                     Research on beam          Aichi Corporation        04-15-92 - 
                     damping technology for                             03-31-93 
                     vehicles that work in 
                     high places 

                     Applied research on use   Kagawa Pref., Okura      08-17-92 - 
                     of agricultural and       Industrial Co., Ltd.     03-31-93 
                     marine waste products 
                     as ecomaterials used in 
                     food distribution 

                     Research on development   Otsuka Pharmaceutical    09-10-92 - 
                     of battery                Co., Ltd.                03-31-93 

                     Research on               Kagawa University,       02-15-93 - 
                     whisker-reinforced        Okayama Prefecture,      03-31-93 
                     aluminum composites       Kamadatoshi, Co. Ltd., 
                                               Shikoku Kasei Co., 
                                               Ltd., Tadano Co., 
                                               Ltd., Toyo Denka 
                                               Industries, Ltd. 

;12;1 Government     Research on method of     Aomori Pref., Iwate      09-10-90 - 
Industrial           comprehensively           Pref., Akita Pref.,      03-31-93 
Research             evaluating composite      Miyagi Pref., Yamagata 
Institute, Tohoku    structures based on       Pref., Fukushima 
                     internal inspection       Pref., Nitto Chemical 
                     system                    Industry Co., Ltd., 
                                               Ben Iwate Kojo, Ltd., 
                                               Sugiura Manufacturing 
                                               Co., Ltd., Tohoku 
                                               Ricoh Co., Ltd., 
                                               Nippon Ceratech Co., 
                                               Ltd., Tohoku Special 
                                               Steel Co., Ltd., Asaka 
                                               Riken Industries, 
                                               Ltd., Kokken Denshi 
                                               Co., Ltd., Hitachi 
                                               Construction Machinery 
                                               Co., Ltd., Tokimekku 
                                               Co., Ltd., Honda 
                                               Kinzoku Gijutsu, Ltd., 
                                               Komatsu Ltd., Nippon 
                                               Emerson Co., Ltd., 
                                               Tohoku University, 
                                               Yamagata University 

                     Research on               Kohpu Chemical Co.,      04-01-91 - 
                     manufacturing             Ltd.                     03-31-93 
                     technology for swollen 
                     silicates and the uses 
                     thereof 

                     Research on ways of       Hitachi Chemical Model   04-01-91 - 
                     analyzing the flow of     Co., Ltd.                03-31-93 
                     non-transparent 
                     composite thermoplastic 
                     resin products by 
                     ultrasonic imaging 

                     Research to perfect       Kunimine Industries,     08-01-91 - 
                     method of manufacturing   Ltd.                     03-31-93 
                     hectorite and 
                     stevensite 

                     Research on effects of    Mitsubishi Research      01-10-92 - 
                     gravity on material       Institute                03-31-93 
                     manufacturing processes 
                     with gaseous chemical 
                     reactions 

                     Research on residual      Tohoku University        02-01-92 - 
                     stress in                 Engineering Department   03-31-93 
                     partially-stable 
                     zirconia and stainless 
                     steel zygotes 

                     Research to develop       Sanden Kogyo Co., Ltd.   02-20-92 - 
                     flow rate meter for                                03-31-93 
                     sealed water conduits 

                     Research to assess        Mitsubishi Aluminum      04-01-92 - 
                     status of various types   Co., Ltd.                03-31-93 
                     of joints by an 
                     ultrasonic imaging 
                     device 

                     Research to develop and   Nitto Funko Co., Ltd.    04-01-92 - 
                     manufacture functional                             03-31-93 
                     inorganic composite 
                     adsorbents 

                     Research on application   Akita Prefecture         04-01-92 - 
                     of local natural                                   03-31-93 
                     resources in 
                     biotechnology 

                     Research on coasting      Fushimi Seiyaku Co.,     07-01-92 - 
                     technology                Ltd.                     03-31-93 

                     Research on ion           Power Reactor and        04-01-92 - 
                     adsorption and swelling   Nuclear Fuel             03-31-93 
                     mechanisms of inorganic   Development 
                     compounds                 Corporation 

Government           Technology for            Tottori Industrial       04-01-92 - 
Industrial           evaluating the design     Research Laboratory,     03-31-93 
Research             process for precision     Tottori Industrial 
Institute, Chugoku   molding of free curved    Technology Center, 
                     surfaces                  Okayama Industrial 
                                               Technology Center, 
                                               Hiroshima Industrial 
                                               Technology Center, 
                                               West, Hiroshima 
                                               Industrial Technology 
                                               Center, East, 
                                               Yamaguchi Industrial 
                                               Technology Center, 
                                               Mitsuyo Co., Chugoku 
                                               Industries, Ltd., 
                                               Nippon System Design 
                                               Co., Interface Co., 
                                               Sanei Technologies 
                                               Co., Aimekkusu Co., 
                                               Mazda Motor 
                                               Corporation, 
                                               Ishikawajima-Harima 
                                               Heavy Industries Co., 
                                               Mitsubishi Motors 
                                               Corporation, 
                                               Metasoft-Fuji Co., 
                                               Japan Steel Works, 
                                               Ltd., System 
                                               Instrumentation Co., 
                                               Ltd., Nissin Steel 
                                               Co., Ltd., Sharp 
                                               Corp., Sakurai Kikai 
                                               Co., Kasen Nozzle 
                                               Manufacturing Co., 
                                               Ltd., IPD Co., Ltd., 
                                               Sanin Microcomputer 
                                               Center, MIT System 
                                               Development Co., 
                                               Sankyo Seiko Co., 
                                               Hirotech Co., Nippon 
                                               Press Co., Katayama 
                                               Industries, Ltd., 
                                               Hiruta Industries, 
                                               Ltd., Sanyo Brake Co., 
                                               Kinki University 

                     Research on plan          Hiroshima Industrial     04-01-92 - 
                     generation for the        Technology Center,       03-31-93 
                     purpose of robot          West, Hiroshima 
                     control                   Industrial Technology 
                                               Center, East, Kinki 
                                               University Engineering 
                                               Dept., Maritime Safety 
                                               Academy, Ten Pearl 
                                               Co., Ltd., Sanzo Co., 
                                               Ltd. 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-44917 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpjst010___94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-JST-94-010 </AU>
JPRS 
Science &amp; Technology 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Japan AIST Research Laboratory Plans </ABS>
<DATE1>   31 October 1993 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     1993 AIST Laboratory Research Plans </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    1993 AIST Laboratory Research Plans </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Public-Private Joint Research </H4>

<F P=102> 94FE0219H Tokyo AGENCY OF INDUSTRIAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
in Japanese 31 Oct 93 pp 492-495 </F>

<F P=103> 94FE0219H </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo AGENCY OF INDUSTRIAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
in Japanese 31 Oct 93 pp 492-495 </F>

<F P=105> Japanese </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

  [Text] 
<H5>  3. Public-Private Sector Joint Research Programs </H5>
  The technical development of private companies in Japan is 
shifting from the traditional means in which companies import 
technologies from abroad to a more modern approach whereby 
companies base their growth on applied research and practical 
research oriented toward commercialization and 
industrialization. However, when we consider the current 
technological level and development potential of Japan, it is 
obvious that a stronger emphasis must be placed on more 
fundamental research and development. 
  Research and development in basic and foundational areas 
carries with it major technical and economic risks, so it is 
hard to say whether such R&amp;D will be fully implemented by 
private companies in Japan. 
  On the other hand, since the AIST laboratories were 
established we have seen a steady growth of practical results in 
the area of foundational research, so the research potential is 
extremely high when observed from that perspective. 
  In order to more effectively promote foundational research 
in 
Japan, AIST initiated the Private-Public Sector Joint Research 
Program in 1985 with the specific aim of implementing joint 
research that would take maximum advantage of the foundational 
research potential in AIST laboratories and be organically 
linked with the human and financial potential of private 
industry. 
  In the conventional joint research system, government 
research laboratories would promote research and development 
through the private sector, but that system was equivalent to 
allocating research as there was no exchange of research or 
shared use of equipment. It would be an overstatement to say 
that this system was successful, particularly since there were 
no budgetary actions taken by the government. The new joint 
research program, however, enables centralized joint research by 
establishing organic links between the public and private 
sector. This research program includes the joint use of 
equipment owned by AIST laboratories as well as equipment owned 
by private industry. 
<H5>  1. Priority Research Projects </H5>
  These are research projects in which public interest is 
thought to be particularly high. These topics are concerned with 
foundational research essential to building an industrial base 
and with joint research between private companies and AIST 
laboratories in high priority areas. 
<H5>  2. Research Implementation </H5>
  The research will be carried out at AIST laboratories or at 
private corporations depending on the needs at the time. 
  (2) Use of research equipment 
  In order to produce effective joint research based on 
organic 
links between the public and private sector, AIST laboratories 
will accept private researchers (civilians), allow private 
research equipment to be used, and allow private researchers to 
use research equipment owned by the AIST research laboratories 
free of charge. 
  In addition, the government will send researchers to private 
companies as the need arises (official business visits). 
  (3) Research and development funding 
  Personnel costs will be handled separately. In terms of the 
equipment needed for research, there will be no charge to either 
party for the use of each other's equipment. Payment for new 
equipment, supplies, and utilities will be determined according 
to the respective share of research being implemented by each 
party. 
  (4) Contributing equipment 
  It will also be possible for privately owned companies which 
are supplying their own equipment to the AIST laboratory for the 
purpose of joint research to donate that equipment to the AIST 
research laboratory if it is thought to be too expensive to 
remove the equipment once the joint research has been completed, 
or if the equipment was designed exclusively for a particular 
joint research project, or if it was built so that it could 
continue to be used in the future by the AIST laboratory. 
  The research findings made during joint research will become 
joint public-private property. 
  FY93 Budget - &yen;250 million 



  Joint Public-Private Research Projects (July 1, 1993) 

Research             AIST     Term         Partner                Description 
                     Lab 

Develop highly       GIRI,    1991 -       Mitsubishi Chemical    In advanced 
selective            Toh,     1994         Industries, Ltd.,      industries where 
isolating agent      GIRI,                 Hitachi Chemical       development of new 
for metallic         Hok                   Co., Ltd., Rasa        materials plays a 
elements based on                          Industries, Ltd.,      central role, it is 
advanced molecule                          Nippon Rensui Co.,     essential that 
recognition                                Ltd., Asaka Riken      there be a stable 
function                                   Co., Ltd.              supply of highly 
                                                                  pure rare metals 
                                                                  for use as raw 
                                                                  materials, and 
                                                                  likewise essential, 
                                                                  there should be a 
                                                                  more sophisticated 
                                                                  method for 
                                                                  separating metals 
                                                                  based on 
                                                                  composition 
                                                                  analysis in order 
                                                                  to conduct process 
                                                                  and quality 
                                                                  management of new 
                                                                  materials. This 
                                                                  research will focus 
                                                                  on creating new 
                                                                  materials and 
                                                                  reagents having the 
                                                                  ability to 
                                                                  recognize metal 
                                                                  ions and metal 
                                                                  complexes by making 
                                                                  compounds of 
                                                                  chain-shaped 
                                                                  reagents and 
                                                                  large-molecule 
                                                                  organic polymers 
                                                                  that react 
                                                                  selectively with 
                                                                  metal ions such as 
                                                                  rhodium, niobium, 
                                                                  and rare earth 
                                                                  elements. The 
                                                                  knowledge gained 
                                                                  will be used to 
                                                                  develop a method 
                                                                  for isolating and 
                                                                  recovering resource 
                                                                  metals, i.e. rare 
                                                                  metals, and a 
                                                                  method for 
                                                                  isolating and 
                                                                  analyzing the 
                                                                  purity of 
                                                                  ultra-minute 
                                                                  quantities. 

Develop advanced     NIBH     1991 -       Sankyo Co., Ltd.,      The rapid growth of 
functions in                  1993         Bioscience Research    biotechnology in 
physiologically                            Institute, Polar       recent years has 
active substances                          Chemical Industries,   led to the 
through use of                             Ltd., New              production of large 
synthetic polymers                         Pharmaceutical         amounts of 
                                           Research Institute     physiologically 
                                                                  active substances 
                                                                  such as interferon, 
                                                                  growth hormones, 
                                                                  and 
                                                                  cancer-resisting 
                                                                  agents, but many 
                                                                  cannot be used 
                                                                  because their 
                                                                  effectiveness has 
                                                                  not been fully 
                                                                  documented and some 
                                                                  have proven to be 
                                                                  toxic. There is 
                                                                  thus a demand for 
                                                                  an applied 
                                                                  technology with 
                                                                  regard to these 
                                                                  substances. The aim 
                                                                  of this research 
                                                                  will be to 
                                                                  concentrate on 
                                                                  substances that 
                                                                  appear to be 
                                                                  effective against 
                                                                  cancer and develop 
                                                                  a technology for 
                                                                  making the 
                                                                  physiologically 
                                                                  active substances 
                                                                  more functional 
                                                                  through the use of 
                                                                  synthetic polymers. 


Invent new alloys    GIRI,    1992 -       Yamatake-Honeywell     The aim of this 
with evenly          Hok      1994         Co., Ltd., Japan       research is to 
distributed                                Steel Works, Ltd.      create a whole 
particle matter in                                                martensite crystal 
microgravity                                                      that exhibits 
environment                                                       excellent wear, 
                                                                  corrosion, and heat 
                                                                  resistance by 
                                                                  melting powdered 
                                                                  metal in a 
                                                                  microgravity 
                                                                  environment and 
                                                                  producing an iron 
                                                                  alloy with an even 
                                                                  distribution of 
                                                                  particulate 
                                                                  throughout. 
                                                                  Therefore, using a 
                                                                  drop test facility 
                                                                  in which a 
                                                                  temporary 
                                                                  microgravity 
                                                                  environment can be 
                                                                  produced, this 
                                                                  research will focus 
                                                                  on developing an 
                                                                  effective method 
                                                                  for fabricating 
                                                                  this material. The 
                                                                  structure of the 
                                                                  new composite 
                                                                  material will then 
                                                                  be analyzed and its 
                                                                  properties 
                                                                  evaluated. 

Advanced             NRLM     1992 -       Tokyo Keiso Co.,       In order to perfect 
three-dimensional             1994         Ltd., Nikon Corp.,     an advanced 
measurement                                Tadano Corp., Idec     three-dimensional 
methods for large                          Izumi Corp.            measurement and 
structures                                                        evaluation 
                                                                  technology for 
                                                                  large structures 
                                                                  such as tanks and 
                                                                  cranes, this 
                                                                  research will focus 
                                                                  on developing a 
                                                                  method for taking 
                                                                  long-distant 
                                                                  measurements by 
                                                                  laser, a laser 
                                                                  tracking method for 
                                                                  optical 
                                                                  measurements of 
                                                                  three-dimensional 
                                                                  positions, 
                                                                  developing a use 
                                                                  for optic-fiber 
                                                                  technology for 
                                                                  anti-explosion 
                                                                  purposes, a method 
                                                                  for evaluating 
                                                                  quantities by means 
                                                                  of measuring 
                                                                  pressure, and a 
                                                                  method for 
                                                                  compensating for 
                                                                  the pneumatic 
                                                                  refraction factor. 

Evaluate behavior    GSJ,     1992 -       Nishimatsu             In order to prevent 
and stability of     NIRE     1996         Construction Co.,      breakup and 
large base rock                            Ltd., Mitsui           disintegration of 
wall surfaces                              Construction Co.,      large base rock 
                                           Ltd., Hazuma-Gumi,     wall surfaces in 
                                           Ltd.                   strip mines and 
                                                                  underground 
                                                                  tunnels, this 
                                                                  research will focus 
                                                                  on the development 
                                                                  of a technology for 
                                                                  elucidating the 
                                                                  mechanism at work, 
                                                                  devising a means 
                                                                  for detecting it 
                                                                  beforehand, and 
                                                                  then incorporating 
                                                                  that knowledge into 
                                                                  safety operations. 
                                                                  To accomplish that 
                                                                  goal, this research 
                                                                  will try to 
                                                                  elucidate and 
                                                                  evaluate the 
                                                                  specific behavior 
                                                                  of ground water in 
                                                                  discontinuous 
                                                                  surfaces within 
                                                                  base rock. 

Research on          GIRI,    1993 -       Asahi Glass Co.,       In order to resolve 
mechanism by which   Osa      1996         Ltd., Central Glass    the problem of 
bubbles are                                Co., Ltd., Nippon      bubbles in the 
generated in the                           Sheet Glass Co.,       glass fusion 
glass fusion                               Ltd., Nippon           process, this 
process                                    Electric Glass Co.,    research will 
                                           Ltd., Toyo Glass       attempt to perfect 
                                           Co., Ltd., HOYA        a technology which 
                                           Corp., and three       analyzes 
                                           others                 microbubbles, and 
                                                                  with that will 
                                                                  conduct scientific 
                                                                  studies on bubbling 
                                                                  mechanisms which 
                                                                  will include the 
                                                                  gas component 
                                                                  dissolving and 
                                                                  bubbling mechanism, 
                                                                  the mechanism by 
                                                                  which glass is 
                                                                  refined by a 
                                                                  clarifying agent, 
                                                                  elucidation of the 
                                                                  rebubbling 
                                                                  phenomenon (reboil) 
                                                                  caused by oxidation 
                                                                  and reduction, and 
                                                                  bubbling caused by 
                                                                  contact with the 
                                                                  furnace. 

Perfect mitigation   GIRI,    1993 -       Chugoku Electric       Based on the 
technology to        Chu      1996         Power Co., Ltd.,       results of R&amp;D 
control ocean                              Taisei Corp.,          conducted by this 
environment                                Penta-Ocean            laboratory on 
                                           Construction Co.,      flow-duration 
                                           Ltd., Bridgestone      control as a 
                                           Corp.                  leading technology 
                                                                  that both mitigates 
                                                                  and protects the 
                                                                  natural environment 
                                                                  from the effects 
                                                                  that large-scale 
                                                                  developments have 
                                                                  on the ocean 
                                                                  environment, this 
                                                                  project will 
                                                                  include R&amp;D on 
                                                                  a flow-duration 
                                                                  control structure 
                                                                  having a commercial 
                                                                  function and 
                                                                  research on 
                                                                  effective adaptable 
                                                                  configurations. 

Material             NIMC     1993 -       National Research      The technology of 
processing using              1996         Institute for          plasma 
ultra-high-speed                           Metals,                flamecoating, which 
high-density                               Ishikawajima-Harima    is now used 
plasma jets                                Heavy Industries       commercially, is 
                                           Co., Ltd., Kobe        running up against 
                                           Steel, Ltd., Japan     technical 
                                           Steel Works, Ltd.,     limitations in 
                                           Mitsubishi Heavy       terms of the 
                                           Industries, Ltd.,      interparticle 
                                           Mitsubishi Materials   binding forces in 
                                           Corp.                  flamecoated film, 
                                                                  the existence of 
                                                                  air pockets, and 
                                                                  bonding capability 
                                                                  with materials, so 
                                                                  it has become an 
                                                                  urgent matter that 
                                                                  new and innovative 
                                                                  technologies be 
                                                                  developed that will 
                                                                  enable even higher 
                                                                  quality film to be 
                                                                  created, thus this 
                                                                  research will 
                                                                  attempt to 
                                                                  prototype new 
                                                                  materials and 
                                                                  perfect a 
                                                                  generation/control 
                                                                  technology for the 
                                                                  ultra-high-speed 
                                                                  high-density plasma 
                                                                  jets used at this 
                                                                  laboratory and a 
                                                                  high-energy 
                                                                  flamecoating 
                                                                  technology for 
                                                                  private industry. 

Upgrading the        NIBH     1993 -       Nippon Kasei           This research will 
functionality and             1995         Chemical Co., Ltd.,    be about developing 
controlling in                             Hisamitsu              a method for 
vivo production of                         Pharmaceutical Co.,    increasing the 
ribozymes                                  Ltd., Nagase Sangyo    activation energy 
                                           Co., Ltd., Applied     and stability of 
                                           Biosystems Japan       ribozymes whose 
                                           Co., Ltd.              activity is less 
                                                                  than protein 
                                                                  enzymes. The 
                                                                  ribozyme is used to 
                                                                  disconnect and 
                                                                  deactivate the 
                                                                  genome of RNA virus 
                                                                  such as AIDS. 
                                                                  R&amp;D will also 
                                                                  be conducted on 
                                                                  bringing about 
                                                                  efficient in vivo 
                                                                  production of 
                                                                  ribozymes in the 
                                                                  future. 

Synthesis and        GIRI,    1990-1993    Mitsubishi Gas         This research will 
functionality of     Kyu                   Chemical Co., Ltd.,    focus on the 
inorganic layered                          Koppu Chemical Co.,    synthesis of new 
polymers                                   Ltd.                   innovative 
                                                                  fluoromica having 
                                                                  high-frequency and 
                                                                  optical properties 
                                                                  by the conventional 
                                                                  method and by 
                                                                  non-conventional 
                                                                  mechanism, and will 
                                                                  attempt to 
                                                                  elucidate the 
                                                                  electrical and 
                                                                  optical properties 
                                                                  therein. This 
                                                                  project will focus 
                                                                  on the development 
                                                                  of a continuous 
                                                                  production system 
                                                                  for fluoromica, as 
                                                                  well as R&amp;D on 
                                                                  high-tech 
                                                                  electronic 
                                                                  materials, special 
                                                                  light-sensitive 
                                                                  pigments, and 
                                                                  non-combustible 
                                                                  sheets. 

Development of       GIRI,    1990-1993    Daido Steel Co.,       By developing a 
near net shape       Nag                   Ltd., Nissan           method for molding 
molds by casted                            Chemical Industries,   near net shapes by 
metals                                     Ltd., Fuji Electric    casting hard metals 
                                           Co., Ltd.              such as titanium 
                                                                  and 
                                                                  titanium-aluminum, 
                                                                  this research will 
                                                                  focus on (1) 
                                                                  developing a 
                                                                  high-precision mold 
                                                                  that will not react 
                                                                  with those 
                                                                  materials, and (2) 
                                                                  injection of pure 
                                                                  solvents into a 
                                                                  vacuum or inert gas 
                                                                  atmosphere, (3) 
                                                                  producing materials 
                                                                  and systems that 
                                                                  can supply 
                                                                  manufactured goods 
                                                                  to advanced 
                                                                  industries. 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-44918 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpjst010___94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-JST-94-010 </AU>
JPRS 
Science &amp; Technology 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Japan AIST Research Laboratory Plans </ABS>
<DATE1>   31 October 1993 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     1993 AIST Laboratory Research Plans </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    1993 AIST Laboratory Research Plans </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    AIST Laboratories Carrying Out Technical Guidance </H4>

<F P=102> 94FE0219I Tokyo AGENCY OF INDUSTRIAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
in Japanese 31 Oct 93 p 502 </F>

<F P=103> 94FE0219I </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo AGENCY OF INDUSTRIAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
in Japanese 31 Oct 93 p 502 </F>

<F P=105> Japanese </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

  [Text] 
<H5>  5. Technical Guidance </H5>
  As was stated in Chapter 1, the research laboratories 
affiliated with AIST share basic research with each other. One 
of the responsibilities of AIST is to widely disseminate the 
technology and know-how that has been accumulating over many 
years. 
  In the meantime, AIST research laboratories have been 
receiving strong demands for technical assistance and 
consultation regarding fundamental and basic research. 
  Therefore, in 1957, AIST decided to open a technical 
assistance center in its main headquarters. Later, it opened 
technical assistance centers at affiliated research 
organizations. Those parties desiring technical assistance 
should contact a technical assistance center (or technical 
exchange and promotion center) at any of the AIST research 
laboratories. 
  In accordance with Article 2 of the Regulations Governing 
Inventions Made with AIST Technical Assistance, which was 
approved by the Diet on February 25, 1972, each research 
laboratory must exchange written confirmations with the 
organizations with whom it is rendering assistance concerning 
how inventions pertaining to said technical assistance will be 
administered given the possibility of an invention. 
  AIST has established what are called liaison committees to 
facilitate research exchanges, help with staff training, and 
build cooperation with public examination and technology 
centers. These were first formed in 1954 in order to raise the 
technological level of local industries, particularly growth 
industries, and to place more emphasis on R&amp;D in local public 
research institutions. 



  1992 Technical Assistance and Consultation 

Year                    FY88                        FY89 

Research Laboratory     Assist        Advise        Assist        Advise 

National Research       21            1089          24            374 
Laboratory of 
Metrology 

Mechanical              75            564           80            480 
Engineering 
Laboratory 

National Chemical       114           1149          92            1024 
Laboratory for 
Industry 

Government Industrial   126           2890          103           2168 
Research Institute, 
Osaka 

Government Industrial   147           1671          134           1240 
Research Institute, 
Nagoya 

Fermentation Research   62            1352          73            1391 
Institute 

Research Institute      56            329           43            356 
for Polymers and 
Textiles 

Geological Survey of    8             1101          54            1418 
Japan 

Electrotechnical        118           751           172           700 
Laboratory 

Industrial Products     45            255           40            208 
Research Institute 

Research Institute      46            745           38            732 
for Environment and 
Natural Resources 

Government Industrial   35            324           39            336 
Development 
Laboratory, Hokkaido 

Government Industrial   26            935           29            805 
Research Institute, 
Kyushu 

Government Industrial   16            460           16            405 
Research Institute, 
Shikoku 

Government Industrial   22            113           17            100 
Research Institute, 
Tohoku 

Government Industrial   17            178           9             112 
Research Institute, 
Chugoku 

Total                   934           13,906        963           11,849 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-44919 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpjst010___94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-JST-94-010 </AU>
JPRS 
Science &amp; Technology 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Japan AIST Research Laboratory Plans </ABS>
<DATE1>   31 October 1993 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     1993 AIST Laboratory Research Plans </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    1993 AIST Laboratory Research Plans </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Kohsetsushi Laboratories Profiled </H4>

<F P=102> 94FE0219J Tokyo AGENCY OF INDUSTRIAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
in Japanese 31 Oct 93 pp 518-530 </F>

<F P=103> 94FE0219J </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo AGENCY OF INDUSTRIAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
in Japanese 31 Oct 93 pp 518-530 </F>

<F P=105> Japanese </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

  [Text] 



  List of Public Examination and Technology Centers -- Part One 

District           No.           Local Affiliate      Organization 

;11;1 Hokkaido     101           Hokkaido Pref.       Hokkaido Pref. 
(11)                                                  Industrial Research 
                                                      Institute 

                   102           Hokkaido Pref.       Hokkaido Pref. 
                                                      Forestry Research 
                                                      Laboratory 

                   103           Hokkaido Pref.       Hokkaido Pref. 
                                                      Underground Resources 
                                                      Research Institute 

                   104           Hokkaido Pref.       Hokkaido Pref. Cold 
                                                      Region Urban Research 
                                                      Institute 

                   105           Hokkaido Pref.       Hokkaido Environmental 
                                                      Science Research 
                                                      Center 

                   106           Hokkaido Pref.       Hokkaido Pref. 
                                                      Industrial Technology 
                                                      Center 

                   107           Asahikawa City       Asahikawa Industrial 
                                                      Science and Technology 
                                                      Center 

                   108           Asahikawa City       Asahikawa Industrial 
                                                      Arts Center 

                   109           Kitami City          Kitami Industrial 
                                                      Science and Technology 
                                                      Center 

                   110           Obihira City         Obihira Industrial 
                                                      Technology Center 

                   111           Hokkaido             Hokkaido Food 
                                                      Processing Center 

;18;1 Tohoku       201           Aomori Pref.         Aomori Industrial 
(14)                                                  Technology Center 

                   202           Aomori Pref.         Aomori Industrial 
                                                      Research Institute 

                                 Aomori Pref.         Aomori Industrial 
                                                      Research Institute, 
                                                      Aomori Woodworking 
                                                      Institute 

                   203           Aomori Pref.         Aomori Machinery and 
                                                      Metals Research 
                                                      Institute 

                   204           Aomori Pref.         Aomori Marine Products 
                                                      Processing Research 
                                                      Institute 

                   205           Iwate Pref.          Iwate Industrial 
                                                      Research Institute 

                   206           Iwate Pref.          Iwate Brewing and 
                                                      Foodstuff Research 
                                                      Laboratory 

                   207           Iwate Pref.          Iwate Fisheries 
                                                      Research Laboratory 

                   208           Akita Pref.          Akita Industrial 
                                                      Technology Center 

                   209           Akita Pref.          Akita Brewing Research 
                                                      Laboratory 

                   210           Akita Pref.          Akita Environmental 
                                                      Technology Center 

                   211           Inawashiro City      Inawashiro Technology 
                                                      Development Center 

                   212           Yamagata Pref.       Yamagata Industrial 
                                                      Research Institute 

                   213           Miyagi Pref.         Miyagi Industrial 
                                                      Research Institute 

                   214           Fukushima Pref.      Fukushima Pref. 
                                                      High-Tech Plaza 

                                 Fukushima Pref.      Fukushima Pref. 
                                                      High-Tech Plaza, 
                                                      Fukushima Branch 

                                 Fukushima Pref.      Fukushima Pref. 
                                                      High-Tech Plaza, 
                                                      Aizuwakamatsu Branch 

                                 Fukushima Pref.      Fukushima Pref. 
                                                      High-Tech Plaza, Iwaki 
                                                      Branch 

;48;1 Kanto (48)   301           Ibaragi Pref.        Ibaragi Industrial 
                                                      Research Institute 

                   302           Tochigi Pref.        Tochigi Industrial 
                                                      Technology Center 

                   303           Tochigi Pref.        Tochigi Textile 
                                                      Research Laboratory 

                   304           Tochigi Pref.        Tochigi Center for 
                                                      Commerce and Industry 

                   305           Tochigi Pref.        Tochigi Tsumugi 
                                                      Textile Research 
                                                      Laboratory 

                   306           Tochigi Pref.        Tochigi Food Products 
                                                      Research Laboratory 

                   307           Tochigi Pref.        Tochigi Ceramics 
                                                      Research Institute 

                   308           Gunma Pref.          Gunma Industrial 
                                                      Research Institute 

                   309           Gunma Pref.          Gunma Textile Research 
                                                      Laboratory 

                   310           Gunma Pref.          Gunma Agricultural 
                                                      Processing Center 

                   311           Saitama Pref.        Saitama Mold and 
                                                      Machinery Research 
                                                      Laboratory 

                   312           Saitama Pref.        Saitama Textile 
                                                      Research Laboratory 

                   313           Saitama Pref.        Saitama Paper 
                                                      Manufacturing Research 
                                                      Laboratory 

                   314           Saitama Pref.        Saitama Food Products 
                                                      Research Laboratory 

                   315           Saitama Pref.        Saitama Industrial 
                                                      Technology Research 
                                                      Institute 

                   316           Saitama Pref.        Saitama Horticulture 
                                                      Research Laboratory 

                   317           Saitama Pref.        Saitama Environmental 
                                                      Pollution Center 

                   318           Chiba Pref.          Chiba Industrial 
                                                      Research Institute 

                   319           Chiba Pref.          Chiba Machinery and 
                                                      Metals Research 
                                                      Institute 

                   320           Chiba Pref.          Chiba Agricultural 
                                                      Research Laboratory 

                   321           Tokyo Metro          Tokyo Municipal 
                                                      Industrial Research 
                                                      Institute 

                   322           Tokyo Metro          Tokyo Municipal 
                                                      Textile Research 
                                                      Laboratory 

                   323           Tokyo Metro          Tokyo Municipal 
                                                      General Isotope 
                                                      Research Institute 

                   324           Tokyo Metro          Tokyo Municipal Food 
                                                      Products Technology 
                                                      Center 

                   325           Tokyo Metro          Tokyo Municipal 
                                                      Leather Technology 
                                                      Center 

                   326           Tokyo Metro          Tokyo Municipal 
                                                      Livestock Research 
                                                      Laboratory 

                   327           Kanagawa Pref.       Kanagawa Industrial 
                                                      Research Institute 

                   328           Kanagawa Pref.       Kanagawa Industrial 
                                                      Arts Institute 

                   329           Kanagawa Pref.       Kanagawa Textile 
                                                      Research Institute 

                   330           Kanagawa Pref.       Kanagawa Furniture 
                                                      Research Center 

                   331           Kanagawa Pref.       Kanagawa Agricultural 
                                                      General Research 
                                                      Institute 

                   332           Yokohama City        Yokohama Center for 
                                                      Small and Medium 
                                                      Enterprises 

                   333           Niigata Pref.        Niigata Industrial 
                                                      Technology Center 

                   334           Niigata Pref.        Niigata Food Products 
                                                      Research Laboratory 

                   335           Niigata Pref.        Niigata Brewing 
                                                      Research Laboratory 

                   336           Nagano Pref.         Nagano Information 
                                                      Technology Research 
                                                      Institute 

                   337           Nagano Pref.         Nagano Industrial 
                                                      Research Institute 

                   338           Nagano Pref.         Nagano Precision 
                                                      Machinery Research 
                                                      Institute 

                   339           Nagano Pref.         Nagano Food Products 
                                                      Research Institute 

                   340           Nagano Pref.         Nagano General 
                                                      Forestry Information 
                                                      Center 

                   341           Yamanashi Pref.      Yamanashi-Fuji 
                                                      Industrial Technology 
                                                      Center 

                   342           Yamanashi Pref.      Yamanashi Industrial 
                                                      Technology Center 

                   343           Shizuoka Pref.       Shizuoka Industrial 
                                                      Technology Center, 
                                                      Shizuoka 

                   344           Shizuoka Pref.       Shizuoka Industrial 
                                                      Technology Center, 
                                                      Hamamatsu 

                   345           Shizuoka Pref.       Shizuoka Industrial 
                                                      Technology Center, 
                                                      Fuji 

                   346           Shizuoka Pref.       Shizuoka Industrial 
                                                      Technology Center, 
                                                      Numazu 

                   347           Shizuoka Pref.       Shizuoka Design Center 
                                                      for Small-Medium 
                                                      Enterprises 

                   348           Shizuoka City        Shizuoka Center for 
                                                      New Industries 





  List of Public Examination and Technology Centers -- Part Two 

Organization              Address                       Telephone 

Hokkaido Pref.            11-Block 19th Ave.,           011(747)2211 
Industrial Research       Kita-ku, Sapporo City, T060 
Institute 

Hokkaido Pref. Forestry   1-10-174-7 Nishi Kagura,      0166(75)4233 
Research Laboratory       Asahikawa City, T071-01 

Hokkaido Pref.            12-Block 19th Ave.,           011(747)2211 
Underground Resources     Kita-ku, Sapporo City, T060 
Research Inst. 

Hokkaido Pref. Cold       1-3-36 4th Ave, Bldg. 24,     011(621)4211 
Region Urban Research     Sapporo City, T063 
Institute 

Hokkaido Environmental    12-Block 19th Ave.,           011(747)2211 
Science Research Center   Kita-ku, Sapporo City, T060 


Hokkaido Pref.            379 Kikyo-machi, Hakodate     0138(47)3615 
Industrial Technology     City, T041 
Center 

Asahikawa Industrial      34-11 Hinode, E.              0166(36)3111 
Science and Technology    Asahikawa-machi, 
Center                    Asahikwawa, T078 

Asahikawa Industrial      3-5-11 3rd Ave., Toyooka,     0166(32)1231 
Arts Institute            Asahikawa City, T078 

Kitami Industrial         1-4 Miwa, Kitami City, T090   0157(31)2705 
Science and Technology 
Center 

Obihira Industrial        1-2-21 Kita, 22 Jo, Nishi     0155(37)3160 
Technology Center         Obihiro City T080-24 

Hokkaido Food             589-4 Midori-machi,           011(387)4111 
Processing Center         Bunkyo-dai, Ebetsu City 
                          T069 

Aomori Industrial         202-4 Oaza Yatsuyakuji        0177(39)9676 
Technology Center         Ashiya, Aomori City, 
                          T030-01 

Aomori Industrial         80 Fukuro-machi, Hirosaki     0172(32)1466 
Research Institute        City, T036 

Aomori Industrial         202-4 Oaza Yatsuyakuji        0177(39)8551 
Research Institute,       Ashiya, Aomori City, 
Aomori Woodworking        T030-01 
Institute 

Aomori Machinery and      4-7-8 Numadate, Hachinohe     0178(22)4336 
Metals Research           City, T031 
Institute 

Aomori Marine Products    2-10 Chikko-machi,            0178(33)1347 
Processing Research       Hachinohe City, T031 
Institute 

Iwate Industrial          26 Tsushida, Morioka City,    0196(36)3640 
Research Institute        Iwate T020 

Iwate Brewing and         26 Tsushida, Morioka City,    0196(35)4130 
Foodstuff Research        Iwate T020 
Laboratory 

Iwate Fisheries           1-4-21 Niihama-cho,           0193(24)2111 
Research Laboratory       Kamaishi City, T026 

Akita Industrial          4-11 Aza Sanuki               0188(62)3414 
Technology Center         Shinya-machi, Akita City, 
                          T010-16 

Akita Brewing Research    47 Aza Ebisugawara,           0188(62)4285 
Laboratory                Yatsuhashi, Akita City, 
                          T010 

Akita Environmental       191-18 Aza Shimo,             0188(63)1425 
Technology Center         Yatsuhashi, Akita City, 
                          T010 

Inawashiro Technology     18-19 Aza Minami Nishiyama,   0185(52)5249 
Development Center        Inawashiro City, T016-01 

Yamagata Industrial       683 Aza Kuruma-no-mae,        0236(44)3222 
Research Institute        Numaki, Yamagata City, T990 


Miyagi Industrial         8-7-20 Nagamachi,             022(248)4386 
Research Institute        Taihaku-ku, Sendai City, 
                          T982 

Fukushima Pref.           1-3 Shimoaza-Funokawa,        0249(59)1911 
High-Tech Plaza           Fukushima City, T960-21 

Fukushima Pref.           7-2 Azayamakamidate,          0245(93)1121 
High-Tech Plaza,          Katahira, Koriyama City 
Fukushima Branch          T963-02 

Fukushima Pref.           651-1 Aza Muranishi,          0242(27)0834 
High-Tech Plaza,          Aizuwakamatsu City, T965 
Aizuwakamatsu Branch 

Fukushima Pref.           23-32 Aza Kodosaku,           0246(44)1475 
High-Tech Plaza, Iwaki    Shimofunao-cho, Iwaki, T972 
Branch 

Ibaragi Industrial        3781-1 Yato Nagaoka,          0292(93)7212 
Research Institute        Ibaragi-cho, Ibaragi, 
                          T311-31 

Tochigi Industrial        516-1 Shirokuwada, Kanuma     0289(62)5211 
Technology Center         City, T322 

Tochigi Textile           2870 Nishinomiya-cho,         0284(21)2138 
Research Laboratory       Ashikaga City, T326 

Tochigi Center for        950 Tenjin-cho, Sano City,    0283(22)0733 
Commerce and Industry     T327 

Tochigi Tsumugi Textile   2358 Fukura, Koyama City,     0285(49)0009 
Research Laboratory       T307-02 

Tochigi Food Products     508 Ichinosawa-cho,           0286(48)5471 
Research Laboratory       Utsunomiya City, T320 

Tochigi Ceramics          695 Mashiko, Mashiko-cho,     02857(2)5221 
Research Institute        Haga-gun, Tochigi, T321-42 

Gunma Industrial          190 Shimaba-cho, Maehashi     0272(51)4261 
Research Institute        City, T371 

Gunma Textile Research    5-46-1 Socho, Kiryu City,     0277(52)9950 
Laboratory                T376 

Gunma Agricultural        1085 Egi-cho, Maehashi City   0272(69)4171 
Processing Center         T371 

Saitama Mold and          1-1-56 Shibashita,            048(265)1311 
Machinery Research        Kawaguchi City T333 
Laboratory 

Saitama Textile           7-29 Muko-machi, Gyoda City   0485(55)2391 
Research Laboratory       T361 

Saitama Paper             226 Ogawa, Ogawa-cho,         0493(72)0222 
Manufacturing Research    Hiki-gun, Saitama, T355-03 
Laboratory 

Saitama Food Products     2-133 Suehiro, Kumagai        0485(21)0614 
Research Laboratory       City, 360 

Saitama Industrial        3-10-1 Kizaki, Urawa City,    048(833)1511 
Technology Research       T338 
Institute 

Saitama Horticulture      91 Rokumanbe, Kuki City,      0480(21)1113 
Research Laboratory       T346 

Saitama Environmental     639-1 Kami Okubo, Urawa       048(853)6111 
Pollution Center          City, T338 

Chiba Industrial          889 Kasori-cho, Chiba City,   043(231)4325 
Research Institute        T264 

Chiba Machinery and       6-13-1 Tendai-cho, Chiba      043(252)2101 
Metals Research           City, T263 
Institute 

Chiba Agricultural        808 Ozenno-cho, Chiba City,   043(291)0151, 
Research Laboratory       T266                          043(291)5319 

Tokyo Municipal           3-13-10 Nishi-ga-oka          03(3909)2151 
Industrial Research       Kita-ku, Tokyo, T115 
Institute 

Tokyo Municipal Textile   3-19-1 Myoshin-cho,           0426(42)7175 
Research Laboratory       Hachioji City, T192 

Tokyo Municipal General   2-11-1 Fukazawa,              03(3702)3111 
Isotope Research          Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, T158 
Institute 

Tokyo Municipal Food      1-9 Sakuma-cho, Kanda,        03(5256)9251 
Products Technology       Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, T101 
Center 

Tokyo Municipal Leather   3-3-14 E. Sumida,             03(3616)1671 
Technology Center         Sumida-ku, Tokyo, T131 

Tokyo Municipal           715 Shinmachi, Ome-shi,       0428(31)2171 
Livestock Research        Tokyo, T198 
Laboratory 

Kanagawa Industrial       3173 Showa-cho,               045(771)1301 
Research Institute        Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama City, 
                          T236 

Kanagawa Industrial       1-7-53 Honmachi, Odawara      0465(22)4168 
Arts Institute            City, T250 

Kanagawa Textile          4408 Hanbara, Ako-cho,        0462(81)1132 
Research Institute        Ako-gun, Kanagawa, T243-03 

Kanagawa Furniture        896-5 Sugikubo, Ebina City,   0462(38)3031 
Research Center           T243-04 

Kanagawa Agricultural     496 Teradanawa, Hiratsuka     0463(58)0333 
General Research          City, T259-12 
Institute 

Yokohama Center for       Asahi Kaikan 6F, 15 Nippon    045(662)6631 
Small and Medium          Odori, Yokohama C., T231 
Enterprises 

Niigata Industrial        1-1-1 Kabuto Nishi,           025(244)9168 
Technology Center         Matsumoto City, T950 

Niigata Food Products     2-25 Shinsakae-machi, Kamo    0256(52)0448 
Research Laboratory       City, T959-13 

Niigata Brewing           2-5932-133 Suido-cho,         025(222)4568 
Research Laboratory       Niigata City, T951 

Nagano Information        1-7-7 Nomizo-nishi            0263(25)0790 
Technology Research       Matsumoto City, T399 
Institute 

Nagano Industrial         188 Wakazato, Nagano City,    0262(26)2812 
Research Institute        T380 

Nagano Precision          9959 Okaya City, T394         0266(23)4000 
Machinery Research 
Institute 

Nagano Food Products      205-1 Aza Nishibanba, Oaza    0262(27)3131 
Research Institute        Kurita, Nagano City, T380 

Nagano General Forestry   5739 Oaza Kataoka, Shiojiri   0263(52)0600 
Information Center        City, T399-07 

Yamanashi-Fuji            2095 Shimoyoshida,            0555(22)2100 
Industrial Technology     Fujiyoshida City, T403 
Center 

Yamanashi Industrial      2094 Otsu-cho, Kofu City      0552(43)6111 
Technology Center         T400 

Shizuoka Industrial       2078 Maki-ga-ya, Shizuoka     054(278)3023 
Technology Center,        City T421-21 
Shizuoka 

Shizuoka Industrial       8950 Toda-cho, Hamamatsu      053(428)4151 
Technology Center,        City, 431-21 
Hamamatsu 

Shizuoka Industrial       2590-1 Obuchi, Fuji City,     0545(35)5190 
Technology Center, Fuji   T417 


Shizuoka Industrial       3981-1 O-oka, Numazu City,    0559(25)1100 
Technology Center,        T410 
Numazu 

Shizuoka Design Center    44-1 Otemachi, Shizuoka       054(273)4335 
for Small-Medium          City, T420 
Enterprises 

Shizuoka Center for New   2992 Nakajima, Shizuoka       054(281)2100 
Industries                City, T422 





  List of Public Examination and Technology Centers -- Part Three 

Organization         Director         Staff       Research Areas 

Hokkaido Pref.       T. Maruyama      109         M,Me,Ch,I,Ce,B,F,Mi,El 
Industrial 
Research Institute 


Hokkaido Pref.       H. Nakagawa      162         Ch,I 
Forestry Research 
Laboratory 

Hokkaido Pref.       F. Hayakawa      42          Ch,Mi 
Underground 
Resources Research 
Institute 

Hokkaido Pref.       Y. Nakamura      50          Cn,Ce 
Cold Region Urban 
Research Institute 


Hokkaido             K. Hirano        48          Ep 
Environmental 
Science Research 
Center 

Hokkaido Pref.       O. Sato          27          M,Me,Ch,El,F 
Industrial 
Technology Center 

Asahikawa            A. Kato          10          M,Me 
Industrial Science 
and Technology 
Center 

Asahikawa            S. Nakajima      27          I,Ce 
Industrial Arts 
Institute 

Kitami Industrial    J. Oishi         10          M,Me,I 
Science and 
Technology Center 

Obihira Industrial   N. Takahashi     4           M,ME,I 
Technology Center 

Hokkaido Food        S. Aoki          45          F 
Processing Center 

Aomori Industrial    Y. Mochizuki     22          M,Ch,El 
Technology Center 

Aomori Industrial    K. Fukuta        30          Ch,T,Ce,B,F 
Research Institute 


Aomori Industrial    F. Shinogi       15          Ie 
Research 
Institute, Aomori 
Woodworking 
Institute 

Aomori Machinery     H. Amauchi       14          M,Ch,El,B 
and Metals 
Research Institute 


Aomori Marine        M. Akaba         12          M,Me,Ch 
Products 
Processing 
Research Institute 


Iwate Industrial     T. Okada         41          F 
Research Institute 


Iwate Brewing and    K. Taniguchi     15          M,Me,Ch,T,I,Ce,El,Ep 
Foodstuff Research 
Laboratory 

Iwate Fisheries      S. Shibui        41          B,F 
Research 
Laboratory 

Akita Industrial     S. Kadowaki      60          F (processed) 
Technology Center 

Akita Brewing        T. Samuta        16          M,Me,Ch,Ce,I,EP,El,Cn 
Research 
Laboratory 

Akita                K. Kataoka       22          B,F 
Environmental 
Technology Center 

Inawashiro           K. Otaka         5           Ep 
Technology 
Development Center 


Yamagata             R. Tamiya        104         I 
Industrial 
Research Institute 


Miyagi Industrial    K. Saito         41          M,Me,El,Ch,I,Ce,B,F 
Research Institute 


Fukushima Pref.      K. Sakai         90          M,Me,Ch,I,Ce,El,B,Ep 
High-Tech Plaza 

Fukushima Pref.      K. Fujita        (17)        M,Me,El,Ch,Ce 
High-Tech Plaza, 
Fukushima Branch 

Fukushima Pref.      Y. Saito         (22)        I,Ce,B,F,P 
High-Tech Plaza, 
Aizuwakamatsu 
Branch 

Fukushima Pref.      T. Kanno         (8)         M,Me,Ch 
High-Tech Plaza, 
Iwaki Branch 

Ibaragi Industrial   T. Dan           71          M,Me,I,El,Ch,B,Ce,T,F 
Research Institute 


Tochigi Industrial   M. Tanidabe      35          M,Me,I,El 
Technology Center 

Tochigi Textile      I. Omachi        23          T 
Research 
Laboratory 

Tochigi Center for   K. Watanabe      22          M,Me,Ch,T 
Commerce and 
Industry 

Tochigi Tsumugi      H. Iwano         10          T 
Textile Research 
Laboratory 

Tochigi Food         K. Umeyama       15          B,F 
Products Research 
Laboratory 

Tochigi Ceramics     K. Kosugo        12          Ce 
Research Institute 


Gunma Industrial     H. Seyama        49          M,El,Me,Ch,I,B,F 
Research Institute 


Gunma Textile        T. Tejima        28          T 
Research 
Laboratory 

Gunma Agricultural   S. Fukushima     9           F 
Processing Center 

Saitama Mold and     R. Katsunuma     33          M,Me 
Machinery Research 
Laboratory 

Saitama Textile      H. Susa          42          T 
Research 
Laboratory 

Saitama Paper        H. Tenkai        7           P 
Manufacturing 
Research 
Laboratory 

Saitama Food         T. Yatsumori     17          B,F 
Products Research 
Laboratory 

Saitama Industrial   S. Kurosu        36          I,Ch,El,Ce 
Technology 
Research Institute 


Saitama              Y. Matsumura     62          Pk 
Horticulture 
Research 
Laboratory 

Saitama              H. Okanao        40          Ep 
Environmental 
Pollution Center 

Chiba Industrial     Y. Suzuki        30          I,B,F,R,El 
Research Institute 


Chiba Machinery      A. Muto          39          M,Me,El 
and Metals 
Research Institute 


Chiba Agricultural   S. Masubuchi     186         F 
Research 
Laboratory 

Tokyo Municipal      K. Otomo         199         I,M,Me,El,Ch 
Industrial 
Research Institute 


Tokyo Municipal      H. Matsubara     84          T 
Textile Research 
Laboratory 

Tokyo Municipal      K. Sanai         68          Ra 
General Isotope 
Research Institute 


Tokyo Municipal      A. Watanabe      20          F 
Food Products 
Technology Center 

Tokyo Municipal      H. Okamura       14          L 
Leather Technology 
Center 

Tokyo Municipal      T. Nakajima      76          Ch,F 
Livestock Research 
Laboratory 

Kanagawa             Y. Shibata       189         M,Me,Ch,T,El,Ra 
Industrial 
Research Institute 


Kanagawa             C. Nagamatsu     19          I 
Industrial Arts 
Institute 

Kanagawa Textile     T. Yamazawa      13          T 
Research Institute 


Kanagawa Furniture   H. Ugawa         10          I 
Research Center 

Kanagawa             N. Tsurashima    62          F 
Agricultural 
General Research 
Institute 

Yokohama Center      S. Hiramatsu     39          Me,Ch,I 
for Small and 
Medium Enterprises 


Niigata Industrial   A. Yoshida       104         M,Me,Ch,T,Mfg,El,Ce 
Technology Center 

Niigata Food         S. Imai          19          B,F 
Products Research 
Laboratory 

Niigata Brewing      T. Suzuki        6           B 
Research 
Laboratory 

Nagano Information   J. Miyazawa      39          T,In,Me 
Technology 
Research Institute 


Nagano Industrial    K. Wada          36          M,Me,Ch,I 
Research Institute 


Nagano Precision     K. Okubo         43          M,Ch,El 
Machinery Research 
Institute 

Nagano Food          S. Baba          23          B,F,Pk,Ch 
Products Research 
Institute 

Nagano General       H. Shigeki       26          I 
Forestry 
Information Center 


Yamanashi-Fuji       A. Wada          23          T,M,El 
Industrial 
Technology Center 

Yamanashi            E. Nakamura      76          T,M,I,Me,B,F 
Industrial 
Technology Center 

Shizuoka             H. Nakatsuka     68          M,Me,Ch,I,B,El,F 
Industrial 
Technology Center, 
Shizuoka 

Shizuoka             K. Furuhashi     47          T,M,Me,Ch,El 
Industrial 
Technology Center, 
Hamamatsu 

Shizuoka             K. Kuboshima     23          P,El,M 
Industrial 
Technology Center, 
Fuji 

Shizuoka             K. Tarumoto      18          M,Me,Ch,El 
Industrial 
Technology Center, 
Numazu 

Shizuoka Design      A. Kamoshida     5           D 
Center for 
Small-Medium 
Enterprises 

Shizuoka Center      F. Onaga         25          I 
for New Industries 


Key: M: Machiney, Me: Metals, Mf: Manufactured Products, Ch: Chemicals, L: 
Leather, D: Design, P: Plastics, T: Textiles, I: Industrial Technology, Ce: 
Ceramics, P: Paper, El: Electronics, Mi: Mining, B: Brewing, Pk: Packaging, 
Ep: Environmental pollution, Cn: Construction, F: Food Products, Ra: 
Radiation, R: Resources, W: Wood, In: Information, Ph: Pharmaceuticals 





  List of Public Examination and Technology Centers -- Part Four 

Organization       Affiliated Committees and Subcommittees 

                   MM     CH     TX     MG     CI     EP     MO     EL 

Hokkaido Pref.     X      X             X      X      X             X 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute 

Hokkaido Pref.                          X                           X 
Forestry 
Research 
Laboratory 

Hokkaido Pref.            X                    X      X 
Underground 
Resources 
Research Inst. 

Hokkaido Pref.                                 X      X 
Cold Region 
Urban Research 
Institute 

Hokkaido                                              X 
Environmental 
Science Research 
Center 

Hokkaido Pref. 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Asahikawa          X 
Industrial 
Science and 
Technology 
Center 

Asahikawa                               X      X 
Industrial Arts 
Institute 

Kitami             X                    X 
Industrial 
Science and 
Technology 
Center 

Obihira 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Hokkaido Food                                                X 
Processing 
Center 

Aomori             X                                         X      X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Aomori                    X             X      X      X      X 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute 

Aomori                                  X 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute, 
Woodworking Inst 


Aomori Machinery   X      X 
and Metals 
Research 
Institute 

Aomori Marine                                                X 
Processing 
Research 
Institute 

Iwate Industrial   X      X      X      X      X      X             X 
Research 
Institute 

Iwate Brewing                           X                    X 
and Foodstuff 
Research 
Laboratory 

Iwate Fisheries                                              X 
Research 
Laboratory 

Akita Industrial   X      X             X      X      X             X 
Technology 
Center 

Akita Brewing                           X                    X 
Research 
Laboratory 

Akita                                                 X 
Environmental 
Technology 
Center 

Inawashiro                              X 
Technology 
Development 
Center 

Yamagata           X      X      X      X      X      X      X      X 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute 

Miyagi             X      X             X      X      X      X      X 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute 

Fukushima Pref.    X      X                           X             X 
High-Tech Plaza 

Fukushima Pref.    X      X      X                    X             X 
High-Tech Plaza, 
Fukushima Branch 


Fukushima Pref.           X             X      X             X 
High-Tech Plaza, 
Aizuwakamatsu 
Branch 

Fukushima Pref.    X      X                           X             X 
High-Tech Plaza, 
Iwaki Branch 

Ibaragi            X      X      X      X      X      X      X      X 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute 

Tochigi            X      X             X                           X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Tochigi Textile                  X 
Research 
Laboratory 

Tochigi Center     X      X      X 
for Commerce and 
Industry 

Tochigi Tsumugi                  X 
Textile Research 
Laboratory 

Tochigi Food                            X                    X 
Products 
Research 
Laboratory 

Tochigi Ceramics                               X 
Research 
Institute 

Gunma Industrial   X      X             X      X      X      X      X 
Research 
Institute 

Gunma Textile                    X                    X 
Research 
Laboratory 

Gunma                                                        X 
Agricultural 
Processing 
Center 

Saitama Mold and   X      X 
Machinery 
Research 
Laboratory 

Saitama Textile                  X 
Research 
Laboratory 

Saitama Paper             X             X 
Manufacturing 
Research 
Laboratory 

Saitama Food                            X             X      X 
Products 
Research 
Laboratory 

Saitama                   X             X      X      X             X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Research 
Institute 

Saitama                                 X                    X 
Horticulture 
Research 
Laboratory 

Saitama                                               X 
Environmental 
Pollution Center 


Chiba Industrial          X             X             X      X      X 
Research 
Institute 

Chiba Machinery    X      X                           X             X 
and Metals 
Research 
Institute 

Chiba                                                               X 
Agricultural 
Research 
Laboratory 

Tokyo Municipal    X      X             X      X      X             X 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute 

Tokyo Municipal                  X                                  X 
Textile Research 
Laboratory 

Tokyo Municipal                                       X 
General Isotope 
Research 
Institute 

Tokyo Municipal                                              X 
Food Products 
Technology 
Center 

Tokyo Municipal           X                           X 
Leather 
Technology 
Center 

Tokyo Municipal                                              X 
Livestock 
Research 
Laboratory 

Kanagawa           X      X      X      X             X      X      X 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute 

Kanagawa                                X 
Industrial Arts 
Institute 

Kanagawa Textile                 X 
Research 
Institute 

Kanagawa                                X 
Furniture 
Research Center 

Kanagawa                                X                    X 
Agricultural 
General Research 
Institute 

Yokohama Center    X      X             X                           X 
for Small and 
Medium 
Enterprises 

Niigata            X      X      X      X      X      X             X 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute 

Niigata Food                            X                    X 
Products 
Research 
Laboratory 

Niigata Brewing                                              X 
Research 
Laboratory 

Nagano             X      X      X                    X             X 
Information 
Technology 
Research 
Institute 

Nagano             X      X             X      X      X             X 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute 

Nagano Precision   X      X                           X             X 
Machinery 
Research 
Institute 

Nagano Food                             X                    X 
Products 
Research 
Institute 

Nagano General                          X 
Forestry 
Information 
Center 

Yamanashi-Fuji     X             X                                  X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Yamanashi          X      X      X      X             X      X      X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Shizuoka           X      X             X      X      X      X      X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center, Shizuoka 


Shizuoka                  X      X                    X             X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center, 
Hamamatsu 

Shizuoka                  X             X             X             X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center, Fuji 

Shizuoka           X                                         X      X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center, Numazu 

Shizuoka Design                  X      X 
Center for 
Small-Medium 
Enterprises 

Shizuoka Center                         X 
for New 
Industries 

Key: MM: Mach/Metals, CH: Chemicals, TX: Textiles, MG: Manufacturing, CI: 
Ceramics, EP: Pollution, MO: Microbes, EL: Electronics 





  Listing of Public Examination and Research Centers -- Part One 

District           No.           Local Affiliate     Organization 

Chubu (32)         401           Aichi Pref.         Aichi Industrial 
                                                     Technology Center 

                   402           Aichi Pref.         Aichi Food Products 
                                                     Research Center 

                   403           Aichi Pref.         Aichi-Mikawa Fiber 
                                                     Research Center 

                   404           Aichi Pref.         Aichi-Owari Fiber 
                                                     Research Center 

                   405           Aichi Pref.         Aichi-Tokoname 
                                                     Ceramics Research 
                                                     Center 

                   406           Aichi Pref.         Aichi-Seto Ceramics 
                                                     Research Center 

                   407           Aichi Pref.         Aichi Environmental 
                                                     Pollution 
                                                     Investigation Center 

                   408           Nagoya City         Nagoya Industrial 
                                                     Research Institute 

                   409           Gifu Pref.          Gifu Industrial 
                                                     Technology Center 

                   410           Gifu Pref.          Gifu Textile Research 
                                                     Laboratory 

                   411           Gifu Pref.          Gifu Metals Research 
                                                     Laboratory 

                   412           Gifu Pref.          Gifu Paper 
                                                     Manufacturing Research 
                                                     Institute 

                   413           Gifu Pref.          Gifu Ceramics Research 
                                                     Institute 

                   414           Gifu Pref.          Gifu Industrial Arts 
                                                     Institute 

                   415           Gifu Pref.          Gifu Forestry Center 

                   416           Tajima City         Tajimi Ceramic Design 
                                                     Research Center 

                   417           Doki City           Doki Ceramics Research 
                                                     Laboratory 

                   418           Mizunami City       Mizunami Ceramics 
                                                     Research Laboratory 

                   419           Mie Pref.           Mie Industrial 
                                                     Technology Center 

                   420           Mie Pref.           Mie Metallurgical 
                                                     Research Laboratory 

                   421           Mie Pref.           Mie Ceramics Research 
                                                     Laboratory 

                   422           Ise City            Ise Industrial Arts 
                                                     Institute 

                   423           Toyama Pref.        Toyama Industrial 
                                                     Technology Center 

                   424           Toyama Pref.        Toyama Forestry 
                                                     Research Center 

                   425           Toyama Pref.        Toyama Pharmaceutical 
                                                     Research Institute 

                   426           Toyama Pref.        Toyama Food Products 
                                                     Research Institute 

                   427           Takaoka City        Takaoka Industrial 
                                                     Arts Design Center 

                   428           Ishikawa Pref.      Ishikawa Industrial 
                                                     Research Institute 

                   429           Ishikawa Pref.      Ishikawa Kutani-Yaki 
                                                     Pottery Research 
                                                     Laboratory 

                   430           Ishikawa Pref.      Ishikawa Forestry 
                                                     Research Laboratory, 
                                                     Ishikawa Wood Center 

                   431           Yamanaka Town       Yamanaka Lacquerware 
                                                     Research Institute 

                   432           Wajima City         Wajima Lacquerware 
                                                     Research Institute 

;24;1 Kinki        501           Fukui Pref.         Fukui Industrial 
                                                     Research Institute 

                   502           Fukui Pref.         Fukui Research 
                                                     Institute for 
                                                     Processed Foods 

                   503           Takeo City          Takeo Industrial 
                                                     Research Institute 

                   504           Shiga Pref.         Shiga Pref. Machinery 
                                                     and Metals Research 
                                                     Institute 

                   505           Shiga Pref.         Shiga Textile 
                                                     Information Center 

                   506           Shiga Pref.         Shiga Shiragaki 
                                                     Ceramics Research 
                                                     Laboratory 

                   507           Shiga Pref.         Shiga Industrial 
                                                     Research Institute 

                   508           Kyoto Pref.         Kyoto Center for Small 
                                                     and Medium Enterprises 


                   509           Kyoto Pref.         Kyoto Textile 
                                                     Information Center 

                   510           Kyoto City          Kyoto Industrial 
                                                     Research Institute 

                   511           Kyoto City          Kyoto Dyeing and 
                                                     Weaving Research 
                                                     Institute 

                   512           Nara Pref.          Nara Industrial 
                                                     Research Institute 

                   513           Nara Pref.          Nara Trade and Tourism 
                                                     Center 

                   514           Nara Pref.          Nara Forestry Research 
                                                     Laboratory 

                   515           Nara Pref.          Nara Pharmaceutical 
                                                     Information Center 

                   516           Osaka Pref.         Osaka Pref. Industrial 
                                                     Technology and General 
                                                     Research Center 

                   517           Osaka Pref.         Osaka Pref. Central 
                                                     Industrial Design 
                                                     &amp; Research Center 

                   518           Osaka City          Osaka Pref. Industrial 
                                                     Research Institute 

                   519           Osaka City          Osaka Pref. 
                                                     Environmental Science 
                                                     Research Institute 

                   520           Hyogo Pref.         Hyogo Pref. Industrial 
                                                     Technology Center 

                   521           Hyogo Pref.         Hyogo Pref. 
                                                     Environmental 
                                                     Pollution Research 
                                                     Institute 

                   522           Hyogo Pref.         Hyogo Pref. Central 
                                                     Agricultural Research 
                                                     Center 

                   523           Wakayama Pref.      Wakayama Industrial 
                                                     Technology Center 

                   524           Wakayama Pref.      Wakayama Lacquerware 
                                                     Research Laboratory 

;9;1 Chugoku (9)   601           Tottori Pref.       Tottori Industrial 
                                                     Research Institute 

                   602           Tottori Pref.       Tottori Research 
                                                     Institute for 
                                                     Processed Foods 

                   603           Shimane Pref.       Shimane Pref. 
                                                     Industrial Technology 
                                                     Center 

                   604           Okayama Pref.       Okayama Industrial 
                                                     Technology Center 

                   605           Hiroshima Pref.     Hiroshima Pref. W. 
                                                     Industrial Technology 
                                                     Center 

                   606           Hiroshima Pref.     Hiroshima Pref. E. 
                                                     Industrial Technology 
                                                     Center 

                   607           Hiroshima Pref.     Hiroshima Pref. 
                                                     Industrial Food 
                                                     Technology Center 

                   608           Hiroshima City      Hiroshima Industrial 
                                                     Technology Center 

                   609           Yamaguchi Pref.     Yamaguchi Industrial 
                                                     Technology Center 





  Listing of Public Examination and Research Centers -- Part Two 

Organization              Address                        Telephone 

Aichi Industrial          Nishi Shinwari,                0566(24)1841 
Technology Center         Hitotsuki-cho, Kaya City, 
                          T448 

Aichi Food Products       2-1-1 Shinfukutera-machi,      052(521)9316 
Research Center           Nishi-ku, Nagoya T451 

Aichi-Mikawa Fiber        109 Igakubo, Otsuka-cho,       0533(59)7146 
Research Center           Gamagori City T443 

Aichi-Owari Fiber         35 Aza Miyaura, Yamato-cho,    0586(45)7871 
Research Center           Ichinomiya City T491 

Aichi-Tokoname Ceramics   4-50 Oso-cho, Tokoname City,   05693(5)5151 
Research Center           T479 

Aichi-Seto Ceramics       537 S. Yamaguchi-cho, Seto     0561(21)2116 
Research Center           City, T489 

Aichi Environmental       7-6 Aza Nagare, Tsuji-machi,   052(911)3111 
Pollution Investigation   Kita-ku, Nagoya T462 
Center 

Nagoya Industrial         6-3-4-41 Atsuta-ku, Nagoya     052(661)3161 
Research Institute        City, T456 

Gifu Industrial           47 N. Oyobi, Kasamatsu-cho,    05838(8)3151 
Technology Center         Hashima, Gifu, T501-61 

Gifu Textile Research     47 N. Oyobi, Kasamatsu-cho,    05838(8)3151 
Laboratory                Hashima, Gifu, T501-61 

Gifu Metals Research      1288 Kose, Seki City,          0575(22)0147 
Laboratory                T501-32 

Gifu Paper                777 Maeno, Mino City,          0575(33)1241 
Manufacturing Research    T501-37 
Institute 

Gifu Ceramics Research    3-11 Hoshigadai, Tajima        0572(22)5381 
Institute                 City, T507 

Gifu Industrial Arts      1554 Yamada-cho, Takayama      0577(33)5252 
Institute                 City, T506 

Gifu Forestry Center      1128-1 Soyo, Mino City,        0575(33)2585 
                          T501-37 

Tajimi Ceramic Design     2-77 Misaka-cho, Tajima        0572(22)4731 
Research Center           City, T507 

Doki Ceramics Research    1556-2 Dachi-machi, Doki       0572(5)8312 
Laboratory                City, T509-54 

Mizunami Ceramics         5-5-1 Kamihira-cho, Mizura     0572(68)2111 
Research Laboratory       City, T509-61 

Mie Industrial            3485 Aza Otsuka, Komori,       0592(34)4036 
Technology Center         Takachaya, Tsu City, T514 

Mie Metallurgical         208 Aza Nishiyama,             0594(31)0300 
Research Laboratory       Oazashichi, Kuwana City, 
                          T511 

Mie Ceramics Research     788 Higashi Akuragawa,         0593(31)2381 
Laboratory                Yokkaichi City, T510 

Ise Industrial Arts       5-14-43 Ichi-no-ki, Ise        0596(28)4397 
Institute                 City, T516 

Toyama Industrial         150 Nikami-cho, Takaoka        0766(21)2121 
Technology Center         City, T933 

Toyama Forestry           4940 Kurakawashin,             0766(56)2815 
Research Center           Kosugi-cho, Toyama, T939-03 

Toyama Pharmaceutical     17-1 Naka Taikoyama,           0766(56)6026 
Research Institute        Kosugi-cho, Toyama, T939-03 

Toyama Food Products      360 Yoshioka, Toyama City,     0764(29)5400 
Research Institute        T939 

Takaoka Industrial Arts   Chiiki Jiba Sangyo Center      0766(22)2317 
Design Center             4F, 1-1 Kaihatsu Honmachi, 
                          Takaoka City, T933 

Ishikawa Industrial       1-Guchi, Tomizo-cho,           0762(67)8080 
Research Institute        Kanazawa City T920-020 

Ishikawa Kutani-Yaki      Ha-21-3 Shorenji-cho,          0761(47)3631 
Pottery Research          Komatsu City, T923-01 
Laboratory 

Ishikawa Forestry         73-1 Aza Yoshioka Higashi,     07619(3)1873 
Research Laboratory,      Kawachi-mura, T920-23 
Ishikawa Wood Center 

Yamanaka Lacquerware      I-102 Tsukaya-cho,             07617(8)0425 
Research Institute        Yamanaka-machi, Ishikawa, 
                          T922-01 

Wajima Lacquerware        24-55 Kawai-machi, Nagahama    0768(22)2211 
Research Institute        City, T928 

Fukui Industrial          10 Aza N. Inada, 61 Kawai      0766(55)0664 
Research Institute        Washizuka-cho, Fukui, T910 

Fukui Research            1-1 Aza Ogawara,               0776(61)3539 
Institute for Processed   Tsubo-no-uchi, Maruoka-cho, 
Foods                     Sakai-gun, Fukui, T910-02 

Takeo Industrial          49-6 Ikenoue-cho, Takeo        0778(22)1241 
Research Institute        City, Fukui, T915 

Shiga Pref. Machinery     52 Oka-machi, Hikone City,     0749(22)2325 
and Metals Research       T522 
Institute 

Shiga Textile             27-39 Mitsuya Motomachi,       0749(62)1492 
Information Center        Nagahama City, T526 

Shiga Shiragaki           498 Nagano, Shigaraki-cho,     0748(82)1155 
Ceramics Research         Koga-gun, Shiga, T529-18 
Laboratory 

Shiga Industrial          232 Kamitoyama, Ritto-cho,     0775(58)1500 
Research Institute        Kurita, Shiga, T520-30 

Kyoto Center for Small    17 Minami-machi, Chudo-ji,     075(315)2811 
and Medium Enterprises    Shimogyo-ku, Kyoto, T600 

Kyoto Textile             139-1 Aza Tanba,               0772(62)0074 
Information Center        Mineyama-cho, Naka-gun, 
                          Kyoto, T627 

Kyoto Industrial          17 Minami-machi, Chudo-ji,     075(311)3171 
Research Institute        Shimogyo-ku, Kyoto, T600 

Kyoto Dyeing and          647-20 Sokoku-ji Monzen-cho,   075(441)3165 
Weaving Research          Kamidachiuri Agaru, 
Institute                 Karasuma-dori, Kamigyo-ku, 
                          Kyoto, T602 

Nara Industrial           129-1, Kashiwagi-cho, Nara     0742(33)0817 
Research Institute        City, T630 

Nara Trade and Tourism    38-1 Noborioji-cho, Nara       0742(22)6601 
Center                    City, T630 

Nara Forestry Research    Kibi, Takatori-cho,            0744(52)2380 
Laboratory                Takaichi-gun, Nara, T635-01 

Nara Pharmaceutical       605-10 Gosho City, T639-22     07456(2)2376 
Information Center 

Osaka Pref. Industrial    2-1-53 Enoshima, Nishi-ku,     06(443)1121 
Technology and General    Osaka, T550 
Research Center 

                          Osaka Shoko Kaikan, 4-3-6      06(281)0327 
                          Minami Honmachi, Chuo-ku, 
                          Osaka, T541 

Osaka Pref. Industrial    22-28, Asahi-machi, Izumi      0725(33)8810 
Design &amp; Research     Otsu City, T595 
Center 

Osaka Pref. Industrial    1-6-50 Morinomiya, Joto-ku,    06(969)1031 
Research Institute        Osaka T536 

Osaka Pref.               8-34 Higashi Ue-machi,         06(771)8331 
Environmental Science     Tennoji-ku, Osaka, T543 
Research Institute 

Hyogo Pref. Industrial    3-1-12 Yukihira-cho,           078(731)4481 
Technology Center         Suma-ku, Kobe City, T654 

Hyogo Pref.               3-1-27 Yukihira-cho,           078(735)6911 
Environmental Pollution   Suma-ku, Kobe City, T654 
Research Inst. 

Hyogo Pref. Central       Ko-1533, Minami-no-oka,        0790(47)1117 
Agricultural Research     Beppu-cho, Kasai C., T679-01 
Center 

Wakayama Industrial       60 Ogura, Wakayama City,       0734(77)1271 
Technology Center         T649-62 

Wakayama Lacquerware      226-2 Funao, Kainan City,      0734(82)0844 
Research Laboratory       T642 

Tottori Industrial        390 Akisato, Tottori City,     0857(22)8321 
Research Institute        T680 

Tottori Research          2032-1 Nakano-cho,             0859(44)6121 
Institute for Processed   Sakaiminato City, T684 
Foods 

Shimane Pref.             219 Izumokyo, Izumo-cho,       0852(52)4480 
Industrial Technology     Yotsuka, Shimane, T699-01 
Center 

Okayama Industrial        4-3-18 Ifuku-cho, Okayama      0862(52)4480 
Technology Center         City, T700 

Hiroshima Pref. W.        3-6-21 Chuo, Kure City, T737   0823(52)5136 
Industrial Technology 
Center 

Hiroshima Pref. E.        3-232-6 Fukatsu-cho,           0849(31)2400 
Industrial Technology     Fukuyama City, T721 
Center 

Hiroshima Pref.           12-70 Honmachi, Hijiyama, S.   082(251)7431 
Industrial Food           Ward, Hiroshima, T732 
Technology Center 

Hiroshima Industrial      3-8-24 Senda-cho, Naka-ku,     082(242)4170 
Technology Center         Hiroshima, T730 

Yamaguchi Industrial      585-1 Aza Yugaki, Oaza         0839(22)6810 
Technology Center         Asada, Yamaguchi City, T753 





  Listing of Public Examination and Research Centers -- Part Three 

Organization         Director         Staff       Research Areas 

Aichi Industrial     S. Fujii         66          M,Me,Ch,I,Pk 
Technology Center 

Aichi Food           T. Harada        47          B,F 
Products Research 
Center 

Aichi-Mikawa Fiber   K. Sawada        35          T 
Research Center 

Aichi-Owari Fiber    M. Yazawa        44          T 
Research Center 

Aichi-Tokoname       T. Morikawa      26          Ce 
Ceramics Research 
Center 

Aichi-Seto           M. Nakamura      25          Ce 
Ceramics Research 
Center 

Aichi                O. Naruse        64          Ep 
Environmental 
Pollution 
Investigation 
Center 

Nagoya Industrial    J. Terada        107         M,Me,Ch,Ce,El 
Research Institute 


Gifu Industrial      S. Kishigami     37          Ch,F,B,El 
Technology Center 

Gifu Textile         S. Watanabe      24          T 
Research 
Laboratory 

Gifu Metals          H. Sekiya        20          M,Me,Ch,El 
Research 
Laboratory 

Gifu Paper           K. Satake        15          P 
Manufacturing 
Research Institute 


Gifu Ceramics        I. Murase        26          Ce 
Research Institute 


Gifu Industrial      T. Yokota        17          Mfg 
Arts Institute 

Gifu Forestry        I. Imori         33          I 
Center 

Tajimi Ceramic       N. Mizuno        25          Ce 
Design Research 
Center 

Doki Ceramics        Y. Ohashi        13          Ce 
Research 
Laboratory 

Mizunami Ceramics    T. Makino        10          Ce 
Research 
Laboratory 

Mie Industrial       K. Hayashi       54          Ch,T,I,M,F,B,Me,El,Ep 
Technology Center 

Mie Metallurgical    M. Kawabata      14          Me 
Research 
Laboratory 

Mie Ceramics         M. Nishida       19          Ce 
Research 
Laboratory 

Ise Industrial       M. Sakata        7           Ch,I 
Arts Institute 

Toyama Industrial    T. Yamamoto      74          M,Me,Ch,I,Ce,El,T 
Technology Center 

Toyama Forestry      R. Karazawa      36          Mf 
Research Center 

Toyama               H. Saito         18          Ph 
Pharmaceutical 
Research Institute 


Toyama Food          N. Kubo          20          F 
Products Research 
Institute 

Takaoka Industrial   M. Hori          5           D 
Arts Design Center 


Ishikawa             T. Ishida        96          M,Me,Ch,T,Mf,Ce,F,El 
Industrial 
Research Institute 


Ishikawa             M. Mishima       9           Ce 
Kutani-Yaki 
Pottery Research 
Laboratory 

Ishikawa Forestry    S. Sanbayashi    4           I 
Research 
Laboratory, 
Ishikawa Wood 
Center 

Yamanaka             K. Okura         3           I 
Lacquerware 
Research Institute 


Wajima Lacquerware   T. Kato          3           I 
Research Institute 


Fukui Industrial     T. Kobayashi     96          M,Me,Ch,I,T,Ce,El 
Research Institute 


Fukui Research       T. Nakamura      16          F 
Institute for 
Processed Foods 

Takeo Industrial     S. Ikeda         7           M,I,Me 
Research Institute 


Shiga Pref.          N. Ueda          9           M,Me 
Machinery and 
Metals Research 
Institute 

Shiga Textile        H. Maekawa       19          T 
Information Center 


Shiga Shiragaki      Y. Imanishi      16          Ce 
Ceramics Research 
Laboratory 

Shiga Industrial     S. Otsuki        26          M,Me,Ch,I,F,El,D 
Research Institute 


Kyoto Center for     B. Kondo         85          M,Me,Ch,I,F,El 
Small and Medium 
Enterprises 

Kyoto Textile        T. Kojima        40          T 
Information Center 


Kyoto Industrial     T. Kamon         45          Me,Ch,Mfg,Ce,B,El 
Research Institute 


Kyoto Dyeing and     H. Yamada        42          T 
Weaving Research 
Institute 

Nara Industrial      M. Okuda         35          M,Me,Ch,T,I,Ce,F 
Research Institute 


Nara Trade and       K. Nishii        10          I 
Tourism Center 

Nara Forestry        S. Nakanishi     39          I 
Research 
Laboratory 

Nara                 S. Jo            9           Ph 
Pharmaceutical 
Information Center 


Osaka Pref.          S. Hata          224         M,Me,Ch,Ce,El,T 
Industrial 
Technology and 
General Research 
Center 

Osaka Pref.          S. Imatake       18          D 
Central Industrial 
Design &amp; 
Research Center 

Osaka Pref.          T. Hirashima     120         M,Me,Ch,T,Ce,El,F 
Industrial 
Research Institute 


Osaka Pref.          M. Nagasawa      119         Ep,F 
Environmental 
Science Research 
Institute 

Hyogo Pref.          T. Terai         118         M,Me,Ch,T,I,Ce,Pk,F,L 
Industrial 
Technology Center 

Hyogo Pref.          M. Kobayashi     44          Ep 
Environmental 
Pollution Research 
Institute 

Hyogo Pref.          S. Yoshifusa     216         Mz,F 
Central 
Agricultural 
Research Center 

Wakayama             Y. Tsuji         58          M,Me,Ch,T,W,B,F,L,In 
Industrial 
Technology Center 

Wakayama             M. Hosobo        9           M 
Lacquerware 
Research 
Laboratory 

Tottori Industrial   T. Okamoto       38          Me,P,T,Mf,Ce,B,M,El 
Research Institute 


Tottori Research     Y. Yamazaki      15          F 
Institute for 
Processed Foods 

Shimane Pref.        N. Sakai         39          M,Me,Ch,I,Ce,F,P,Mi,Ep,B 
Industrial 
Technology Center 

Okayama Industrial   H. Takatani      76          M,Me,Ch,T,I,Ce,B,F 
Technology Center 

Hiroshima Pref. W.   I. Oshita        52          M,Me,Ch,Ce 
Industrial 
Technology Center 

Hiroshima Pref. E.   M. Takasaki      49          T,M,Me,El,D,I 
Industrial 
Technology Center 

Hiroshima Pref.      Y. Sakaki        38          B,F 
Industrial Food 
Technology Center 

Hiroshima            K. Yamamoto      30          M,Ch,I,Me,El 
Industrial 
Technology Center 

Yamaguchi            Y. Inoki         47          M,Me,Ch,T,I,Ce,B,F,El,D 
Industrial 
Technology Center 

Key: M: Machinery, Me: Metals, Mf: Manufactured products, Ch: Chemicals, L: 
Leather, D: Design, P: Plastics, T: Textiles, I: Industrial technology, Ce: 
Ceramics, P: Paper, El: Electronicc, Mi: Mining, B: Brewing, Pk: Packaging, 
Ep: Environmental pollution, Cn: Construction, F: Food Products, Ra: 
Radiation, R: Resources, W: Wood, In: Information, Ph: Pharmaceuticals, Mz: 
Miniaturization 





  Listing of Public Examination and Research Centers -- Part Four 

Organization       Affiliated Committees and Subcommittees 

                   MM     CH     TX     MG     CI     EP     MO     EL 

Aichi Industrial   X      X             X      X      X             X 
Technology 
Center 

Aichi Food                X             X             X      X 
Products 
Research Center 

Aichi-Mikawa                     X                    X 
Fiber Research 
Center 

Aichi-Owari                      X                    X             X 
Fiber Research 
Center 

Aichi-Tokoname            X             X      X      X 
Ceramics 
Research Center 

Aichi-Seto                X             X      X      X 
Ceramics 
Research Center 

Aichi                                                 X 
Environmental 
Pollution 
Investigation 
Center 

Nagoya             X      X      X             X      X             X 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute 

Gifu Industrial    X      X             X             X      X      X 
Technology 
Center 

Gifu Textile                     X                    X             X 
Research 
Laboratory 

Gifu Metals        X      X                           X             X 
Research 
Laboratory 

Gifu Paper                X             X             X 
Manufacturing 
Research 
Institute 

Gifu Ceramics                           X      X      X 
Research 
Institute 

Gifu Industrial                         X 
Arts Institute 

Gifu Forestry                           X 
Center 

Tajimi Ceramic                          X      X 
Design Research 
Center 

Doki Ceramics                           X      X 
Research 
Laboratory 

Mizunami                                X      X 
Ceramics 
Research 
Laboratory 

Mie Industrial     X      X      X      X             X      X      X 
Technology 
Center 

Mie                X      X                           X             X 
Metallurgical 
Research 
Laboratory 

Mie Ceramics              X                    X 
Research 
Laboratory 

Ise Industrial                          X             X 
Arts Institute 

Toyama             X      X      X      X      X      X             X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Toyama Forestry                         X 
Research Center 

Toyama                    X 
Pharmaceutical 
Research 
Institute 

Toyama Food                                                  X 
Products 
Research 
Institute 

Takaoka                                 X 
Industrial Arts 
Design Center 

Ishikawa           X      X      X      X      X      X      X      X 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute 

Ishikawa                  X             X      X      X 
Kutani-Yaki 
Pottery Research 
Laboratory 

Ishikawa                                X 
Forestry 
Research 
Laboratory, 
Ishikawa Wood 
Center 

Yamanaka                                X 
Lacquerware 
Research 
Institute 

Wajima                                  X 
Lacquerware 
Research 
Institute 

Fukui Industrial   X      X      X      X      X      X             X 
Research 
Institute 

Fukui Research                                               X 
Institute for 
Processed Foods 

Takeo Industrial   X                    X 
Research 
Institute 

Shiga Pref.        X      X                           X             X 
Machinery and 
Metals Research 
Institute 

Shiga Textile                    X                    X 
Information 
Center 

Shiga Shiragaki                         X      X 
Ceramics 
Research 
Laboratory 

Shiga Industrial   X      X             X             X      X      X 
Research 
Institute 

Kyoto Center for   X      X             X      X      X      X      X 
Small and Medium 
Enterprises 

Kyoto Textile                    X                           X 
Information 
Center 

Kyoto Industrial   X      X             X      X      X      X      X 
Research 
Institute 

Kyoto Dyeing and                 X 
Weaving Research 
Institute 

Nara Industrial    X      X      X      X      X      X      X      X 
Research 
Institute 

Nara Trade and                          X 
Tourism Center 

Nara Forestry                           X 
Research 
Laboratory 

Nara                      X 
Pharmaceutical 
Information 
Center 

Osaka Pref.        X      X      X      X      X                    X 
Industrial 
Technology and 
General Research 
Center 

Osaka Pref.                      X      X 
Industrial 
Design &amp; 
Research Center 

Osaka Pref.        X      X                    X      X      X      X 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute 

Osaka Pref.                                           X      X 
Environmental 
Science Research 
Inst. 

Hyogo Pref.        X      X      X      X      X      X      X      X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Hyogo Pref.                                           X 
Environmental 
Pollution 
Institute 

Hyogo Pref.                             X                    X 
Central 
Agricultural 
Research Center 

Wakayama           X      X      X      X      X      X      X      X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Wakayama                                X 
Lacquerware 
Research 
Laboratory 

Tottori            X      X      X      X      X      X      X      X 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute 

Tottori Research                        X                    X 
Institute for 
Processed Foods 

Shimane Pref.      X      X             X      X      X      X      X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Okayama            X      X      X      X      X      X      X      X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Hiroshima Pref.    X      X                    X      X             X 
W. Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Hiroshima Pref.    X      X      X      X             X             X 
E. Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Hiroshima Pref.                         X             X      X 
Industrial Food 
Technology 
Center 

Hiroshima          X      X             X      X      X             X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Yamaguchi          X      X      X      X      X      X      X      X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Key: MM: Mach/Metals, CH: Chemicals, TX: Textiles, MG: Manufacturing, CI: 
Ceramics, EP: Pollution, MO: Microbes, EL: Electronics 





  Listing of Public Examination and Research Centers -- Part One 

District           No.             Local Affiliate     Organization 

;13;1 Shikoku      701             Tokushima Pref.     Tokushima Pref. 
(12)                                                   Industrial Technology 
                                                       Center 

                   702             Tokushima Pref.     Tokushima 
                                                       Environmental 
                                                       Preservation Center 

                   703             Tokushima City      Tokushima Woodworking 
                                                       Center 

                   704-1           Kagawa Pref.        Kagawa Food Research 
                                                       Laboratory 

                   704-2           Kagawa Pref.        Kagawa Fermented 
                                                       Foods Research 
                                                       Laboratory 

                   705             Kagawa Pref.        Kagawa Industrial 
                                                       Technology Center 

                   706             Ehime Pref.         Ehime Industrial 
                                                       Technology Center 

                   707             Ehime Pref.         Ehime Paper 
                                                       Manufacturing 
                                                       Research Laboratory 

                   708             Ehime Pref.         Ehime Ceramics 
                                                       Research Laboratory 

                   709             Ehime Pref.         Ehime Research 
                                                       Laboratory for 
                                                       Textile Industry 

                   710             Niihama City        Niihama Municipal 
                                                       Industrial Research 
                                                       Institute 

                   711             Kochi Pref.         Kochi Industrial 
                                                       Technology Center 

                   712             Kochi Pref.         Kochi Paper 
                                                       Manufacturing 
                                                       Research Laboratory 

;22;1 Kyushu       801             Fukuoka Pref.       Fukuoka Industrial 
(18)                                                   Technology Center 

                                   Fukuoka Pref.       Fukuoka Industrial 
                                                       Technology Center, 
                                                       Chemical Fiber 
                                                       Research Laboratory 

                                   Fukuoka Pref.       Fukuoka Industrial 
                                                       Technology Center, 
                                                       Materials Development 
                                                       Research Laboratory 

                                   Fukuoka Pref.       Fukuoka Industrial 
                                                       Technology Center, 
                                                       Interior Research 
                                                       Laboratory 

                                   Fukuoka Pref.       Fukuoka Industrial 
                                                       Technology Center, 
                                                       Machinery and 
                                                       Electronics Research 
                                                       Laboratory 

                   802             Fukuoka Pref.       Fukuoka General 
                                                       Agricultural Research 
                                                       Institute, Chikugo 
                                                       Laboratory 

                   803             Saga Pref.          Saga Industrial 
                                                       Research Institute 

                   804             Saga Pref.          Saga Ceramics 
                                                       Research Laboratory 

                   805             Nagasaki Pref.      Nagasaki Industrial 
                                                       Technology Center 

                   806             Nagasaki Pref.      Nagasaki Industrial 
                                                       Ceramics Center 

                   807             Kumamoto Pref.      Kumamoto Industrial 
                                                       Technology Center 

                   808             Kumamoto Pref.      Kumamoto Processed 
                                                       Foods Research 
                                                       Laboratory 

                   809             Oita Pref.          Oita Industrial 
                                                       Research Institute 

                   810             Oita Pref.          Oita Industrial Arts 
                                                       Institute, Hita 

                   811             Oita Pref.          Oita Industrial Arts 
                                                       Institute, Beppu 

                   812             Beppu City          Beppu Industrial Arts 
                                                       Research Institute 

                   813             Oita Pref.          Oita Pref. Industrial 
                                                       Technology Research 
                                                       Exchange Center 

                   814             Miyazaki Pref.      Miyazaki Industrial 
                                                       Research Institute 

                   815             Miyazaki Pref.      Miyazaki Food 
                                                       Products R&amp;D 
                                                       Center 

                   816             Kagoshima Pref.     Kagoshima Industrial 
                                                       Technology Center 

                   817             Kagoshima Pref.     Kagoshima 
                                                       Agricultural Products 
                                                       Processing Research 
                                                       and Information 
                                                       Center 

                   818             Kagoshima Pref.     Kagoshima Oshima 
                                                       Tsumugi Research and 
                                                       Information Center 

Okinawa (2)        819                                 Okinawa Industrial 
                                                       Research Institute 

                   820                                 Okinawa Industrial 
                                                       Arts Institute 





  Listing of Public Examination and Research Centers -- Part Two 

Organization             Address                        Telephone 

Tokushima Pref.          11-2 Nishihiraki, Saiga-cho,   0886(69)4711 
Industrial Technology    Tokushima City, T770 
Center 

Tokushima                5-71 Mandai-cho, Tokushima     0886(25)7751 
Environmental            City, T770 
Preservation Center 

Tokushima Woodworking    1-8-22 Fukushima, Tokushima    0886(22)9625 
Center                   City, T770 

Kagawa Food Research     587-1 Goto-cho, Takamatsu      0878(81)3177 
Laboratory               City, T761 

Kagawa Fermented Foods   1351-1 Inawa-ko,               0879(82)0034 
Research Laboratory      Uchiumi-cho, Shodoshima-gun, 
                         Kagawa, T761-44 

Kagawa Industrial        587-1 Goto-cho, Takamatsu      0878(81)3175 
Technology Center        City, T761 

Ehime Industrial         487-2 Kumeogita-cho,           0899(76)7612 
Technology Center        Matsuyama City, T790 

Ehime Paper              281-2 Kawanoe-cho, Kawanoe     0896(58)2144 
Manufacturing Research   City, T799-01 
Laboratory 

Ehime Ceramics           2 Gohonmatsu, Tobe-cho,        0899(62)2076 
Research Laboratory      Iyo-gun, Ehime, T791-21 

Ehime Research           2-5-48 Higashimura Minami,     0898(48)0021 
Laboratory for Textile   Imabari City, T799-15 
Industry 

Niihama Municipal        142-1 Takihama, Niihama        0897(45)2329 
Industrial Research      City, T792 
Institute 

Kochi Industrial         3992-3 Fushida, Kochi City,    0888(46)1111 
Technology Center        T781-51 

Kochi Paper              3-115 Asahi-machi, Kochi       0888(24)4151 
Manufacturing Research   City, T780 
Laboratory 

Fukuoka Industrial       332-1 Oaza Kamikoga,           092(925)7721 
Technology Center        Tsukushino City, T818 

Fukuoka Industrial       332-1 Oaza Kamikoga,           092(925)7721 
Technology Center,       Tsukushino City, T818 
Chemical Fiber 
Research Laboratory 

Fukuoka Industrial       499 Oaza Inatomi, Yatume       0943(23)2361 
Technology Center,       City, T834 
Materials Development 
Research Laboratory 

Fukuoka Industrial       405-3 Aza Hatanaka Higashi,    0944(86)3259 
Technology Center,       Oaza Kamimaki, Okawa City, 
Interior Research        T831 
Laboratory 

Fukuoka Industrial       3-6-1 Norimatsu                093(691)0260 
Technology Center,       Yahatanishi-ku, Kitakyushu 
Machinery and            City, T807 
Electronics Research 
Laboratory 

Fukuoka General          1003 Muta, Hachi-machi,        0944(32)1092 
Agricultural Research    Oki-cho, Mitsuma-gun, 
Institute, Chikugo       Fukuoka, T830-04 
Laboratory 

Saga Industrial          114 Yatmizo, Nabeshima-cho,    0952(30)8161 
Research Institute       Saga, T849 

Saga Ceramics Research   3100-5-Otsu, Aza Tanohira,     0955(43)2185 
Laboratory               Chubu, Arita-cho, Nishi 
                         Matsuura-gun, Saga, T844 

Nagasaki Industrial      1303-8, 2-Chome, Ikeda,        0957(52)1133 
Technology Center        Omura City, T856 

Nagasaki Ceramics        605-2 Hikibago, Nasami-cho,    0959(85)3140 
Research Laboratory      Higashi Hiusu-gun Nagasaki, 
                         T859-37 

Kumamoto Industrial      3-11-38 Higashi-machi,         096(368)2101 
Technology Center        Kumamoto City, T862 

Kumamoto Processed       3-11 Higashi-machi, Kumamoto   096(368)3600 
Foods Research           City, T862 
Laboratory 

Oita Industrial          3239-4 Oaza Shimogori, Oita    0975(69)1855 
Research Institute       City, T870 

Oita Industrial Arts     3 Ishii-cho, Hita City, T877   0973(23)2213 
Institute, Hita 

Oita Industrial Arts     3-3 Higashi Soen-cho, Beppu    0977(22)0208 
Institute, Beppu         City, T874 

Beppu Industrial Arts    7-14 Suehiro-cho-cho, Beppu    0977(23)1072 
Research Institute       City, T874 

Oita Pref. Industrial    1977-1 Oaza Nahahanda, Oita    0975(97)6406 
Technology Research      City, T879-76 
Exchange Center 

Miyazaki Industrial      1-7-14 Tsunehisa, Miyazaki     0985(51)7211 
Research Institute       City, T880 

Miyazaki Food Products   1-7-14 Tsunehisa, Miyazaki     0985(50)1488 
R&amp;D Center           City, T880 

Kagoshima Industrial     1445-1 Oda, Hayato-cho,        0995(43)5111 
Technology Center        Aira-gun, Kagoshima, T899-51 


Kagoshima Agricultural   5500 Kamifukumoto-machi,       0992(68)9325 
Products Processing      Kagoshima City, T891-01 
Research and 
Information Center 

Kagoshima Oshima         888 Urakami, Naze City, T894   0997(52)0068 
Tsumugi Research and 
Information Center 

Okinawa Industrial       1-8-39 Kimiya, Naha City,      098(832)2176 
Research Institute       T902 

Okinawa Industrial       213 Aza Shoya,                 098(889)1186 
Arts Institute           Nanpuhara-machi, Okinawa, 
                         T901-11 





  Listing of Public Examination and Research Centers -- Part Three 

Organization        Director        Staff       Research Areas 

Tokushima Pref.     K. Ueda         52          M,Me,Ch,T,I,B,El,F,In,D 
Industrial 
Technology Center 


Tokushima           K. Kitamura     49          Ep,F,B 
Environmental 
Preservation 
Center 

Tokushima           T. Iitomi       7           I 
Woodworking 
Center 

Kagawa Food         M. Ogura        13          B,F 
Research 
Laboratory 

Kagawa Fermented    S. Shiota       13          B,F 
Foods Research 
Laboratory 

Kagawa Industrial   H. Suezawa      30          M,Me,I,Ce,Ch,El 
Technology Center 


Ehime Industrial    A. Hato         48          Me,Ch,I,F,M,B,El 
Technology Center 


Ehime Paper         Y. Bessho       10          P 
Manufacturing 
Research 
Laboratory 

Ehime Ceramics      H. Sagawa       7           Ce 
Research 
Laboratory 

Ehime Research      K. Mizuzaki     19          T 
Laboratory for 
Textile Industry 

Niihama Municipal   O. Fujita       3 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute 

Kochi Industrial    K. Tauchi       37          M,Me,Ch,I,Ce,F,In,D 
Technology Center 


Kochi Paper         K. Okazaki      13          P 
Manufacturing 
Research 
Laboratory 

Fukuoka             T. Shiozawa     128 
Industrial 
Technology Center 


Fukuoka             T. Ueno         (31)        Ch,T,Ce,F 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center, Chemical 
Fiber Research 
Laboratory 

Fukuoka             G. Yamaguchi    (15)        I,P,Ch 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center, Materials 
Development 
Research 
Laboratory 

Fukuoka             H. Sakamoto     (11)        I 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center, Interior 
Research 
Laboratory 

Fukuoka             Y. Akahoshi     (51)        M,Me,El 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center, Machinery 
and Electronics 
Research 
Laboratory 

Fukuoka General     T. Takahashi    23          I 
Agricultural 
Research 
Institute, 
Chikugo 
Laboratory 

Saga Industrial     S. Arita        34          M,Me,Ch,I,F,El 
Research 
Institute 

Saga Ceramics       H. Takagi       22          Ce 
Research 
Laboratory 

Nagasaki            S. Nagata       40          M,Me,Ch,El,F,D 
Industrial 
Technology Center 


Nagasaki            H. Seki         21          Ce 
Industrial 
Ceramics Center 

Kumamoto            K. Tsukitari    43          M,Me,Ch,Mfg,Ce,Mz,El 
Industrial 
Ceramics Center 

Kumamoto            S. Uemura       16          F,Pk 
Processed Foods 
Research 
Laboratory 

Oita Industrial     E. Yokoyama     32          M,Me,Ch,Ce,Mz,F,El 
Research 
Institute 

Oita Industrial     M. Yamamura     14          I 
Arts Institute, 
Hita 

Oita Industrial     T. Eto          12          I 
Arts Institute, 
Beppu 

Beppu Industrial    F. Kai          4           I 
Arts Research 
Institute 

Oita Pref.          S. Hashimoto    6           El 
Industrial 
Technology 
Research Exchange 
Center 

Miyazaki            K. Nagano       40          M,Me,Ch,Ce,El,I 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute 

Miyazaki Food       K. Nagano       19          F,B 
Products R&amp;D 
Center 

Kagoshima           K. Jinnai       62          M,Me,Ch,Ce,F,B,El,I 
Industrial 
Technology Center 


Kagoshima           K. Matsubara    11          F 
Agricultural 
Products 
Processing 
Research and 
Information 
Center 

Kagoshima Oshima    N. Niizu        18          T 
Tsumugi Research 
and Information 
Center 

Okinawa             K. Miyagi       22          Ch,Me,Ce,B,Ep,F 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute 

Okinawa             Z. Teruya       13          I,T 
Industrial Arts 
Institute 

Key: M: Machinery, Me: Metals, Mf: Manufactured Products, Ch: Chemicals, L: 
Leather, D: Design, P: Plastics, T: Textiles, I: Industrial Technology, Ce: 
Ceramics, P: Paper, El: Electronicc, Mi: Mining, B: Brewing, Pk: Packaging, 
Ep: Environmental Pollution, Cn: Construction, F: Food Products, Ra: 
Radiation, R: Resources, W: Wood, In: Information, Ph: Pharmaceuticals, Mz: 
Miniaturization 





  Listing of Public Examination and Research Centers -- Part Four 

Organization     Affiliated Committees and Subcommittees 

                 MM            CH    TX    MG     CI    EP      MO    EL 

                 Tokushima     X     X     X      X     X       X     X 
                 Pref. 
                 Industrial 
                 Technology 
                 Center 

Tokushima                                               X 
Environmental 
Preservation 
Center 

Tokushima                                  X 
Woodworking 
Center 

Kagawa Food                                X            X       X 
Research 
Laboratory 

Kagawa                                     X            X       X 
Fermented 
Foods Research 
Laboratory 

Kagawa           X             X           X      X                   X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Ehime            X             X           X            X       X     X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Ehime Paper                    X                        X 
Manufacturing 
Research 
Laboratory 

Ehime Ceramics                                    X 
Research 
Laboratory 

Ehime Research                       X                  X 
Laboratory for 
Textile 
Industry 

Niihama 
Municipal 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute 

Kochi            X             X           X      X     X       X     X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Kochi Paper                    X           X 
Manufacturing 
Research 
Laboratory 

Fukuoka          X             X     X     X      X     X       X     X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Fukuoka                        X     X            X             X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center, 
Chemical Fiber 
Research 
Laboratory 

Fukuoka                        X           X      X             X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center, 
Materials 
Development 
Research 
Laboratory 

Fukuoka                                    X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center, 
Interior 
Research 
Laboratory 

Fukuoka                        X                                      X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center, 
Machinery and 
Electronics 
Research 
Laboratory 

Fukuoka                                    X 
General 
Agricultural 
Research 
Institute, 
Chikugo 
Laboratory 

Saga             X             X           X            X       X     X 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute 

Saga Ceramics                              X      X     X 
Research 
Laboratory 

Nagasaki         X             X           X            X       X     X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Nagasaki                                   X      X 
Industrial 
Ceramics 
Center 

Kumamoto         X             X           X      X     X       X     X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Kumamoto                                   X                    X 
Processed 
Foods Research 
Laboratory 

Oita             X             X                  X     X       X     X 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute 

Oita                                       X 
Industrial 
Arts 
Institute, 
Hita 

Oita                                       X 
Industrial 
Arts 
Institute, 
Beppu 

Beppu                                      X 
Industrial 
Arts Research 
Institute 

Oita Pref.                                                            X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Research 
Exchange 
Center 

Miyazaki         X             X           X      X     X             X 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute 

Miyazaki Food                                           Tc&gt; X 
Products 
R&amp;D Center 


Kagoshima        X             X     X     X      X     X       X     X 
Industrial 
Technology 
Center 

Kagoshima                                  X            X       X 
Agricultural 
Products 
Processing 
Research and 
Information 
Center 

Kagoshima                            X 
Oshima Tsumugi 
Research and 
Information 
Center 

Okinawa          X             X                  X     X       X 
Industrial 
Research 
Institute 

Okinawa                              X     X 
Industrial 
Arts Institute 


Total            67            83    45    109    59    90      66    71 

Key: MM: Mach/Metals, CH: Chemicals, TX: Textiles, MG: Manufacturing, CI: 
Ceramics, EP: Pollution, MO: Microbes, EL: Electronics 


<H5>  3. Employee Technical Training Program </H5>
  Small and medium size business schools that belong to small 
and medium size corporate groups have been conducting various 
training programs in order to provide the kind of knowledge and 
skills that those in charge of small and medium size companies 
affiliated with national and local public organizations will 
need in order to provide effective technical assistance. 
  Part of this training is being conducted by AIST. 
AIST-affiliated research laboratories have been offering 
technical training programs to technical specialists working in 
public examination and technology centers. 
  In the following table, we list the technical training 
programs being offered in 1993 at the AIST research labs. 



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1993 Small and Medium Enterprise Six-Month Training Programs                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Training Organization                 |Subject                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|National Research Laboratory of Metro-|Applied semiconductor interference te-| 
|logy                                  |chnology                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                                      |Research to upgrade injection molding | 
|                                      |and welding technology for ceramics   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|;6;1 Mechanical Engineering Laboratory|Precision measurements by laser inter-| 
|                                      |ferometer                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                                      |Intelligent processing data base      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                                      |Color image processing                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                                      |Micromachining of micromachine compon-| 
|                                      |ents                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                                      |Construction of genetic information a-| 
|                                      |nalysis support system                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                                      |Basic research on shearing and bendin-| 
|                                      |g of intermetallic compounds          | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|;7;1 National Institute for Chemicals |Hollow fiber applied technology       | 
|and Materials                         |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                                      |Synthesis of polymer electrode materi-| 
|                                      |als and performing evaluations thereof| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                                      |Non-destructive measurement of fibrou-| 
|                                      |s polymer materials                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                                      |Control and function evaluation of po-| 
|                                      |lymer materials that exhibit stimulus-| 
|                                      |response characteristics              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                                      |Analyzing the characteristics of bior-| 
|                                      |elated polymers and the applications  | 
|                                      |thereof                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                                      |Evaluating the catalytic characterist-| 
|                                      |ics of oxides                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                                      |Structure and properties of polymer m-| 
|                                      |aterials                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                                      |Government Industrial Research Instit-|Polymer-alloying of thermoplastic res-| 
|                                      |ute, Osaka                            |ins                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Government Industrial Research Instit-|Synthesis of microporous crystal and  | 
|ute, Nagoya                           |functional evaluation thereof         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                                      |Synthesis of interceramic compounds   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                                      |Method of evaluating the manufacture  | 
|                                      |of biocomposite ceramics              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|National Institute of Bioscience and  |Basic technology for breeding microor-| 
|Human Technology                      |ganisms                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Electrotechnical Laboratory           |Research on reliability of electronic | 
|                                      |elements                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                                      |Prototyping and evaluating magnetic a-| 
|                                      |rtificial lattices                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|National Institute for Resources and  |Ozone processing of toxic organic sub-| 
|Environment                           |stances                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-44920 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpjst010___94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-JST-94-010 </AU>
JPRS 
Science &amp; Technology 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Japan AIST Research Laboratory Plans </ABS>
<DATE1>   31 October 1993 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     1993 AIST Laboratory Research Plans </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    1993 AIST Laboratory Research Plans </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Industrial Property Licensing </H4>

<F P=102> 94FE0219K Tokyo AGENCY OF INDUSTRIAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
in Japanese 31 Oct 93 p 547 </F>

<F P=103> 94FE0219K </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo AGENCY OF INDUSTRIAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
in Japanese 31 Oct 93 p 547 </F>

<F P=105> Japanese </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

  [Text] 
<H5>  2. Licensing Industrial Property Rights </H5>



  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Total Annual Revenues from Licensing of Property Rights                    | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Year              |License Fees (uni-|Number of Claims  |Total Number of A-| 
|                  |t: yen)           |                  |pplicants         | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1971              |183,025,262       |138               |216               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1972              |284,463,042       |198               |269               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1973              |286,635,214       |208               |304               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1974              |369,594,360       |274               |397               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1975              |468,920,764       |403               |695               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1976              |367,910,924       |405               |677               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1977              |252,126,882       |384               |636               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1978              |239,487,361       |388               |620               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1979              |205,296,730       |468               |635               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1980              |283,027,984       |523               |746               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1981              |233,906,312       |559               |826               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1982              |243,899,876       |557               |854               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1983              |239,404,138       |590               |882               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1984              |275,400,132       |639               |946               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1985              |307,988,162       |681               |933               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1986              |296,764,117       |716               |1,005             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1987              |291,134,740       |748               |991               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1988              |324,383,968       |758               |1,002             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1989              |329,219,742       |661               |824               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1990              |185,793,166       |624               |783               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1991              |198,670,437       |622               |790               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1992              |198,326,446       |595               |721               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 





  Licensing Status (March 31, 1991) 

AIST Lab    Domestic Industrial Property Rights                                                 Overseas             Total 

Patents                          Utility Models       Designs              Total 

Licenses    Firms    Licenses    Firms    Licenses    Firms    Licenses    Firms    Licenses    Firms    Licenses    Firms 

NAIR        0        0           0        0           0        0           0        0           0        0           0        0 

NRLM        4        6           4        4           0        0           8        10          0        0           8        10 

MEL         40       40          0        0           0        0           40       40          0        0           40       40 

NIMC        81       106         3        3           0        0           84       109         3        9           87       118 

GIRI-O      57       72          0        0           0        0           57       72          0        0           57       72 

GIRI-N      12       13          0        0           0        0           12       13          0        0           12       13 

NIBM        56       104         2        2           0        0           58       106         2        2           60       108 

GSJ         4        4           3        4           0        0           7        8           0        0           7        8 

ETL         36       37          8        8           0        0           44       45          0        0           44       45 

NIRE        32       36          2        2           0        0           34       38          0        0           34       38 

GIRI-H      4        4           1        1           0        0           5        5           0        0           5        5 

GIRI-K      28       29          1        1           0        0           29       30          0        0           29       30 

GIRI-S      13       13          0        0           0        0           13       13          0        0           13       13 

GIRI-T      4        8           0        0           0        0           4        8           0        0           4        8 

GIRI-C      1        1           3        3           0        0           4        4           0        0           4        4 

Sub Total   372      473         27       28          0        0           399      501         5        11          404      512 


LARGE       74       91          2        2           0        0           76       93          6        6           82       99 

SUN         21       21          0        0           0        0           21       21          0        0           21       21 

MOON        11       10          1        1           0        0           12       11          0        0           12       11 

NEXT        10       12          0        0           0        0           10       12          0        0           10       12 

MED         63       63          3        3           0        0           66       66          0        0           66       66 

Sub Total   179      197         6        6           0        0           185      203         6        6           191      209 


TOTAL       551      670         33       34          0        0           584      704         11       17          595      721 

(Note: number includes applications pending; FIRMS: applicants) 

Key: GIRI-O: Govt. Industrial Research Institute, Osaka; NIBH: Natl. Inst. of Bioscience and Human Technology; GIRI-N: Govt. 
Industrial Research Institute, Nagoya; GSL: Geological Survey of Japan; GIRI-H: Govt. Industrial Research Institute, Hokkaido; 
ETL: Electrotechnical Laboratory; GIRI-K: Govt. Industrial Research Laboratory, Kyushu; NIRE: Natl. Institute for Resources and 
Environment; GIRI-S: Govt. Industrial Research Laboratory, Shikoku; NAIR: Natl. Inst. for Adv. Interdisciplinary Research; GIRI-T: 
Govt. Industrial Research Laboratory, Tohoku; NRLM: Natl. Research Laboratory of Metrology; GIRI-C: Govt. Industrial Research 
Laboratory, Chugoku; MEL: Mechanical Engineering Laboratory; NIMC: Natl. Inst. of Materials and Chemical Research; SUN: Old 
Sunshine Project; LARGE: Large-Scale Project; MOON: Moonlight Project; NEXT: Next-Generation Project; MED: Medical and Well-Being 
Project 




</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-44921 </DOCNO>
<HT>      "jpnea029___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-029 </AU>
JPRS 
Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     4 April 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Inter-Palestinian Relations Analyzed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Inter-Palestinian Relations Analyzed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94AF0189A Jerusalem AL-MANAR in Arabic 4 Apr 94 pp 9, 15 </F>
<F P=103> 94AF0189A </F>
<F P=104>  Jerusalem AL-MANAR </F>
<F P=105>  Arabic </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Rub'i al-Madhun: "Limited Options in </F>
Inter-Palestinian Relations"] 
  [Text] Are the Palestinians heading toward a civil war in 
their mounting political disputes as they approach 
implementation of the autonomy formula in Gaza and Jericho 
first? Or towards a coexistence that is uneasy yet capable of 
securing basic elements of control to prevent the outbreak of 
any local wars, and to avert the spread of their destructive 
outcomes? 
  It would be naive not to expect the Palestinians' to quickly 
return to the local "cold" war pattern that has accompanied the 
peace process in the Middle East ever since the Madrid 
conference. It would also be a mistake not to show profound 
feelings of fear and unease that reflect the extent of anxiety 
over the future of domestic Palestinian relations as the 
authority exerts its powers in the autonomous areas. And yet it 
would be dangerous to depend on these two expressions of general 
positions on larger, transitional events, such as we see leading 
the Palestinians into a tunnel that would limit their options 
either to retreating from larger events in their political 
life--with the aim of obtaining "joint satisfaction" and 
enabling them to "put their house in order"--or to facing civil 
war to decide the course of the struggle. 
  It is important at the outset to avoid the trap of drawing 
instant deductions, relying on the phenomenon of developments. 
It is necessary to explore the background of the phenomenon, to 
go directly into a quick but quiet process, to dismantle it, in 
order to find the elements that may be within the realm of 
possibility, and to exclude exaggeration. Anxieties generate 
possibilities. 
<H5>  "Palestinian Militias" </H5>
  The Palestinians' fears spring from three principal sources 
that have solidified into a fourth, after reports of the spread 
of more arms in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, and the fact 
that the Israeli occupation authorities have facilitated the 
acquisition of arms for a large number of citizens through 
purchase, smuggling, or condoning the theft of arms. They have 
encouraged the formation of local militias to push the Authority 
in the autonomous areas into a civil war, imposing an impediment 
to the first Palestinian autonomy experiment at its very 
beginnings. These sources are: 
  First: the mounting attitude of "political anger" on the 
part 
of Palestinian factions who oppose the policy of the PLO 
leadership and Chairman Yasir 'Arafat, and the PLO's abandonment 
of these factions along the way, which leads to their 
estrangement and extinction, rather than to their participation 
in the political arena, where they may have positive effects on 
the political process. This has limited the dissidents' options 
to calling for the death of 'Arafat and his comrades, or 
proclaiming public despair and frustration with the public 
manifestations of the Palestinian condition. Both options are 
extreme movements in conflicting directions, and neither one has 
the power to influence official policy, as each includes 
open--and possibly final--acknowledgement of early bankruptcy. 
  Second: the isolation of a limited number of Palestinian 
leaders who are managing Palestinian affairs in every category, 
and the growing tendency toward secrecy and immersion in 
administrative detail. These elements give profound indications 
of the likelihood of mounting doubts in Palestinian circles over 
the future of the national movement, and the level of public 
participation in the making of policy and the nature of laws 
governing this participation. This comes at a time when other 
indications give more ominous confirmation of trends inside the 
leadership and in the major centers of action that could push in 
the direction of more hardened norms in relations between the 
coming Authority and its opponents, with the claim of avoiding 
public abandonment and likely oversight accompanying the process 
of transferring authority. 
  Third: these negative points of the Palestinian opposition 
support some early inferences regarding the nature of the future 
authority in the Gaza and Jericho areas. The first picture of 
the autonomy shows a vague image of the future of the 
opposition, some of whom expect a confrontation with the 
Palestinian police "even harsher than that with the Israeli 
forces." So how can these fears be tested in their probable 
interactions? 
  First, the past negative motives that represented the major 
causes of public tension must be eliminated, temporarily at 
least. The events that would most likely inflame or support 
expectations of war should be banished. The background of the 
incident should be studied, as the force that represents the 
main dominating instrument of action in the course of domestic 
relations, and the best able to define its final direction. 
<H5>  Curbing Ingredients of Tension </H5>
  Let us begin with Hamas. This beginning provides a complete 
tour within the ranks of the opposition, as this fundamentalist 
organization plays the major dominating role in controlling the 
elements of general tension, not because it is the most ominous 
"partner" of the PLO, but because it is without peer in 
political opposition to 'Arafat. It holds many of the keys to 
domination--from afar--with numerous elements of Palestinian 
peace and war. It is the most widespread and the most 
influential, and the least subordinate, and this distinction 
made it less interested in the practical aspect of the 
development of relations in the existing 10-member opposition 
alliance in Damascus today, which it describes as a media arena 
more than a forum for achieving specific gains on the ground. 
Thus Hamas, which talks a great deal here, does not ignore what 
is happening there (however little), as the Palestinian 
Authority begins the first phase of formation. Is it enough to 
confirm the belief that Hamas is no longer busy escalating a 
cold war of words with 'Arafat and the PLO leadership, while the 
elements deciding the battle will not be on the scene of this 
war seeking to gain greater influence, in order to be granted 
legitimate and official status? 
  A reading of the results of the recent agreements and 
charters signed by the powers of war and peace on the 
Palestinian scene shows a marked inclination to explain the 
motives of their political decisions, which form the general 
trend of PLO policy more than their interest in obstructing 
their enemies or threatening them directly, and pushing them 
into decisions they do not consider right. But Hamas 
politicians, who have been characterized over the past two years 
by humble political experience and division in political 
pronouncements based on reactions of the supports of difference, 
and reaffirming political participation, have begun to gain 
political field experience, especially after numerous setbacks. 
If one sets aside the difference of their armed activities--and 
this development is reflected in the attempts of some Hamas 
members to push the movement toward greater pragmatism and a 
reduction in the intensity of its fundamentalist violence--if 
one takes the conventional meaning of this violence, can this 
development be placed in the category of tactical politics, or a 
cautious step on the part of Hamas to prepare the way for an 
announcement of its participation in the future Palestinian 
Authority, or at least in its civil admnistrative institutions? 
<H5>  Hamas Camp </H5>
  A little consideration of the power of Hamas is helpful to 
the process of exploring the rest of the elements of Palestinian 
war and peace. Despite the growth of Hamas's influence and its 
strength on the ground in the occupied areas, it has still not 
created a sufficient threat to the PLO's influence allowing it 
to remove it from the arena, but it has produced a certain 
"power balance" which has begun to strengthen in the Hamas camp 
with a rise in gun ownership and the development of technical 
field abilities in terms of violent armed action, especially in 
operations targeted against Israeli intelligence and its 
officers. Fatah, on the other hand, the biggest organization, 
some of whose armed persons turned in their war materiel to the 
occupation authorities in response to political developments, 
while some others held on to a small amount of equipment--it has 
begun to exchange its former elements of power for the 
possession of the official security power, represented by at 
least 6,000 policemen who will be at the disposal of the future 
Authority, of which Fatah will be the backbone. It will be the 
Authority's direct instrument for safeguarding the general 
regime and protecting the political agreements between the PLO 
and Israel, within the confines of the force's deployment area, 
and their major operation areas. If these two power elements 
represent the measure of the "balance of deterrence" of the two 
sides and prevent the firing of the first missile at the 
crossing point, then the question would be about the factors of 
controlling this balance, which does not make civil war a 
mandatory transition. And if that is possible, what are the 
transitions they will pass through? 
<H5>  Expanding the Borders of Coexistence </H5>
  Now, we are able to identify the ablities of both Fatah and 
Hamas as the two primary, major, dominating powers in equalizing 
the "balance of power," which in turn sets out the divisions 
between internal peace and war, and which also impose the the 
form of possible coexistence. How is this balance employed, not 
in its more perilous uses to destroy an enemy, but in the 
framework of joint cooperation? 
  The PLO will be facing, in the very near future, the dilemma 
of controlling numerous secondary and marginal balances that 
have the potential to cause the internal collapse of national 
relations. This requires Fatah, first and foremost, to review 
the worst conditions at the general and specific levels inside 
the PLO's institutions, as Fatah constitutes the greatest weight 
inside the PLO. For there is something that goes beyond the 
perils of this dilemma to more dangerous channels of action 
proposed to the PLO leadership, to allow the approach to a 
palpable degree more like the practices of statesmen. They must 
change existing institutions' management methods that emphasize 
skills that do not value work with the mentality of the 
"political marketplace." They must also create a delicate 
balance on more than one level between this authority's respect 
for the agreements it has signed and the PLO's announced 
commitments within the current political settlement context, 
which enables them to protect the PLO's agreement without being 
forced into a clash with the opposing forces, especially 
concerning autonomous control. A balance such as this may not be 
struck without an increased grasp of the opposition's problems, 
and working to relinquish its extremist ideas by pushing it 
towards practical tests that would convince it to reformulate 
its positions, and everything that would lead to direct 
confrontations with it. The slide towards confrontation would 
not serve the interests of the opposition, but harm them, also, 
and directly, the broad popular sectors and factions that appear 
hurt already by the outcome of the political agreements with 
Israel. They feel that these agreements have not so far served 
their short-term or long-term interests. In another sense, 
'Arafat's command, which will undertake its duties in the 
autonomous areas by stabilizing and maintaining security, will 
face political opposition seeking the widest possible forums for 
expression and freedom of opinion, at a time when the 
Palestinian leadership finds itself compelled to ignore the 
sounds of explosions in areas outside its control. This aspect, 
which includes armed Palestinian actions, must be turned into an 
Israeli problem, to prevent any Palestinian side from playing 
the role of guardian of Israel's security interests in areas 
from which Israel refuses to withdraw, and in which it is still 
raising thousands of flags of occupation. 
  On the other hand, the opposition forces, principally Hamas, 
face in turn the same balance, but in a way that imposes on them 
the creation of a precise and accurate balance between general 
Palestinian national aspirations for peaceful coexistence among 
all political sides, and their militant demands, including armed 
action, which might continue all along the occupation border 
surrounding the autonomous area. 
  Despite the seeming equivalence of the dilemmas of the two 
sides (the PLO and the opposition) and the sharing of 
responsibility for the perils of any slide into civil war, the 
control factors are the PLO's, when we consider its official 
status and its way of dealing with the opposition as a measure 
upon which much light will be shed. 
  Thus we may move on to the test of another sort of balance, 
of the type that defines Hamas's and the other oppositiion 
forces' options after the end of the interactions that will come 
with the first intensive and public appearance of the 
Palestinian police in the autonomous areas. 
  At the outset, there is no need to overemphasize the 
negative 
effects of the appearance of the police force. Despite its 
inevitable show of force, destined for sabotage and field 
experience, the appearance of the Palestinian police, 
unprecedented since the Israeli occupation in 1967, will take 
place after the disappearance of the Israeli army, the security 
forces, the "border guard," and their Palestinian helpers. This 
will transform the show of force into the police's first 
positive task, to safeguard the citizens' security and the 
protection of production facilities and maintaining the process 
of building the first Palestinian Authority on our national 
soil. This gives this transformation a celebratory value that 
hides, for the present, any tendency toward repression. 
  Thus we approach the imagined picture of the likely reality 
in the autonomous areas, and with it we come to the 
possibilities generated by this first step: 
  The first hypothesis is that Hamas and other opposition 
forces intend to launch sporadic attacks on the Palestinian 
police forces, exploiting the unstable transitional state, with 
the aim of confusing the new Authority and hampering its 
exercise of power and the complete extension of its influence in 
the autonomous areas. However, this hypothesis is forcefully 
contradicted by Hamas's past assurances that it would not be the 
first to initiate a clash, and that it does not intend to fight 
the Palestinian police as long as the latter does not obstruct 
Hamas's armed cells, give chase to its fighters, or hamper its 
resistance to the occupation. It is also incompatible with the 
recent statements and positions issued by Hamas spokesmen in the 
wake of the Cairo agreement between the PLO and Israel, which 
merely set out Hamas's position on the agreement and its 
expectations with regard to it. It contained no provocative or 
even outspoken charges; nor did it contain, as was usual in 
past, any challenges to the autonomous Authority going any 
farther than betting on its failure. 
  The second hypothesis is that Hamas will accept in principle 
a sort of coexistence with the future Authority, being content 
to rely on the shortcomings of the Cairo agreement and the 
negative points of the Oslo accord in its bet on the failure of 
the peace process, and on the basis of the accord's new burdens 
on the Palestinian people. In this case, we would be facing two 
scenarios. 
  1. Expanding the "mutual coexistence" between Hamas and the 
opposition under the umbrella of the new Authority, and Hamas's 
willingness to participate indirectly in the agencies of the 
Authority through its members and supporters inside the 
Palestinian institutions and the spread of this participation to 
other security-related institutions against the occupation 
forces all along the belt surrounding the autonomous area. This 
possibility is the most likely, especially in the time between 
the start of the handover of power and the elections expected in 
July. This time period appears likely, because the rest of the 
opposition sides, perhaps includes this distinction, going 
outside the opposition's traditional positions, and taking 
advantage of the time period available to prepare for elections. 
We do not, however, expect Hamas to announce intentions like 
these, or for them to crop up in its spokesmen's statements any 
time soon. Hamas's purpose is not to announce its intentions 
fully, and it is precisely this that has begun to stir up the 
fears of the other opposition forces, which have begun to 
whisper that the PLO is putting "one foot here--inside the ranks 
of the opposition alliance--and another foot there, with 
'Arafat." 
  2. The development of a partial "upset" in Hamas's 
positions, 
especially with the likelihood of participating with the 
Authority in elections. This was clearly the view in Shaykh 
Ahmad Yasin's papers, published weekly in AL-WASAT a few months 
ago. If things move in this direction, the features of this 
upset would begin with Hamas's decision to make a broad and 
organized entry into the autonomous institutions. This would 
translate its public influence into a power taking part in 
seizing the centers of power in the Authority's administrative 
institutions. 
  Thus we may summarize the probabilities of the interaction 
of 
the elements of internal conflict in the coming phase as 
follows: the emergence of a sort of balance of unease between 
the future Palestinian Authority in the autonomous areas, and 
the Palestinian opposition, based on the two sides' balance of 
interests, which could hold the keys to power in the future of 
war and peace, a mounting tendency toward stability. This means 
continued apprehensions over the course of the changes, but to 
an extent that would still leave the door to salvation open. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-44922 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea029___94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-029 </AU>
JPRS 
Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     20 April 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Palestine Investment Company Plans </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Palestine Investment Company Plans </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94AF0186A London AL-HAYAH in Arabic 20 Apr 94 p 10 </F>
<F P=103> 94AF0186A </F>
<F P=104>  London AL-HAYAH </F>
<F P=105>  Arabic </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Raja'i al-Masri, by 'Adil Bishtawi, from </F>
Amman; date not given--first five paragraphs are AL-HAYAH 
introduction] 
  [Text] At the time of ongoing political negotiations for an 
end to Israeli occupation of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, 
several other parties are continuing their efforts to create 
institutions capable of bringing about development and improving 
the quality of life of inhabitants of the occupied territories 
as well as of building the infrastructure and restoring 
essential services after 26 years of negligence and destruction 
that were at the core of Israeli occupation policies. 
  A number of Israeli institutions and Palestinian businessmen 
have announced the founding of holding companies to help rebuild 
the occupied motherland, even before agreement was reached in 
Washington last September on the Declaration of Principles 
between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization. 
  There have been recurring press reports of "huge" projects 
being planned to expend "billions of dollars" in the West Bank 
and the Strip. A great many of those plans, however, did not 
materialize and may never see the light of day. 
  Information available so far would indicate that the 
Palestine Development and Investment Corporation (PDIC), 
incorporated in Amman at the end of last month, has the 
financial, managerial, and technical clout to do the difficult 
job ahead. It would also seem that it has adopted a more 
tangible strategy to deal with current conditions and possible 
future developments. 
  AL-HAYAH had the following interview in Amman with Raja'i 
al-Masri, the company's official spokesman. 
  [Bishtawi] Now that the Palestine Development and Investment 
Corporation has been incorporated in Amman and its 16-member 
Board of Directors elected, what remains to be done before 
operations can begin in occupied Palestine? 
  [Al-Masri] The next step is to appoint a managing director 
for the company after his job description is stated. The 
company's administrative structure has already been defined and 
a number of individuals have already been named to certain 
positions. Legal counsel has already taken steps to establish 
the company's regional headquarters in Amman as discussions 
continue with regard to its main offices in Palestine. The final 
location of the latter is yet to be determined, but they will be 
initially located in the West Bank, in or close to Jerusalem. 
Additional offices will be opened in Gaza City. 
  [Bishtawi] What are the broad investment strategies of 
Palestine Development and Investment Corporation? 
  [Al-Masri] Conceptually, the company's activities will 
primarily be a function of its nature as a funding company in 
the sense that it will be a financing vehicle, even though it 
may play a limited role in the transfer of technology. I am not 
referring to pure or basic sciences; rather, to the transfer of 
the technology of various types of systems. The company will 
engage in constant contacts in an endeavor to foster world-wide 
financing relations with private and other institutions such as 
the European Community and the International Finance Agency. The 
latter is a World Bank agency concerned with private sector 
investments. Meanwhile, we continue to seek and identify others 
with which we can open dialogue and cooperate and from whose 
experiences we can benefit. 
  The company, after completing feasibility studies for the 
projects it targets for investment, plans to invest initially 
through companies operating in the West Bank and Gaza, including 
al-Ruwwad Palestinian company, which is yet to be founded even 
though it has been registered in Ramallah and several founders 
culled from among West Bank businessmen. The parent company 
(Palestine Development and Investment) will own 49 percent of 
al-Ruwwad's estimated capital of $50 million. This is the 
maximum investment ratio allowed under current laws in the 
occupied territories. It is currently planned that local 
Palestinian founders put up 25 percent of capital and offer the 
remaining 26 percent to public subscription in the West Bank and 
the Gaza Strip. The company's total investments in the interior 
could be in the vicinity of $200 million. 
  [Bishtawi] There are expectations that the company may begin 
operations in occupied Palestine within six months. What type of 
project could the company undertake or invest in? 
  [Al-Masri] There are a number of essential projects that are 
important both strategically and as investments. Preliminary 
studies have already been made on one such project that focuses 
primarily on the construction industry. It will be implemented 
in several stages. 
  Certain projects involve the construction of fully 
integrated 
housing complexes outside the cities in order to help alleviate 
stifling population densities. Each complex would comprise 1,000 
housing units. There is a political dimension to this that must 
be dealt with first, because it has to do with the land 
privatization issue. It is common knowledge that land ownership 
is in dispute, and the subject of Palestinian land is therefore 
extremely sensitive and complex. 
  Other plans call for the construction of three- and 
four-star 
hotels in a number of Palestinian cities. A number of industrial 
and productive projects aim at creating employment opportunities, 
  [Bishtawi] How will the company raise the capital to finance 
all the aforementioned projects, which may cost $1 billion? 
  [Al-Masri] The company seeks to raise $200 million through a 
private subscription. About half of that amount has already been 
pledged. I don't foresee a problem in raising the entire amount 
since the deadline for the private subscription has been 
extended for three more months ending this coming 30 June. Since 
the subscription is private, the minimum investment amount has 
been set at $100,000 and the maximum at $1 million--the latter 
being 1 percent of capitalization. That would guarantee that no 
one party could gain control of the company and would ensure the 
widest possible investor base by giving everyone an opportunity 
to subscribe. 
  [Bishtawi] Why didn't the company hold a public subscription 
as the Lebanese company Solidaire did? There are a large number 
of Palestinian investors who are able and willing to finance 
this vital project. 
  [Al-Masri] I believe it is because the maximum investment 
amount was set at $1 million. There is a considerable number of 
Arab and Palestinian investors abroad who are able to subscribe 
such an amount. Another reason is that the intention was to 
raise needed capital as rapidly as possible in order to coincide 
with the opening of the West Bank and Gaza to investments. 
Furthermore, the legal structure of the parent company and its 
possible subsidiaries provides for the future broadening of the 
subscription base in order to enable the largest possible number 
of Arabs and Palestinians to contribute to the development of 
Palestinian lands. 
  [Bishtawi] Does the strategy of establishing a holding 
company to engage in private sector investments mean that the 
political leadership has given its support or has acquiesced to 
the fact that the Palestinian economy will be open, private, and 
free-market-driven rather than be government directed or 
controlled? 
  [Al-Masri] There is considerable dependence on the private 
sector in the effort towards development and social and economic 
revival in Palestinian lands. The private sector accounts for 85 
percent of Palestinian economic activity, according to World 
Bank figures based on the finest field studies. The public 
sector played no major role during the 26 years of Israeli 
occupation of the West Bank and Gaza, during which the private 
sector had to contend with extremely difficult conditions and 
cope with impossible regulations, oppressive martial law, and 
other factors that helped instill in it the spirit of individual 
enterprise, initiative, and awareness. The free-market concept 
is therefore taking hold as a tradition. We must build upon 
something positive and that economic convention is positive 
without a doubt. 
  [Bishtawi] Am I to understand then that there has been 
stated 
or unstated prior agreement with the Palestinian political 
leadership to abstain from government controls and refrain from 
the partial or full nationalization of future projects and 
institutions in Palestinian lands? 
  [Al-Masri] It is not my place to verbalize the viewpoint of 
the political leadership. However, the political leadership has 
been consulted and it gave its blessing. The company's 
orientation has been stated in its articles of incorporation and 
it varies considerably from those of many other Arab companies 
founded in the past 20 or 30 years. The articles emphasize that 
the company will engage in medium- to long-term investments and 
that its stock will not be traded during the first few months or 
even the first few years. The articles also call for adding 
capital gradually over four years. The objective is not quick 
profit as proved by the fact that it was not made easy to trade 
the company stock early on. It can be said, generally speaking, 
that some company activities will fall under the development 
plans instituted by the political leadership, including those 
plans contained in studies prepared by concerned organizations 
such as the World Bank and others. It should not be forgotten 
that sound investments mean projects that are feasible and 
profitable. 
  [Bishtawi] The plan to establish the Palestine Development 
and Investment Corporation is based on two basic assumptions. 
The first is that peace is inevitable and that it will at least 
allow for industrial and commercial activity. The second is that 
relations between Jordan and Palestine are predetermined and 
known? 
  [Al-Masri] It goes without saying that the huge investment 
and economic capabilities of all Arabs and Palestinians outside 
Palestine should be enlisted to seize all opportunities for 
capital to contribute, with a reasonable degree of efficacy and 
freedom, in correcting the grave imbalances, deviations, and 
distortions that afflict the economic structure of Palestinian 
lands as a result of the Israeli occupation. Despite the 
complexity and fluctuations of political conditions, and despite 
the diversity and disparity of the many visions for the future, 
this recruitment of capital would lay the ground work for social 
and economic development in order to create jobs, raise incomes, 
improve expertise, and develop the skills of the overwhelming 
majority of our working people in the Palestinian lands. That 
goes hand in hand with realizing for investors worthwhile 
returns on capital. Success in that endeavor is supposed to 
anchor the people to the Palestinian lands. Furthermore, it is 
immensely important for the Palestinian economy to refrain from 
close ties with and almost total subservience to the Israeli 
economy. Opportunities should be created to facilitate the 
restoration of wider economic exchange and the launching of 
joint ventures between Palestinian lands and the sister Arab 
states. 
  [Bishtawi] Were you asked by the Jordanian Government to 
defer the incorporation of the company, for instance until the 
relationship between Jordan and the Palestinian entity takes its 
final shape or until a propensity emerges for certain projects 
and not others? 
  [Al-Masri] The Jordanian Government has not intervened in 
the 
slightest at any stage of founding the company. At the inaugural 
celebration held at the Amman Chamber of Industry and addressed 
by PLO representative Ahmad Quray' (Abu-'Ala'), Jordan announced 
in the person of Dr. Jawad al-'Anani, minister of information, 
that it would extend all possible assistance to guarantee 
company success and enable it to realize its objectives. It was 
clear by his statement that Jordan would not interfere with the 
Palestine Development and Investment Corporation. We must at 
this point emphasize the unity of the two peoples and the 
similitude of their interests. 
  [Bishtawi] Even though the situation has eased somewhat, 
there remains a great deal of ambiguity, for instance about the 
nature of the administrative institutions with which the 
Palestine Development and Investment Corporation and similar 
establishments would deal in the West Bank and Gaza? 
  [Al-Masri] This is true but the objective at the moment is 
to 
attempt to mobilize human and financial resources in order to 
have manpower and financing ready and waiting when the situation 
becomes clearer. I can say that the company endeavors to skirt 
the many deficiencies of the present by wielding the weight it 
has achieved thanks to the caliber of its investors. It is a 
given that the vagueness and uncertainty that characterize this 
period in time would tend to discourage individual private 
capital from investing in Palestinian lands. That prompted the 
creation of the company in order to undertake that important 
wide-scale assemblage of investors from among leading 
institutions and distinguished senior businessmen, thereby 
assigning private sector contributions a leading and innovating 
role. The Palestine Development and Investment Corporation, as 
it now stands, has the necessary clout that--coupled with 
efficient management and the adoption of modern advancement 
systems--would enable it to be doubly effective in achieving 
targeted objectives within a reasonable time frame. 
  [Bishtawi] Palestine Development and Investments Company is 
not the first firm founded for the development of Palestine and 
for undertaking projects in the West Bank and Gaza. Are you 
coordinating with other companies in order to avoid duplication 
and competition for the limited number of projects? 
  [Al-Masri] There is no coordination per se. The company will 
be primarily active in strategic projects. We will not be 
involved in small projects except to offer support. There are 
industrial projects undertaken either by individuals or by a 
small group of businessmen, and these need financial, technical, 
managerial, and marketing support. It is in those areas that 
support can be offered, but not for the purpose of control or 
full or even substantial ownership. The company will therefore 
specialize primarily in the implementation of strategic and 
medium-range projects that would be untenable for individual 
investors. 
  [Bishtawi] In which currencies will the company deal? 
  [Al-Masri] The company's capital is in U.S. dollars but 
investments will be denominated on the basis of capital invested 
into local companies in the domestic currency. But there will 
companies like al-Ruwwad which chose to put its capital (50 
million) in U.S. dollars. 
  [Bishtawi] Have you considered, for instance, hedging 
contracts that would protect the company against sharp 
fluctuations to which investments in local currencies may be 
exposed? 
  [Al-Masri] This is something for the future into which we 
have not yet looked. It will be considered on a case-by-case 
basis as it comes up. The reason is that in most of the 
investments being considered, capital will not be recouped for a 
period of perhaps three to five years before distributions of 
profits are made. They will therefore be self-stabilizing and 
hedging would be short termed. 
  [Bishtawi] The premise underlying all this, as we understand 
it, is that Israel will withdraw from the West Bank and the 
Strip or you would not have considered the establishment of this 
company; and that there will be stability, otherwise there will 
be no development since it is a function of stability. Are these 
and other developments a consideration in the company's 
operating strategies, or would you be able to halt operations at 
any stage that suffers a specific setback and go back to the 
planning board? 
  [Al-Masri] The laws under which the company was incorporated 
as well as its articles of incorporation give it enough 
flexibility. I reiterate that political developments are beyond 
our control, but indications of a peaceful solution do exist. 
  [Bishtawi] As an international expert in economic and 
financial affairs, would you advise the Arab or Palestinian 
venture capitalist in the diaspora to invest in a company like 
Palestine Development and Investment Corporation? 
  [Al-Masri] Palestinians primarily, and Arabs to a lesser 
degree, are invited at this time to assume the long-delayed role 
that is incumbent upon them to play. We all agree that we are 
currently passing through a period of uncertainty. The path is 
not clearly marked, and the difficulties are numerous. But it is 
this type of situation that generates deeper commitment and a 
more urgent call for involvement. Our people in the lands of 
Palestine have the ability and determination to dust off 
backwardness and bring about an ever-increasing development that 
is sustainable through our own potential and abilities once 
occupation ends and artificial legislative and legal 
restrictions are lifted, and heavy-handed political domination 
is removed. Perhaps our greatest asset, without giving in to 
narrow chauvinism, is the human resources in Palestinian lands, 
be they resolute businessmen or stone-throwing children, as 
borne out by recent World Bank studies. All this will inevitably 
generate numerous worthwhile economic and investment 
opportunities, and it stands to reason that Palestinian and Arab 
investors should share in their rewards. 
  [Bishtawi] Some international experts expect peace in the 
Middle East to create conditions that would transform the region 
into one of the most prosperous areas of the world. How do you 
see this? 
  [Al-Masri] That is our target and hope. I am a resident of 
the West who has traveled extensively in Asia over the past 
three years. I have dealt with the so-called economic tigers 
(such as Singapore, Taiwan, and South Korea), and I have always 
felt deeply anguished. We should never give in to negativism, 
because the world is moving at a tremendous pace, and the gap 
between us and the developed world is widening rapidly. We have 
no alternative but to build, but we must have available to us 
certain markets and a certain degree of integration in order to 
play an effective role in developing the economy, raise the 
standard of living, and catch up somewhat with world 
development. The company, by virtue of its stated purpose, is 
attempting to play such a role, but this would depend on the 
political will. The presence of political will, along with 
awareness and education, is of the essence. All this is a 
function of people's convictions, customs, and habits, as well 
as of existing laws and of the need for economic liberalization. 
There is no other way. 
  [Bishtawi] How do you describe Raja'i al-Masri? 
  [Al-Masri] Raja'i al-Masri is a Palestinian who was born in 
1948 in Nablus on the West Bank. He graduated from Wisconsin 
University in the United States with a degree in electrical 
engineering. I hold an MBA from a university in France and am a 
CFA international fellow [as published]. I held positions with 
the Banque de Paris, an investment bank in Paris, as well as 
with the Royal Bank of Canada and with Procter and Gamble. I 
presently live in Montreal, Canada, with my Lebanese wife and 
three sons. I am fluent in French and English and I know some 
German. 
<H5>  The Board of Directors </H5>
  The Palestine Development and Investment Corporation has on 
its board of directors a number of well-known institutions such 
as the Arab Bank, Cairo-Amman Bank, the Housing Bank, 
Dar-al-Handassah Company represented in the person of Dr. Kamal 
al-Sha'ir, al-Masirah Investment Company, and al-Sa'id Company. 
Other directors include Husayn al-Sharqawi, Khaldun Abu-Hassan, 
Riyadh Sadiq, Ramzi Dalul, Zahi Khuri, 'Azmi Abd-al-Hadi, Munib 
al-Masri, Nabil al-Sarraf, Nabil al-Shawwa, and Nidhal Sukhiyan. 
  Dr. al-Sha'ir has been elected chairman of the Board, Munib 
al-Masri as vice-chairman, and Nabil al-Sarraf as secretary. 
  Dr. al-Sha'ir is a well-known Jordanian businessman and 
member of the Jordanian House of Representatives. He owns 
Dar-al-Handassah, one of the largest contractors in the Arab 
nation. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

