<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1628 </DOCNO>
<HT>  "drchi063_k_94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  25 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   Supreme Procuratorate Work Report to NPC </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Supreme Procuratorate Work Report to NPC </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW3103140394 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 2148 
GMT 25 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW3103140394 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Work Report of the Supreme People's Procuratorate" -- </F>
delivered by Zhang Siqing, procurator general of the Supreme 
People's Procuratorate, at the Second Session of the Eighth 
National People's Congress (NPC) on 15 March 1994] 
  [Text] Beijing, 25 Mar (XINHUA) -- Fellow deputies: 
  I would now like to deliver a report on the major situation 
of procuratorial work in 1993 and the main tasks for 1994 at 
this session. Please examine it. 
  In the past year, on the basis of the guidelines laid down 
by 
the 14th National Party Congress and the First Session of the 
Eighth NPC, the Supreme People's Procuratorate assumed overall 
responsibility for various procuratorial activities under the 
principle of "strictly enforcing laws and paying close attention 
to handling cases." People's procuratorates at all levels as 
well as special procuratorates for the military and for railroad 
transport departments strengthened their functions of legal 
supervision; concentrated efforts on investigating such big, 
important cases as corruption, bribery, and so forth; cracked 
down on serious criminal activities; and investigated criminal 
cases of infringement on the democratic rights of citizens and 
dereliction of duty, thereby making positive contributions to 
maintaining national and social stability and to ensuring the 
establishment of a socialist market economy as well as the 
smooth progress of modernization. 
1. Procuratorial Organs Concentrated Efforts on 
Investigating Big, Important Cases and Scored Certain 
Achievements in the Anticorruption Drive. 
  In 1993, procuratorial organs across the country placed a 
total of 56,491 criminal cases, including corruption and bribery 
cases, on file for investigation. Among them 30,877 were 
corruption and bribery cases; 13,148 cases of them involved 
amounts between 10,000 and 100,000 yuan; 955 cases, between 
100,000 and 500,000 yuan; 77 cases, between 500,000 and 1 
million yuan; and 57 cases, over 1 million yuan. Embezzlement 
cases numbered 13,663; 208 such cases involved amounts in excess 
of 1 million yuan. There were 7,457 cases of tax evasion, 
refusal to pay taxes, and obtainment of export duties drawback 
from the state by fraud; 40 such cases involved amounts in 
excess of 1 million yuan. There were 3,436 cases of trademark 
infringement; 50 such cases involved amounts in excess of 1 
million yuan. There were 1,037 cadres at the county 
departmental level and above found guilty of the abovementioned 
crimes and all of them were placed on file for investigation; 64 
of them were cadres at departmental and bureau levels; and 1 of 
them was a cadre at the vice ministerial level. Aside from 
those criminal cases which are under investigation and 
prosecution, misdemeanors which were absolved from prosecution, 
and other misdeeds which did not constitute a crime and were 
transferred to relevant departments for handling, the number of 
criminals prosecuted on charges of the various crimes mentioned 
above reached 19,357 as of the end of last year; 201 of them 
were cadres at the county departmental level; and 16 of them 
were cadres at departmental and bureau levels. Procuratorial 
organs ordered the return of stolen money and goods amounting to 
2.2 billion yuan to the authorities through the handling of such 
criminal cases. 
  After Comrade Jiang Zemin delivered an important speech at 
the Second Plenary Session of the Central Discipline Inspection 
Commission on 21 August 1993, the party committees and 
governments at all levels attached great importance to launching 
the anticorruption drive. They adopted a resolute attitude, 
took prompt actions, and did a large amount of work. Responding 
to a call issued by the CPC Central Committee, the vast numbers 
of cadres and the masses actively informed against and exposed 
criminals guilty of corruption and bribery. Procuratorial 
organs handled over 120,000 clues given by cadres and the masses 
informing against criminals from September to December. 
Procuratorates at all levels resolutely implemented the 
guidelines of the instructions given by the CPC Central 
Committee; upheld the principle -- "be sure to thoroughly and 
accurately investigate criminal cases with firmness of resolve 
and with care;" sorted out and investigated, one by one, the 
clues given by the masses informing against criminals in big, 
important cases; implemented a responsibility system for chief 
procurators in handling cases; improved centralized command and 
coordination; and concentrated efforts on cracking a number of 
big, important cases. From September to December, procuratorial 
organs placed on file for investigation a total of 8,538 big 
cases of corruption and bribery involving amounts in excess of 
10,000 yuan and embezzlement involving amounts in excess of 
50,000 yuan, exceeding the same period of 1992 by 5,883 cases; 
they placed 715 cadres at the county departmental level and 
above (including 61 cadres at departmental and bureau levels) on 
file for investigation and punishment for corruption and taking 
bribes, more than the same period of 1992 by about 6.8 times. 
From September 1993 to January 1994, procuratorial organs 
prosecuted 14,649 criminals on charges of corruption and 
accepting bribes; 182 of them were cadres at the county 
departmental level; and 14 of them were cadres at departmental 
and bureau levels. Through the cracking of big, important cases 
and through the propaganda of legal policies, procuratorial 
organs prompted a number of criminals to surrender to the 
authorities. There were 671 criminals guilty of corruption and 
other crimes who surrendered to procuratorial organs between 
September and December. 
  1) Investigations and handling of criminal cases involving 
embezzlement and bribery by staff members and leaders of party 
and government organizations. Last year 6,011 cases of staff 
members, including some senior leading cadres, of party and 
government organizations were placed on file for investigations 
of embezzlement and bribery. For example, the procuratorial 
organ prosecuted, after completing its investigation, Li 
Xiaoshi, vice minister in charge of the State Science and 
Technology, for taking advantage of his position to support the 
Beijing Great Wall Mechanical and Electrical Science, 
Technology, and Industry Company's illegal fund-raising 
activities, for accepting a 40,000 yuan bribe from its president 
Shen Taifu and other bribes from Hong Kong businessmen, and for 
embezzlement and ownership of huge assets with dubious sources. 
While screening the Great Wall Company's illegal fund-raising 
activities, the procuratorial organ investigated clues to 
alleged embezzlement and offering and accepting of bribes by 
staff members of the company and its branch offices and by its 
shareholders. As of the end of last year, procuratorial organs 
of Beijing Municipality and Liaoning, Guizhou, Guangdong, Gansu, 
and Heilongjiang Provinces had placed on file for investigation 
a total of 35 criminal cases related to the Great Wall Company 
and over 20 party and government functionaries, journalists, and 
accountants, who accepted bribes and facilitated the company's 
illegal fund-raising activities. The Great Wall Company's 
president, Shen Taifu, has been prosecuted for major 
embezzlement and bribery crimes. Judging from the investigation 
of the case, where principal leaders of a locality or department 
are degenerate and commit embezzlement and bribery, crimes in 
this locality or department will be relatively serious. The 
Fujian provincial procuratorial organ cracked an extraordinary 
criminal case of bribery involved the Minjiang Engineering 
Bureau of the Ministry of Power Industry. Five bureau-level 
cadres, including the bureau director and party secretary, and 
10 section-level cadres abused their powers of approving 
engineering contracts, and solicited and accepted bribes 
totaling more than 3 million yuan. Last September, the 
procuratorial organ of Tieling city in Liaoning cracked a 
shocking criminal case of embezzlement, bribery, 
misappropriation of public funds, and tax evasion involving the 
Changtu County Grain Bureau. Director Gui Bingquan, deputy 
director Yang Maoyuan, and other bureau personnel abused their 
powers to sell inferior quality equipment to grain depots in the 
county, and collaborated in soliciting and accepting bribes. 
After placing 43 persons on file for investigation, the 
procuratorial organ decided to arrest 25 and confiscated 32 
million yuan in illicit money. 
  2) Investigations and handling of criminal cases involving 
embezzlement, solicitation and acceptance of bribes, and other 
irregularities by judicial personnel. Last year the 
procuratorial organs placed on file for investigation 1,840 
criminal cases involving judicial personnel. Some of them 
abused powers and perverted justice for bribes. For example, 
Guo Zhengmin, director and party secretary of the Guozhou 
Provincial Public Security Department, took advantage of his 
position and power in illegally approving exit permits for other 
people and accepted more than 100,000 yuan in bribes. 
Procuratorate chief Chen Zhiwen of the Changping County 
Procuratorate of Beijing Municipality abused power and accept 
some 20,000 yuan in bribes. Li Kaifu, member of the Judicial 
Committee and head of the No. 1 Criminal Court of the Hubei 
Provincial Higher Court, accepted 10,000 yuan bribe from the 
family of a death-row prisoner and promised to change the 
verdict to a suspended death sentence. Individual judicial 
personnel even colluded with criminal gangs in committing 
crimes. The procuratorial organs serious investigated and 
handled these criminal cases related to violations of law by 
judicial personnel in the course of enforcing law, thereby 
upholding the dignity and justice of the state laws. 
  3) Procuratorial authorities have prosecuted cases 
involving administrative and law enforcing personnel soliciting 
and accepting bribes. According to incomplete statistics, in 
1993 procuratorial authorities investigated over 1,000 cases 
concerning crimes committed by administrative and law 
enforcement personnel. Abusing their authority, certain 
administrative and law enforcement personnel solicited and 
accepted bribes and withheld services if they were not paid. 
Some even worked in collusion with felons and engaged in such 
crimes as smuggling, letting in smuggled goods, and defrauding 
the state on tax refunds, causing enormous losses to the state. 
After being bribed by personnel of an import-export company in 
Gansu, Wang Tianpeng, deputy director of the Gansu Taxation 
Bureau, approved the refund of 810,000 yuan of taxes to the 
company even though he knew clearly that the bills and vouchers 
presented by the company for tax refund were forged. A lot of 
money belonging to the state was thus swindled. Wang Youyi, 
director of the Fujian Zhangzhou Custom Office, helped a 
Zhanghai Company cheat the state for more than 6 million yuan 
through importing 10,000 tonnes of tax- free rolled steel for 
the company's consumption, in the name of 17 "foreign-funded" 
enterprises. The company reaped illegitimate profits of 1.8 
million yuan from business deals amounting to 34.7 million yuan. 
Procuratorial authorities' prosecution of criminal cases 
involving administrative and law enforcement personnel has 
important significance for safeguarding the state's 
administrative order as well as the establishment of a socialist 
market economic system. 
  4) Procuratorial authorities have prosecuted corrupt and 
bribe- accepting personnel of financial and economic 
departments. In 1993, especially during the second half of the 
year, procuratorial authorities at all levels coordinated 
closely with the implementation of the CPC Central Committee and 
State Council decision to strengthen macroeconomic regulation 
and control, earnestly investigated crimes discovered during the 
course of improving financial order and strengthening control of 
the securities and real estate markets. The amounts of money 
involved in the crimes committed by financial personnel -- who 
extended loans against regulations, who took advantage of their 
offices to solicit bribes and other personal interests, and who 
embezzled public funds -- were generally quite large. Of the 
number of cases investigated within financial departments last 
year, 72 cases involved sums exceeding 1 million yuan. Zhao 
Kai, manager of the business division of the Beijing Trust and 
Investment Company under the China Agricultural Bank, extended 
100 million yuan to two companies in violation of regulations 
and accepted 1.3 million yuan in bribes and a "Benz 500" sedan, 
which he later sold. Procuratorial authorities also 
investigated many major cases in other economic departments. 
Based on the clue provided by a letter, Chongqing's 
procuratorial authorities cracked 28 major cases about 
illegitimate loans extended between city and county (and 
district) financial departments. A total of 36 people, 
including six division cadres, were involved. Beijing's 
procuratorial authorities prosecuted Guo Ziwen, president of the 
China Coal Marketing and Delivering Company, for accepting 
bribes totalling 1.9 million yuan by selling to nine enterprises 
his company's quotas of foreign exchange equivalent to 19.34 
million yuan. Procuratorial authorities of China's railroad 
transport departments investigated 563 cases, involving 640 
people who sought personal gains by means of railroad cars and 
train tickets. The Guangzhou Railway Transport Procuratorate 
cracked a case concerning workers of the Yangcheng Railway 
Transport Company who accepted bribes through their offices for 
authorizing use of railroad cars. Over 20 people were implicated 
for accepting bribes and 16 people were implicated for paying 
bribes. The procuratorate has set files for investigating 15 
workers and held in custody cash, bank books, and stocks worth 
more than 2.7 million yuan, as well as nearly 1,000 grams of 
assorted gold jewelry. In the securities, stock, and real 
estate markets established in recent years, some state 
functionaries, for the sake of seeking personal gains, have 
embezzled public funds for speculating in stocks and real 
estate. Workers of departments in charge of securities 
management and real estate development have taken advantage of 
their offices to solicit bribes, carry out behind-the-scenes 
deals, and practice fraud on the securities market. Last year, 
procuratorial authorities in Shanghai, Guangdong, Guangxi, 
Sichuan, Zhejiang, and Hunan prosecuted many cases in these 
departments. Shanghai's procuratorial authorities prosecuted 45 
cases in which 57.2 million yuan of public funds were misused 
for speculation in the stock market. Guangdong's procuratorial 
authorities cracked the case of Zeng Lihua, vice president of 
the Shenzhen Engineering Consultative Company, who, through his 
position of designating partners of real estate development, 
accepted over 7 million yuan in bribes from foreign and Hong 
Kong businessmen. Procuratorial authorities' prosecution of 
crimes committed within financial and economic departments plays 
a positive role in guaranteeing the implementation of the 
state's decision to strengthen macroeconomic regulation and 
control and improve financial order. 
  5) Various people's procuratorates investigated and 
handled cases of smuggling activities by some organizations and 
business undertakings and crimes of stealing state tax 
reimbursements for exports and of imitating trademarks. In 
recent years, some enterprises and business undertakings and 
organizations have engaged in group smuggling, stealing state 
tax reimbursements for exports, and imitating trademarks. Those 
crimes happened again and again despite orders banning such 
activities. A main reason was due to the support and connivance 
of such activities by some local leaders. Some law enforcement 
departments set fines instead of sentencing offenders to 
imprisonment in handling those cases and indulged criminals. 
This was a conspicuous situation of corruption in some locales. 
To solve the problem of ineffectiveness in cracking down on 
smuggling activities by some organizations and units, the 
Supreme People's Procuratorate and the Supreme People's Court 
jointly issued a "Circular on Strictly Cracking Down on the 
Crime of Smuggling Activities" last August, asking 
procuratorates at various levels to follow Article 13 of the 
Criminal Procedure Law of China which states that "cases that 
the people's procuratorates consider necessary to directly 
accept themselves are to be filed and investigated by the 
people's procuratorates, which are to decide whether or not to 
initiate a public prosecution" and directly place major 
smuggling cases, which were only punished by fines and were not 
investigated for their criminal responsibility, on file for 
investigation and prosecution. Various procuratorates paid 
particular attention to major cases of smuggling by 
organizations and seriously handled cases of some leading 
cadres' protecting and conniving with smuggling activities. In 
1993, the Supreme People's Procuratorate directed and 
coordinated with concerned procuratorates in handling 11 major 
cases of smuggling by some organizations. Under the guidance of 
and with the arrangements of concerned central departments, 
procuratorates fully cooperated with other departments and 
investigated and prosecuted an especially serious cigarette 
smuggling case involving the Rushan City Commerce Bureau in 
Shandong Province. Director of the bureau Liu Qishan 
collaborated with Fan Zhanwu, political commissar of the Weihai 
City Border Defense Subbureau; Liu Ning, deputy head of the 
operations department of the Weihai City Defense Subbureau; and 
Sun Xueping, deputy director of the Rushan City Public Security 
Bureau, to engage in smuggling activities. Wang Jianshi, 
secretary of the party committee of Rushan City, who bent the 
law for the benefit of others, protected the smugglers and 
accepted bribes totaling more than 220,000 yuan. After their 
crimes were exposed, those criminals joined hands to resist 
investigation. The concerned procuratorate initiated a public 
prosecution of those law offenders with the local people's 
court. According to a statistical report, procuratorates in the 
country prosecuted 322 smugglers, including 214 people who were 
involved in major smuggling of automobiles and cigarettes last 
year. 
  Stealing state tax reimbursements for export commodities by 
cheating is a new form of crime in recent years. Some law 
offenders have collaborated with cadres of taxation, customs, 
and foreign trade departments to steal state money by forging 
vouchers, tax collection certificates, and customs declarations. 
In light of the situation, various procuratorates have strictly 
implemented the "supplementary provisions on punishing crimes of 
evading taxes and resisting payment of taxes" adopted by the NPC 
Standing Committee, and investigated and prosecuted a number of 
major cases of stealing state tax money by law offenders, 
including some organizations and units. Various people's 
procuratorates investigated and prosecuted 81 such cases 
involving 259 people. They placed the cases of taking part in 
tax fraud, accepting bribes and malfeasance involving 48 state 
functionaries on file for investigation and prosecution, and 
recovered more than 70 million yuan of state tax money. 
  In recent years, the crimes of imitating trademarks and 
producing and selling fake and shoddy products have been quite 
serious with large volumes and dimensions and different forms. 
Some serious crimes of imitating trademarks were committed by 
enterprises and business undertakings. People's procuratorates 
at various levels strictly implemented the provisions adopted by 
the NPC Standing Committee on punishing the crimes of imitating 
trademarks and of producing and selling fake and shoddy products 
and took resolute measures to crack down on those crimes. In 
1993, people's procuratorates placed 3,436 cases of imitating 
trademarks on file for investigation and prosecution, increasing 
by 10 percent as compared with the previous year. Of which, 720 
cases involved organizations. Through handing those cases, some 
100 million yuan was recovered. The procuratorates in Henan 
Province investigated and prosecuted the case of manufacturing 
and selling fake medicine by the No. 1 veterinary medicine plant 
in Zhoukou Prefecture, and investigated six party and government 
leading cadres and administrative staff members, who accepted 
bribes and supported and connived the illegal activity, for 
their criminal responsibility. Among those cadres, Shenqiu 
County's Party Committee Secretary Liu Weidong and deputy county 
head Cui Donghua were sentenced to eight and nine years of 
fixed-term imprisonment respectively by the local people's court. 
  6) A number of important embezzlers and bribe-takers who 
escaped with the money have been captured. In recent years, 
many embezzlers and bribe-takers escaped with the money and some 
of them held several foreign passports, deposited the money 
abroad, and fled the country either after committing the crimes 
or after their crimes were detected. In view of the situation, 
the procuratorial organs have stepped up efforts to pursue the 
fugitives. According to incomplete statistics, more than 600 
such escapees were captured in 1993, and 19 of them committed 
crimes each involving more than 1 million yuan. Those who were 
captured abroad and repatriated home included Wen Shixing, 
manager of Haicheng Trading Company of Shenzhen who swindled the 
state of a large sum of export tax refund and fled the country 
for as long as three years; Peng Jiandong, president of Yuanye 
Industry Company, Ltd. of Shenzhen who embezzled a large amount 
of public funds and fled the country; and Wang Jianye, chief of 
the finance and trade section of the Shenzhen city planning 
bureau who joined others in taking 6.77 million yuan in bribes. 
  7) Achievements were made in preventing such crimes as 
embezzlement and bribery. Local procuratorates pay attention to 
using actual cases in interpreting laws and using typical cases 
in spreading legal knowledge and promoting ethical integrity 
among state functionaries. They publicize state laws and party 
policies through the news media to enhance the people's 
awareness of the legal system. They have improved information 
work and their ability in detecting embezzlement, bribery, and 
other crimes. During the course of handling cases, they put 
forward suggestions concerning loopholes in the management and 
system of relevant organizations. They supervise the 
establishment and improvement of the embezzlement and bribery 
prevention mechanisms in law enforcement departments and at 
workposts which have personnel, financial, and material 
resources under their direct control. 
  The cases investigated and handled by procuratorial organs 
show the following characteristics of such serious crimes as 
embezzlement and bribery at present: First, the crimes involve 
large amounts of money and the number of extraordinarily serious 
cases has increased. Second, more cases happen in hot spots of 
economic construction and in the departments which perform 
important functions in the market economy; and some new forms of 
crime have occurred in the stock, securities, and real estate 
markets. Third, more crimes involve persons with certain 
powers, most embezzlers are persons who manage money or 
materials, and most bribe-takers are those who control 
personnel, financial, or material resources. Fourth, a 
considerably large percentage of the criminals are of the 
pleasure-seeking type, and many of them spend freely, indulge in 
dissipation, and engage in gambling and visiting prostitutes 
after committing crimes. Fifth, more cases happen in the 
departments with serious irregularities, particularly the 
departments of which the principal leaders are embezzlers or 
bribe-takers. Chances are the investigation of a single person 
usually leads to discovering a number of criminals. Sixth, the 
number of cases each involving more than one person has 
increased, and many cases are characterized by collusion between 
insiders and outsiders, between different departments or trades, 
or between different regions. 
  Generally speaking, the great majority of party workers and 
state functionaries are honest and self-disciplined and are 
diligently working for the people. However, a small number of 
bad degenerates indeed exist, and we must know sufficiently 
their harmfulness and dangerousness. Just as Comrade Jiang 
Zemin pointed out at the second plenary session of the Central 
Commission for Discipline Inspection, if we lower our guard and 
let them go rampant, our party, the people's regime, and the 
socialist modernization drive will collapse. 
  The present situation of the anticorruption struggle is very 
good and the struggle is deepening, but the following major 
problems still exist: The anticorruption work is uneven from 
place to place. The phenomena of substituting one's word for 
law, putting one's power above the law, or obstructing judicial 
investigation of major cases occurs now and then. Some 
organizations fail to inform judicial organs of criminal clues. 
Procuratorial organs have a heavy backlog of reported crimes to 
investigate. Some local chief procurators lack the courage to 
enforce the law impartially and to handle tough cases. A small 
number of police cadres and men are unable to meet the needs of 
the struggle due to poor ability, and the police force needs to 
improve its overall ability of detecting and proving crimes. 
These problems must be solved one by one in the days to come. 
To combat corruption and punish those who commit embezzlement 
or bribery is a protracted and arduous task, as well as an 
important guarantee for reform, opening up, and economic 
development. For this reason, procuratorial organs should 
seriously perform their duties and persistently deepen the 
struggle to combat such crimes as embezzlement and bribery. 
  2. Safeguarding the Country's Political and Social 
Stability Through Cracking Down on Serious Crimes According to 
Law 
  Last year, procuratorial authorities, under the guidance of 
the party Central Committee and party committees at all levels 
and implementing the policy of carrying out comprehensive 
management of public security, joined public security 
departments, security departments, people's courts, and judicial 
authorities in safeguarding the country's political and social 
stability through firmly and promptly cracking down on serious 
crimes and properly handling certain unforeseen incidents with 
relatively great impact. 
  Cracking down on serious crimes is an important aspect in 
safeguarding social stability. Last year, public security and 
procuratorial authorities, people's courts, and judicial 
authorities worked in close coordination with one another and 
launched all kinds of collective and key projects against 
rampant crimes. Fairly good results were achieved in launching 
special campaigns against railroad and highway robberies, theft, 
and abduction of women and children, as well as prostitution in 
all parts of the country; in launching struggles against 
narcotics and gun trafficking in Yunnan and Guangxi; in 
launching struggles against smuggling and illegal emigration in 
coastal areas in Southeast China and in border provinces and 
regions; in launching struggles against local hooliganism and 
evil forces in Shanxi; in launching struggles against kidnapping 
and abduction of women and children in Hebei; and in launching 
struggles against illicit sex business in Beijing, Shanghai, and 
Guangdong; as well as in launching struggles of striking against 
organized crimes, pursuing fugitives, and cracking major cases 
in various parts of the country. 
  During the course of cracking down on criminal activities, 
procuratorial authorities at all levels have discharged their 
responsibilities and taken prompt actions to authorize public 
security organs' requests to arrest felons, and prosecute felons 
arrested and transferred by public security authorities. We 
have intensified procuratorial operations to ensure national 
security through authorizing arrest of criminals endangering 
national security and prosecuting them. By so doing we have 
contributed our part in carrying out comprehensive management of 
public security. In 1993, procuratorial authorities in the 
country authorized the arrest of 532,394 of the 607,945 felons 
of various descriptions whom public security and state security 
organs requested permission to arrest; and prosecuted 479,860 -- 
including 129,219 felons having committed serious crimes -- of 
the 574,176 felons transferred from public security organs. 
  During the crackdown, procuratorial authorities have given 
priority to cracking down on murders, robberies, rapes, 
bombings, armed robberies, and other heinous crimes and criminal 
gangs with an underworld nature. In 1993, procuratorial 
authorities prosecuted 137,523 of the 152,764 felons of these 
categories, prosecuted 48,536 of the 63,670 felons involved in 
serious larcency, prosecuted 6,830 of the 7,677 drug addicts, 
and prosecuted 1,512 of the 1,634 felons -- felons who 
organized, coerced, lured, and facilitated women to become 
prostitutes -- and prosecuted 10,548 of the 11,706 felons who 
abducted and kidnapped women and children -- felons whose arrest 
was authorized by procuratorial authorities. 
  Last year, procuratorial authorities made railroad 
transportation safer through cracking down on train and highway 
robberies. In the struggles of besieging and annihilating train 
and highway robberies, procutoratorial authorities of all 
railroad transportation units authorized the arrest of 9,383 of 
the 10,596 felons whom public security organs requested 
permission to arrest. To deal with the serious robberies 
occurring on the Nos. 3 and 4 international expresses, the 
Beijing railroad transport procuratorial branch moved quickly 
and involved itself in public security organs' investigation and 
authorized the arrest of 103 felons. 
  Many plane hijacking incidents occurred last year. The 
criminal acts which seriously jeopardized public safety were 
subjected to harsh and prompt crackdown according to law. 
Procuratorial authorities promptly authorized the apprehension 
of the hijackers; and promptly prosecuted those who did not 
succeed in fleeing the country on the planes they hijacked. 
  Protecting political stability and public security in the 
country is an important guarantee for deepening reform, opening 
up wider, and promoting economic development. At present, 
public security in our country is generally stable, but the 
situation is still quite grim. Hostile forces and elements at 
home and abroad have never stopped their activities to split, 
subvert, infiltrate, and sabotage our country and to steal 
secrets from our country. The situation of sabotage by national 
splittists at home and illegal activities in the name of 
religion is quite conspicuous. The number of major vile 
criminal cases and violent crimes have increased by a big 
margin. Public security in many rural areas is not good and the 
situation of crimes committed by groups in towns is also quite 
serious. The masses lack a sense of security. Stealing and 
damaging important state production facilities, robbing state 
properties in an uproar, and fights with weapons between groups 
of people happen frequently. In the wake of continuous 
deepening of reform and adjustment of interests, there will be 
new contradictions and problems. In our work, the problem of 
ineffectiveness in striking blows against criminal activities 
still exists in some places. Therefore, the people's 
procuratorates have a very heavy task of striking relentless 
blows against criminals in a prompt manner to protect political 
stability and public security. 
  3. Strengthen Supervision Over Enforcement of Law, New 
Progress Has Been Made in Promoting Strict Implementation of Law 
  Since last year, the Supreme People's Procuratorate has 
stressed the issue of taking vigorous measures to strictly 
enforce the law. The people's procuratorates at various levels 
have adopted specific measures to vigorously enforce the law, 
and strengthened the work of directly placing criminal cases on 
file for investigation and prosecution. On the other hand, it 
has seriously carried out its duty entrusted by the Constitution 
and laws and strengthened supervision over the enforcement of 
law by concerned departments. 
  1) Strengthen supervision over investigation and stress 
solving the problem of not punishing crimes or levying fines to 
replace other punishment. People's procuratorates at various 
levels have strictly carried out their duty of supervision over 
investigation activities by public security organizations. The 
people's procuratorates in some locales have supervised the 
trials of major criminal cases. They have corrected the 
situation of not punishing crimes or levying fines to replace 
other punishment by some departments. On some occasions when 
which criminal cases were not filed for investigation and 
prosecution or not transferred to judicial organs after being 
suggested for prosecution by people's procuratorates, the 
people's procuratorates directly accepted those cases and filed 
those cases for investigation and prosecution. The people's 
procuratorates in Hunan Province directly filed 12 major cases 
involving 29 people for prosecution when concerned departments 
failed to investigate and handle those cases or levied fines to 
replace other punishment. This has received good reaction in 
society. In supervising investigations, various people's 
procuratorates have corrected the situation of not investigating 
and prosecuting criminal activities and the situation of 
investigating and prosecuting innocent people. In 1993, various 
people's procuratorates pursued and arrested 6,534 people in 
examining many cases, and prosecuted 2,720 people. The people's 
procuratorates rejected the arrest of 40,439 people whose 
activities could not be considered crimes and who should not be 
arrested, and put forward 8,596 suggestions for correcting the 
investigation activities which were in violation of the law. 
  2) Strengthen supervision over the trial of criminal cases 
and attach importance to serving protests against erroneous 
judgment on criminal cases, such as the court's not guilty 
decision for those who actually committed crimes or the court's 
passing a light sentence for serious crimes. People's 
procuratorates at various levels lodged 1,879 protests against 
erroneous judgment on criminal cases by courts and 1,765 
suggestions to correct the situation of violation of the law in 
the course of prosecution. The Beijing Municipal People's 
Procuratorate lodged a protest with the Beijing People's Higher 
Court against the judgment in the case of taking bribes by Wei 
Guofan, former assistant director of the Transportation Bureau 
of the Ministry of Railways. When he was an assistant director, 
Wei Guofan accepted a bribe of 3,000 yuan and a refrigerator 
which was worth more than 2,300 yuan. In March 1991, Wei Guifan 
was sentenced to one year fixed-term imprisonment with temporary 
stay of the jail sentence for one year by the court in the first 
instance. Wei Guofan made an appeal and was cleared of his 
crime in November 1992 by the Beijing Municipal Intermediate 
Court. The people's procuratorate considered the turnabout as 
inappropriate and violating the law, because there was proof of 
the defendent's taking a bribe and lodged a protest with the 
higher court. After trial, the Beijing Higher People's Court 
revoked the not guilty judgment and maintained the judgment of 
guilty in the first instance. 
  3) Progress was made in supervising the enforcement of law 
and discipline and giving high priority to investigating and 
handling criminal cases involving state functionaries who abused 
power by violating citizens' rights and interests and those who 
were charged with dereliction of duty. In 1993, the cases of 
207 judicial personnel charged with favoritism and fraud and 378 
state functionaries charged with inquisition by torture to 
extort confessions were placed on file for investigation and 
prosecution. A total of 4,363 cases of illegal detention were 
investigated and handled. Of them, more than 90 percent were 
illegal detention of people involved in economic or civil 
lawsuits between citizens or between legal persons; and a small 
number of them were due to abuse of power by judicial personnel 
or grass-roots-level cadres. Tianjin City's procuratorial 
organs investigated and handled the Daqiuzhuang case of a death 
caused by illegal detention. The prime culprit, Yu Zuomin, has 
been sentenced to 20 years imprisonment on charge of illegal 
detention and bribery. During the 1993 election of people's 
congress deputies at various levels, the procuratorial organs 
placed 110 cases of disrupting elections on file for 
investigation. They also investigated and handled 1,949 cases 
of illegal search, illegal entry into another's house, and 
illegal control of others; 133 cases of obstructing postal and 
telecommunications services and violating citizen's freedom of 
correspondence; and 29 framed cases of reprisal. To investigate 
and handle according to law the criminal cases of violating 
citizen's rights and interests is an important aspect of the 
protection of human rights. China has achieved remarkable 
success in protecting human rights and in waging a struggle 
against the violation of citizen's rights and interests, and the 
situation of human rights in China is good. 
  In 1993, the procuratorial organs placed on file for 
investigation 3,098 cases of dereliction of duty and 4,605 cases 
of major accident responsibility. 
  4) Progress was made in legal supervision over civil trials 
and administrative lawsuits, with special attention paid to 
protests against wrong decisions and orders in civil, economic 
and administrative lawsuits, and to cases of wrong judgment 
during civil and administrative lawsuits due to the judges' 
self-seeking misconduct or their asking for or accepting bribes. 
In 1993, the procuratorial organs lodged protests against wrong 
trial decisions in 310 civil, economic, and administrative 
cases. By examining evidently partial court decisions and 
orders, the procuratorial organs placed the cases of 44 judges 
on file for investigation after discovering their self-seeking 
misconduct. 
  5) The procuratorial organs stepped up supervision and 
inspection of prisons and paid special attention to 
investigating and handling cases of illegal reduction of 
sentence, parole, and medical parole involving bribery, as well 
as the cases of self-seeking misconduct involving unauthorized 
release of inmates. A total 599 such cases were investigated 
and handled. They involved prison staff members who embezzled 
public funds, sought or accepted bribes, practiced favoritism 
and fraud, set inmates free without proper authorization, or 
tortured inmates. Zhu Wenjia, deputy political officer of the 
first brigade of Changchun Prison in Jilin Province accepted 
30,000 yuan in bribes from 29 inmates and their relatives, and 
abused his power in obtaining sentence reduction, parole, or 
medical parole for those inmates. Zhu has been sentenced to 12 
years of imprisonment for the crime according to law. The 
procuratorial organs also made timely inspection and correction 
of such law violations in prisons as detention without proper 
legal papers, keeping inmates from reform through labor in 
violation of court orders, and delay the release of inmates in 
violation of court orders. The procuratorial organs made 
suggestions on correcting 39,342 law violations in prisons, and 
17,823 of them have been corrected by the departments concerned. 
The procuratorial organs made fairly great achievements in 
correcting the problem of overdue detention and suggested the 
correction of 73,416 such cases, and 34,432 of them have been 
corrected by the departments concerned. 
  6) Procuratorial work in handling appeals and complaints 
has been strengthened. Procuratorial organs devoted greater 
efforts to reinvestigation of cases in accordance with appeals 
filed against courts' decisions as well as complaints against 
procuratorial organs' decisions on exemption from prosecution. 
In line with the principle of seeking truth from facts and that 
every wrong should be righted, procuratorial organs, whenever 
mistakes were found, filed protests or otherwise redressed the 
mistakes in accordance with the law. A total of 485,851 appeals 
and complaints were handled in 1993 by procuratorial organs at 
all levels. Of the 63 appeals against arrest that were 
re-examined, the earlier decisions in 12 of them were rescinded. 
Of the 1,995 complaints against exemption from prosecution that 
were re-examined, the earlier decisions in 776 of them were 
reversed. Of the 217 appeals against the courts' sentences of 
criminal punishment that were reinvestigated, 21 were presented 
to the court for retrial and the original sentences revised in 
accordance with the procedure for adjudication supervision. Li 
Zhongyu, former deputy commander of the Mengzui Public Security 
Force, was sentenced to death with a stay of execution in 1953 
on charges of murder out of revenge. The sentence was later 
commuted to 10-years imprisonment. Li refused to accept the 
sentence and appealed many times. The Supreme People's 
Procuratorate, after clarifying the principal facts of the case 
with a thorough reinvestigation, presented the case to the 
Supreme People's Court. The Supreme People's Court directed the 
relevant court to readjudicate the case and a decision of not 
guilty was announced, redressing a miscarriage of justice that 
lasted 40 years. 
  By reinforcing supervision over law enforcement, 
procuratorial organs played a positive role in motivating 
relevant departments to strictly enforce the law, in 
guaranteeing unified and correct enforcement of state laws, and 
in protecting the citizens' democratic rights and rights of the 
person. Nonobservance and lax implementation of laws remains a 
prominent problem in China's judicial and administrative law 
enforcement work. Further efforts should be made to improve the 
environment and conditions for strict law enforcement. The new 
situation -- that is, the establishment of a socialist market 
economic system -- cries out for reinforced supervision over law 
enforcement and respect for the authority of state laws. For 
this reason, we must further enhance supervision over law 
enforcement. 
  4. Strengthen Procuratorial Organs in Accordance With 
the Law, Enforce Strict Discipline Among Procuratorial 
Personnel, and Reinforce the Procuratorial Ranks 
  In the past year, procuratorial organs at all levels have 
built themselves up in accordance with law and enforced strict 
discipline among their personnel. Both the political and 
professional qualifications of procuratorial personnel have 
risen to new levels. 
  Efforts were made to improve the style of work and to go 
deeply into reality to see how things really are. Leaders of 
procuratorial organs at all levels took the lead in going deeply 
into the realities of life, in going down to the grass-roots 
level, and in conducting research and investigations in key 
areas, knotty problems, and weak links of procuratorial work and 
the new situation and new problems procuratorial departments 
have encountered in the process of establishing a market 
economic system. The fruitful efforts in this regard have 
improved our understanding of reality and enabled us to 
formulate more appropriate measures for our work. 
  Leading bodies of procuratorial organs at all levels have 
been strengthened. As a new term started in 1993, most of the 
nation's procuratorial organs readjusted or reinforced their 
leading bodies. Many fine and experienced young and middle-aged 
cadres with both professional ability and political integrity 
were promoted to leading posts, making the ranks of cadres more 
revolutionary, younger, better educated and more professionally 
competent. 
  Ideological and political work was strengthened. By studying 
Volume 3 of the Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping and 
arming themselves ideological with the theory on building 
socialism with Chinese Characteristics, cadres and police have 
enhanced their steadfastness and consciousness of implementing 
the party's basic line. All procuratorial organs conducted 
education on strict law- enforcement, on serving the people 
wholeheartedly as their objective, and on the need to be honest 
and hardworking. 
  Earnest efforts were made to fight corruption among 
procuratorial organs themselves. Leading cadres in 
procuratorial organs at all levels conducted self-investigation 
based on the regulations on clean standards and self-discipline 
issued by the party central committee and made amends 
accordingly. Resolute steps were taken to put a stop to abuse 
of procuratorial powers to collect fees by a handful of 
grass-roots units. Procuratorial cadres and policemen guilty of 
violating the law or discipline were investigated and prosecuted 
to the full force of the law. In 1993, 568 procuratorial 
personnel were investigated for violations of the law and 
discipline, of which 87 were prosecuted on criminal charges. A 
total of 987 procuratorial personnel were found unsuitable and 
reassigned. Procuratorial organs at all levels reinforced rules 
and regulations and amplified internal supervision mechanisms to 
keep their personnel honest and hardworking, thereby ensuring, 
by way of instituting a system, that procuratorial personnel 
will be clean, honest, and enforce the law impartially. 
  In recent years, we have consistently attended to the 
education and training of procuratorial personnel as a strategic 
task. The focus of training in 1993 was on job qualifications, 
upgrading of vocational skills, and knowledge renewal. The 
Central College for Procuratorial Management trained 78 newly 
appointed chief and deputy procurators of the provincial, 
autonomous regional, and municipal, prefectural, and city 
procuratorates. A total of 202 chief and deputy procurators of 
the prefectural and city procuratorates underwent knowledge 
renewal training. Local procuratorial training institutes 
trained 9,000 chief procurators and other key functionaries of 
the grass-roots procuratorates. 
  The "Regulations on Procuratorial Organs Receiving 
Supervision From the People's Congress and Its Standing 
Committee," which were drawn up by the Supreme People's 
Procuratorate last June, have further standardized procedures 
for procuratorial organs to receive supervision from the 
people's congress and its standing committee. Procuratorates at 
all levels regularly reported their work to the people's 
congress and its standing committee at the corresponding level. 
They earnestly implemented resolutions passed by the people's 
congress and its standing committee and accepted the standing 
committee's supervision over their procuratorial activities. 
They earnestly and responsibly handled matters assigned to them 
by the people's congress and motions and proposals by people's 
deputies. They strengthened ties with people's deputies; 
invited them to inspect their work; listened to their criticism, 
viewpoints, and suggestions with an open mind; and sought 
constantly to improve their work. 
  During the past year, vast numbers of procuratorial 
personnel 
displayed a fine mental outlook despite their arduous tasks and 
difficult conditions for waging struggle. A large number of 
advanced collectives and individuals have tempered themselves 
and emerged in the struggle against corruption. The Supreme 
People's Procuratorate and local people's procuratorates at 
different levels commended 4,318 advanced collectives and 15,550 
advanced individuals. 
  While there were achievements in procuratorial work last 
year, there were also problems and shortcomings. The main 
problems and shortcomings were: The law enforcement standards 
and concept of our procuratorial personnel were not able to 
completely satisfy the needs of the new situation for developing 
a socialist market economy; some localities did not strictly 
enforce the law by failing to bring for prosecution to the 
people's court cases that ought to be prosecuted; a few 
grass-roots procuratorates engaged in local protectionism by 
illegally interfering in economic disputes and handling cases 
outside their jurisdiction or in violation of the law; and some 
procuratorial personnel even used their power to extort or 
accept bribes or resorted to fraud to benefit their relatives or 
friends. In addition, procuratorates in many localities lacked 
the budget to handle cases, and their means of transportation 
and technical equipment were obsolete, affecting the smooth 
progress of their investigation into major and important cases. 
  Deputies: 
  The year 1994 is crucial to China's reform. Seizing the 
opportunity, deepening reform, opening up wider, promoting 
development, and maintaining stability represent the overall 
interests of this year's work for the entire party and nation. 
Procuratorial organs must center on these overall interests in 
conducting their work and must consciously subordinate 
themselves to and serve these overall interests. At the 
national conference of chief procurators held toward the end of 
last year, we put forward, after analyzing the situation of our 
procuratorial work, "Views on Further Strengthening Legal 
Supervisory Functions and Safeguarding the Establishment and 
Development of a Socialist Market Economic Structure" which 
establishes the primary task of the procuratorate at present and 
for some time to come as: To uphold the use of Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics and the party's basic line as the guide; 
implement the guidelines of the 14th CPC National Congress and 
the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee; 
adhere to the principle of "grasping two links at the same time, 
attaching equal importance to both," strengthening legal 
supervisory functions; strictly enforce laws; vigorously handle 
cases; concentrate efforts on investigating and punishing 
embezzlement, bribery, and other major criminal cases; and crack 
down on all kinds of criminal activities to safeguard national 
interests against infringement, to protect the legitimate rights 
and interests of citizens and legal persons, to safeguard 
political and social stability, to create a good legal 
environment for reform, opening up, and modernization, and 
promote the establishment and development of a socialist market 
economic structure. 
  In 1994, procuratorial organs across the country must focus 
attention on successfully handling the following tasks: 
  First, in the course of the anticorruption drive, they must 
concentrate efforts on investigating big, important cases; they 
must persist in treating the investigation of criminal cases 
involving leading bodies and leading cadres of the party and 
government, judicial departments, administrative law enforcement 
departments, economic management departments, and their working 
personnel as the major work; and they must pay special attention 
to investigating cases of leading cadres' crimes of corruption 
and taking bribes, cases of judicial and administrative law 
enforcement personnel practicing favoritism, committing 
irregularities, taking bribes, bending the law, and covering up 
crimes, and legal persons' criminal cases. No matter who is 
implicated in a criminal case, they must resolutely conduct a 
thorough investigation and must not be softhearted. The Supreme 
People's Procuratorate and provincial, autonomous regional, and 
municipal procuratorates must further improve the organization, 
command, supervision, and examination of the investigation of 
big, important cases, and promptly sort out and investigate the 
clues which are given by the masses and lead to big, important 
cases to bring about a change in the situation of accumulated 
clues piling up unattended. Procuratorates at the higher level 
must supervise and assist those at the lower level; they must 
eliminate interference and resistance and expedite the progress 
of the drive to develop in depth step by step. 
  Second, procuratorial organs across the country must uphold 
the principle of dealing swift and heavy blows to criminals 
according to the law and crack down on grave criminal 
activities. According to law, they must take prompt action in 
arresting and prosecuting criminals, gangsters, and particularly 
crime syndicates that committed murder, robbery, rape, bombing, 
and theft and robbery of guns; they must coordinate with 
relevant departments to hand down severe punishment to these 
criminals. They must actively participate in surrounding and 
annihilating train robbers and highway bandits and in such 
special drives as fighting robbers and thieves, cracking down on 
"pornography," and eliminating the six evils [prostitution, 
pornography, abduction and trading of women and children, drug 
trafficking, gambling, and profiteering from superstition]. 
They must improve national security-related procuratorial work 
and crack down on various criminals imperiling social and 
political stability. 
  Third, procuratorial organs across the country must 
strengthen supervision over law enforcement; when they handle 
cases, they must pay attention to discovering various 
irregularities in the handling of cases and lax law enforcement; 
and they must promptly make suggestions for rectification. If 
the working personnel of judicial departments and administrative 
law enforcement departments abuse power to seek personal gain, 
are guilty of corruption, take bribes, practice favoritism, 
commit irregularities, illicitly release criminals, extort a 
confession by torture, unlawfully detain suspects, maltreat and 
give corporal punishment to detainees, neglect their duties and 
connive in crimes, harbor evildoers, conceal what they know 
about a criminal case, and commit perjury, and if any of the 
above acts constitutes a crime, procuratorial organs must 
resolutely investigate such cases according to law to fix the 
responsibility for the crime and ask relevant departments to 
strictly enforce the law. 
  Fourth, more efforts must be made to build up contingents of 
procuratorial personnel, to improve their quality, and to 
enhance their level of law enforcement. Procuratorial organs 
must persist in improving themselves according to law; they must 
abide by the provisions of the Constitution; they must adhere to 
the principle of formulating a law first before proceeding to 
vigorously promote reform of the procuratorial system; they must 
strengthen their function of legal supervision; they must 
guarantee the independent exercise of procuratorial power 
according to law; and they must establish a socialist 
procuratorial system with Chinese characteristics that meets the 
needs of a socialist market economy. Based on the NPC Standing 
Committee's plan for legislation, they must fulfill the tasks of 
drafting the "Organic Law (Draft Revision) on People's 
Procuratorates," "Law on Public Procurators," "Law on Punishment 
for Corruption and Bribery," and "Supplemental Regulations on 
the Guilt of Dereliction of Duty;" and they must actively 
participate in amending the "Criminal Law" and "Criminal 
Procedural Law." 
  Fellow deputies, in the new year, the Supreme People's 
Procuratorate will lead the local people's procuratorates at all 
levels, the special people's procuratorates, and all 
procuratorial personnel to uphold the guidance of Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics and the party's basic line, to closely rally 
around the CPC Central Committee with Comrade Jiang Zemin as the 
core, to add to our achievements, to surmount difficulties, to 
blaze new trails and forge ahead, and to make new contributions 
to establishing a socialist market economic system and to 
improving socialist democracy and the legal system. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1629 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_d_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  24 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Northeast Asia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Forum Sees `Bright' Prospects for Trade With ROK </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Forum Sees `Bright' Prospects for Trade With ROK </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK2403102294 Beijing CHINA DAILY in English 24 Mar 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> HK2403102294 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing CHINA DAILY </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Qiu Qi: "Forum Says Trade with South </F>
Korea Looks Bright"] 
  [Text] Trade relations between China and South Korea are 
looking bright, participants at a forum concluded yesterday. 
  The Sino-South Korean economic co-operation seminar held in 
Beijing outlined an optimistic trading future between the two 
neighbours. 
  "The economic exchanges between the two countries play a key 
role in promoting the overall development of Northeast Asia," 
said Yi Hyon-chae, former prime minister of South Korea. 
  Lee added that South Korea is eager to strengthen 
co-operation between the two sides on the basis of mutual 
benefit. 
  The government, he said, encourages more enterprises to 
invest in China and is willing to transfer technology to the 
mainland. 
  Zheng Dunxun, President of China Chemicals Import and Export 
Corporation, said the two economies can benefit from trading. 
  South Korea mainly exports capital-intensive products to 
China such as automobiles, ships and electronic goods, while it 
imports labour-intensive goods like raw materials, crude oil and 
cereals from China. 
  China has become South Korea's third largest trading partner 
and South Korea is the fourth largest recipient of Chinese goods 
(not including shipments through Taiwan and Hong Kong). 
  Last year, trade volume between the two was $8.22 billion, a 
63.5 percent rise over the previous year, Zheng said. 
  China National Chemical Import and Export Corporation 
established a branch office in South Korea in 1992, one of the 
first Chinese enterprises to do so. 
  Since then, 36 Chinese companies have set up branches in 
South Korea. And almost 100 South Korean firms have offices on 
the mainland. 
  Through last September, the eastern neighbour invested $1.5 
billion in the mainland in 2,153 projects. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1630 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_d_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  24 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Northeast Asia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Sino-ROK Seminar on Cooperation in Practical Technology </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Sino-ROK Seminar on Cooperation in Practical Technology </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW2403115294 Beijing XINHUA in English 1127 GMT 24 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW2403115294 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 24 (XINHUA) -- A Sino-ROK (the 
Republic of Korea) seminar on cooperation and joint investment 
for commercialization of practical technology will be held in 
Beijing from April 4 to 7. 
  Co-sponsored by China's State Science and Technology 
Commission (SSTC) and ROK's Ministry of Trade Industry and 
Energy, the seminar aims to promote commercialization of Chinese 
practical technology and help Korean enterprises invest in China. 
  An official of the SSTC said that about 500 Chinese projects 
and 150 Korean projects have so far been offered to the seminar 
for negotiation. 
  He said that the two countries have shown interest in 
projects in such fields as machinery, electronics and chemical 
industry. 
  He said that last year the two countries exchanged visits 
and 
inspections and collected projects for negotiation for the 
forthcoming seminar. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1631 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_d_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  24 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Northeast Asia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Art Group Greeted by `Hearty Applause' in Pyongyang </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Art Group Greeted by `Hearty Applause' in Pyongyang </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW2403153494 Beijing XINHUA in English 1518 GMT 24 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW2403153494 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, March 24, (XINHUA) -- A Chinese art 
group today staged a performance of songs and dances with strong 
northwest characteristics at Pyongyang's Grand Theater in the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK). 
  It was well received by its Korean audience and Chang Chol, 
vice premier and the minister of culture and arts described the 
performances, which received hearty applause, as very good. 
  The vice premier added: "The premiere was very successful 
from an ideological level while the artistic level and talents 
of the actors and actresses was simply outstanding." 
  The Chinese art group, part of the Lanzhou Military Song and 
Dance Formation, are in DPRK to take part in the country's 12th 
"Spring of April" arts festival. 
  Apart from participating in the arts festival, the group 
will 
perform in Kaesong and Hamhung. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1632 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_d_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Northeast Asia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Comparison to Qian Qichen Meeting ROK Foreign Minister </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Comparison to Qian Qichen Meeting ROK Foreign Minister </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW2803145894 </F>
<F P=103> OW2803145894 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
BFN 

    Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese at 1313 GMT on 
28 March transmits a 562-character report on Qian Qichen, PRC 
vice premier and foreign minister, meeting with ROK Foreign 
Minister Han Sung-chu in Beijing on 28 March. 
  The Chinese version has been compared to the XINHUA English 
version entitled "Qian Qichen, ROK Foreign Minister Discuss 
Nuclear Issue" published on pages 13 and 14 in the 28 March 
China Daily Report, revealing the following variations: 
  Page 13, column two, paragraph nine, second sentence, reads: 
...importance to resume negotiations within a trilateral 
framework involving the four sides [as received] so as to 
properly solve the problem. [new graf] ...(adding passage, 
rephrasing). 
  Page 14, column one, first full paragraph, only sentence, 
reads: ...to the issue. 
  Assistant Foreign Minister Wang Shifan; Zhang Tingting, PRC 
ambassador to the ROK; and ROK Ambassador to China Hwang 
Pyong-tae were present at the meeting. 
  This afternoon, Song... (adding paragraph). 
  Page 14, column one, paragraph two, first sentence, reads: 
...science and technology in Zhongnanhai. The two sides 
exchanged views on... (adding "in Zhongnanhai" and "sides." 
  Page 14, column one, paragraph three, only sentence, reads: 
...industry and resources at the Diaoyutai Guesthouse this 
afternoon, during which they... (adding "at the Diaoyutai 
Guesthouse this afternoon.") 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1633 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_d_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Northeast Asia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Comparison on Hosokawa News Conference in Beijing </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Comparison on Hosokawa News Conference in Beijing </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW2003213394 </F>
<F P=103> OW2003213394 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
BFN 

    Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese at 1450 GMT on 
20 March carries a 867-character report on Japanese Prime 
Minister Hosokawa holding a news conference in Beijing. 
  The Chinese version has been compared with the XINHUA 
English 
version published on pages 21, 22 of the 21 March China Daily 
Report, revealing the following variations: 
  Page 21, column two, paragraph six, only sentence reads: 
...importance to them. 
  He said the relationship between the two countries has 
entered a new stage following the 20th anniversary of the 
normalization of diplomatic relations and the 15th anniversary 
of the signing of the Treaty of Peace and Friendship between 
Japan and China. During this period, His Majesty the Emperor 
and Her Majesty the Empress have visited China. 
  He said the... (rewording, adding new material.) 
  Same page, same column, paragraph eight, only sentence 
reads: 
...relations very well. 
  He said: "We are willing to further develop Japanese-Chinese 
relations into a kind of relationship that looks toward the 
future and that makes contributions to the world." 
  "China's reform and opening policy have not only made 
contributions to China itself, but also to peace and prosperity 
in this region. Therefore, Japan will try its best to give 
support to the efforts that China has made. 
  The two countries... (adding paragraph, rewording). 
  Same page, same column, paragraph eleven, only sentence 
reads: ...The signing of the agreement on environmental 
protection cooperation between the two countries during the 
visit is of profound significance in terms of the cooperation 
between the two countries, he noted. 
  When touching on the economic and trade cooperation between 
the two countries, Hosokawa said he was pleased with the great 
expansion of Japanese trade and investment in China. He said: 
There are broad prospects for such cooperation. We have 
decided that Japan and China will make joint efforts to further 
develop economic relations between the two countries in the 
future. 
  Therefore, both sides have decided to cooperate on an 
important venue in the two countries' history of cultural 
exchanges -- protection work on the Kaiyuan Palace in the 
ancient Tang Dynasty city of Changan. 
  Hosokawa said that...rewording three paragraphs. 
  Page 22, column one, paragraph three, only sentence reads: 
...Hosokawa said that the DPRK nuclear issue is a major issue 
that concerns security guarantees for Northeast Asia. Both 
sides share the same view on this point. Both sides reaffirm 
the importance of the two countries' keeping close contacts to 
solve this issue. 
  He looked back on his inauguration speech last August, in 
which he said he would deal seriously with events in the past. 
During the talks, he also explained to President Jiang Zemin 
and Premier Li Peng that due to its soul-searching regarding the 
past, Japan will make greater efforts to develop a 
forward-looking Japanese-Chinese relationship in the future. 
[new graf] 
  Hosokawa pointed out that although his current visit was a 
short one, he saw with his own eyes the great changes that have 
taken place in China and that he was deeply impressed with the 
Chinese peoples' confidence in the future. He added that he 
will visit Shanghai tomorrow and go to see the Pudong 
Development Zone -- the symbol of China's reform and opening up. 
...(rewording last three grafs, adding final sentence). 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1634 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_d_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Northeast Asia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Comparison to Li Peng, Hosokawa Hold Talks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Comparison to Li Peng, Hosokawa Hold Talks </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW2003114894 </F>
<F P=103> OW2003114894 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
BFN 

    Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese at 0934 GMT on 
20 March carries a 1612-character report on Li Peng's meeting 
with Japanese Prime Minister Hosokawa. 
  The Chinese version has been compared to the XINHUA English 
version entitled "Li Peng, Japan's Hosokawa Hold Talks" 
published on pages 10-12 in the 21 March China Daily Report, 
revealing the following variations: 
  Page 10, column two, paragraph 11, sentence one reads: 
...these remarks during his talks with visiting Japanese Prime 
Minister Morihiro Hosokawa here this morning. ...(deleting words) 
  Page 12, column one, paragraph three, only sentence reads: 
...issue should be properly solved through dialogues... (adding 
the word "properly.") 
  Page 12, column one, paragraph four, only sentence reads: 
...He expressed his anxiety [you lu (1992 1982)] and worry 
about the current development of the issue. 
  The meeting was held in a sincere, friendly [cheng zhi you 
hao 6134 2304 0645 1170] atmosphere. 
  He made these... (adding word "anxiety" and new paragraph, 
providing STCs.) 
  Page 12, column one, paragraph five, only sentence reads: 
...ambassador to China. 
  After the talks, Premier Li Peng and Prime Minister Morihiro 
Hosokawa attended a signing ceremony for an agreement on 
environment protection between the Chinese and Japanese 
Governments. ...(adding new paragraph). 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1635 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_d_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Northeast Asia </F>
<H3> <TI>   XINHUA Replaces Item </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    XINHUA Replaces Item </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW2003165794 </F>
<F P=103> OW2003165794 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
BFN 

    Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese at 1404 GMT on 
20 March carries a service message killing a 1612-character item 
transmitted at 0934 GMT on 20 March and replacing it with a 
1731-character item. Earlier Chinese item was filed as a 
comparison FYI [above item] to the XINHUA English version 
entitled "Li Peng, Japan's Hosokawa Hold Talks" published on 
pages 10-12 of the 21 March China Daily Report. 
  A comparison of the replacement Chinese version with both 
the 
XINHUA English and previous XINHUA Chinese items reveal the 
following variations: 
  XINHUA English version, page 12, column one, paragraph four, 
only sentence reads: ...of the issue. 
  During the talks, Prime Minister Hosokawa invited Premier Li 
Peng to visit Japan. He said to Li Peng, "I am expecting to 
meet you again in Japan." 
  Li Peng expressed his appreciation for the invitation. He 
said that a specific time for the visit would be coordinated 
through diplomatic channels. 
  Among those present... (adding two new paragraphs). 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1636 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_p_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  18 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Central-South Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Six Convicted Drug Traffickers Executed in Guangzhou </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Six Convicted Drug Traffickers Executed in Guangzhou </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK3003123294 Guangzhou Guangdong People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 0400 GMT 18 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK3003123294 </F>
<F P=104>  Guangzhou Guangdong People's Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Mandarin </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] This morning, the Guangzhou City Intermediate 
People's Court announced the execution of criminal Ma Wengui and 
five other criminals whose death sentences and life-long 
deprivation of political rights had been confirmed by the 
provincial higher people's court. The six convicted drug 
traffickers were taken to an execution ground where they were 
shot in the head. 
  On 30 April, 1993, criminal Ma Guoying bought heroin in 
Yunnan and smuggled it into Guangzhou where he joined criminal 
Ma Wengui, who was looking for a buyer in the city. On 9 May, 
1993, Ma Wengui and Ma Guoying were caught red-handed by police 
while selling some 4,900 grams of heroin to a buyer in a 
Guangzhou hotel. Ma Wengui and Ma Guoying were later sentenced 
to death and deprived of political rights for life. 
  In April, 1992, criminals Mo Wenjian and Wei Jiping smuggled 
1,050 grams of heroin from Nanning into Guangzhou where they 
gave it to criminal Zheng Nanye, who was looking for a buyer in 
the city. On afternoon of 7 April, the three criminals were 
caught red-handed by police when Mo Wenjian and Wei Jiping went 
to collect money from Zheng Nanye who had just sold the heroin. 
Both Mo Wenjian and Wei Jiping were sentenced to death and 
deprived of political rights for life. Zheng Nanye was 
sentenced to life imprisonment and deprived of political rights 
for life. 
  In 1989, criminal Ma Zuohua bought 12,000 grams of heroin in 
Chengdu and asked another person to take it to Guangzhou by 
plane. Ma later on received $50,000 HOng Kong dollars for his 
role in the deal. Ma Zuohua was sentenced to death and deprived 
of political rights for life. 
  In November, 1992, criminal Li Feng bought 4,000 grams of 
heroin in Yunnan and smuggled it into Guangzhou where he sold 
more than 1,700 grams of heroin to others. He was arrested by 
police later on. Li was sentenced to death and deprived of 
political rights for life. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1637 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_p_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Central-South Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Guangzhou Reportedly To Quicken Sale of State Enterprises </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Guangzhou Reportedly To Quicken Sale of State Enterprises </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK3003122994 Hong Kong TA KUNG PAO in Chinese 10 Mar 94 p7 </F>
<F P=103> HK3003122994 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong TA KUNG PAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special dispatch" by staff reporter Yuan Hsiu-hsien (5913 </F>
4423 6343): "Guangzhou Quickens the Pace of `Conceding Markets, 
Profits, and Ownership Right' of State-Owned Enterprises to 
Foreign Businessmen"] 
  [Text] Guangzhou, 9 Mar--This year Guangzhou City will 
quicken the pace of changing the operational mechanism of 
state-owned enterprises, refrain from helping out money-losing 
enterprises, and accelerate the "concession of markets, profits, 
and ownership right" to foreign businesses. Guangzhou Executive 
Vice Mayor Chen Kaizhi and Wu Liang made the these remarks at a 
news conference of the city people's congress today. 
  Chen said: The city started exploring the change of 
operation mechanism in state-owned enterprises last year. The 
authorities will change the traditional methods of granting 
loans and so on to money-losing enterprises and will not help 
them out so they can thoroughly remold themselves. With regard 
to existing enterprises, especially young and lively 
enterprises, it is necessary to quicken the pace of changing 
their mechanisms. We should take advantage of their adolescent 
years to help them find "mothers-in-law" and marry them off to 
establish a modern enterprise system. 
  Wu Liang said: Last year, Guangzhou boldly "conceded 
markets, profits, and ownership right" to foreign businesses, 
and it will accelerate this process this year. Various 
enterprises, whether newly-established, profit-making, or good 
old ones, also should be sold. We are even ready to sell whole 
factories. Some tertiary industries, including commerce and 
retail and catering businesses, as well as tunnels and bridges, 
will also be sold in a planned and restrained manner. However, 
there should be coordination with the central government on 
certain items. Wu said: By selling shares we can use the funds 
for more necessary construction projects in Guangzhou, including 
the construction of underground railways and roads. 
  Speaking on excessive price rises last year, Wu said: We 
shall adopt feasible measures to keep down prices. These 
measures include the establishment of a fund for keeping down 
prices and the establishment of a reserve system for important 
nonstable food; the implementation of a system of putting on 
record price increases for important commodities; tighter 
management of collection of administrative and service charges 
and adoption of macroeconomic regulation and control measures 
over the sales of commodities that can yield exorbitant profits; 
and acceleration of the "shopping basket" project in an effort 
to keep the rise in retail price index to within 15 percent this 
year. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1638 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_p_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  26 Feb 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Central-South Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hubei Governor Delivers Government Work Report </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Hubei Governor Delivers Government Work Report </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0403004694 Wuhan Hubei People's Radio Network in Mandarin 
1000 GMT 26 Feb 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK0403004694 </F>
<F P=104>  Wuhan Hubei People's Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Mandarin </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpts] The second session of the Eighth Hubei 
Provincial People's Congress was solemnly inaugurated in 
Wuchang's Hongshan Auditorium this afternoon. [passage omitted] 
  At 15:00 in the afternoon, Guan Guangfu [provincial party 
secretary] declared the second session of the Eighth Hubei 
Provincial People's Congress open. 
  On behalf of the Hubei Provincial People's Government, Hubei 
Provincial Governor Jia Zhijie delivered at the session a 
government work report which was divided into the following six 
parts entitled respectively: 
  1. Review of Hubei's work in 1993; 
  2. Hubei's major national economic goals and tasks in 
1994; 
  3. It is necessary to quicken the pace of reform and 
meticulously organize and further all types of reforms; 
  4. It is necessary to expand opening up and make hubei's 
national economy even more exported-oriented; 
  5. It is necessary to persistently and simultaneously 
grasp two key work aspects and vigorously build socialist 
spiritual civilization, democracy, and legal system; 
  6. It is necessary to further emancipate the mind, 
improve work style, and implement work to the letter and 
comprehensively fulfill Hubei's national economic and social 
development quotas in 1994. 
  In reviewing Hubei's work in 1993, Governor Jia Zhijie 
stated: The year 1993 marked the first year of my governorship. 
Over the past year, the Hubei people have worked very hard with 
the result that we have comprehensively accomplished the 
provincial national economic tasks, made significant headway in 
respect of building socialism with Chinese characteristics, and 
scored encouraging achievements in reform, opening up, and 
modernization drive. Last year, Hubei's total gross domestic 
national product reached 108.1 billion yuan, representing a 12.7 
percent increase and the highest growth rate in the last eight 
years; total industrial and agricultural output value 213.2 
billion yuan, registering a 17.8 percent increase; financial 
revenue 11.47 billion yuan, up by 21.8 percent; per capita 
subsistence income on the part of urban residents 2,191 yuan, up 
by 516 yuan; and per capita net income on the part of peasants 
783 yuan, up by 105 yuan. 
  Governor Jia Zhijie noted: By reviewing and summing up 
Hubei's work in 1993, we have come to understand an indisputable 
truth: In order to consolidate and develop the excellent 
situation of reform and construction, we should firmly grasp the 
following aspects of work in 1994: 
  1. To constantly bear in mind that development is the 
last word [FA ZHAN CAI SHI YING DAO LI 4099 1455 2088 2508 4289 
6670 3810] and strive to maintain a sustained, rapid, and 
healthy national economic growth; 
  2. To persistently deepen reform,; expand opening up, and 
promote faster and better economic growth; 
  3. To give top priority to economic efficiency 
improvement and simultaneously increase speed, efficiency, and 
reserve strength in economic work; 
  4. To correctly handle relations between reform and 
development on the one hand and social stability on the other; 
  5. To firmly grasp two key aspects of work at the same 
time. 
  Speaking of Hubei's national economic development tasks and 
quotas in 1994, Governor Jia Zhijie maintained: The general 
guiding ideology for Hubei's economic work in 1994 is as 
follows: To unswervingly and conscientiously implement the 
spirit of the 14th CPC National Congress and the spirit of the 
Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee under 
the guidance of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics as well as the party's 
basic line, to firmly grasp each and every excellent opportunity 
of deepening reform and expanding opening up, to consolidate 
agriculture as the foundation, to give full scope to the pillar 
role of large and medium-sized enterprises, to devote more 
energy to key aspects of the province's economic work, to 
strengthen such weak links as light industry, textile industry, 
and so on, to build more basic facilities, to make redoubled 
efforts to develop basic industries, to accelerate scientific 
and technological advancement and structural readjustment, to 
energetically improve economic efficiency and quality, and to 
bring about sustained, rapid, and healthy economic growth across 
the province. 
  Governor Jia Zhijie went on: Hubei's economic work in 1994 
should aim at overfulfilling each and every economic quota, 
catching up with the whole country in terms of economic growth, 
bringing about a faster-paced growth, and making more 
breakthroughs in various trades and professions. In order to 
attain such a general goal, Jia Zhijie held, we must focus on 
the following aspects of work in 1994: 
  1. To steadily develop grain, cotton, and oil crop 
production; speed up diversified economic development as well as 
township and town enterprises development; and comprehensively 
invigorate the province's rural economy with an eye to 
increasing income on the part of peasants; 
  2. To maintain fast-paced industrial growth on the basis 
of improved economic efficiency; 
  3. To increase investment, perfect investment structure, 
and rapidly build key construction projects; 
  4. To energetically develop a tertiary industry and 
establish a new pattern of industrial development; 
  5. To rapidly build a sound market system by focusing on 
certain key links; 
  6. To energetically implement a strategy aimed at 
developing Hubei by virtue of advanced science, technology, and 
education to comprehensively improve Hubei's national economic 
quality and labor quality. 
  Those attending and sitting at the rostrum at the opening 
ceremony were provincial party committee, people's government, 
Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference [CPPCC] 
committee, and military district leaders, including Hui Liangyu 
[provincial CPPCC committee chairman], Qian Yunlu, Li Daqiang, 
Wang Zhongnong, Liu Guoyu [provincial military district 
commander], Liu Rongli, Wang Shengtie, Deng Guozheng, Huang 
Yuanzhi, Han Nanpeng, Meng Qingping, Zhao Baojiang, and others. 
[passage omitted] 
  Also sitting at the rostrum at the opening ceremony were Li 
Qifan, provincial higher people's court president; Zhong Shuqin, 
provincial people's procuratorate chief procurator; and some 
retired veteran provincial leaders, including Han Ningfu; Shen 
Yinluo; Zhong Shuqiao; Wu Tao; Huang Zhengxia; Han Hongshu; and 
others. [passage omitted] 
  In a related development, a preparatory meeting was held for 
the second session of the Eighth Hubei Provincial People's 
Congress in Wuchang's Hongshan Auditorium yesterday morning. 
  The preparatory meeting adopted the following eight-item 
agenda for the second session of the Eighth Hubei Provincial 
People's Congress: 
  1. To listen to and deliberate on "The Hubei Provincial 
People's Government Work Report" to be delivered by Governor Jia 
Zhijie; 
  2. To listen to, deliberate on, and adopt "The 1993 Hubei 
Provincial National Economic and Social Development Report" and 
"The 1994 Hubei Provincial National Economic and Social 
Development Plan (Draft)" to be delivered by provincial planning 
commission Director Gao Youke; 
  3. To listen to, deliberate on, and adopt "The 1993 Hubei 
Provincial Financial Estimates Implementation Report" and "The 
1994 Hubei Provincial Financial Estimates (Draft)" to be 
delivered by provincial finance department Director Hong Daoyou; 
  4. To listen to and deliberate on "The Hubei Provincial 
People's Congress Standing Committee Work Report" to be 
delivered by Zheng Yunfei, provincial people's congress standing 
committee vice chairman; 
  5. To listen to and deliberate on "The Hubei Provincial 
Higher People's Court Work Report" to be delivered by Li Qifan, 
provincial higher people's court president; 
  6. To listen to and deliberate on "The Hubei Provincial 
People's Procuratorate Work Report" to be delivered by Zhong 
Shuqin, provincial people's procuratorate chief procurator; 
  7. To deliberate on "The Hubei Provincial Measures of 
Implementing 'The PRC Law of National People's Congress 
Deputies' and 'The PRC Law of People's Congress Deputies at All 
Levels' (Draft);" 
  8. To elect some of the Eighth Hubei Provincial People's 
Congress Standing Committee members through a by-election. 
  Yesterday morning's preparatory meeting elected the 
following 
executive chairmen, presidium members, secretary general, and 
deputy secretary generals of the second session of the Eighth 
Hubei Provincial People's Congress: 
  The executive chairmen are: Guan Guangfu [provincial party 
secretary, Zheng Yunfei, Wang Ruisheng, Wang Zhizhuo, Liang 
Shufen (female), Xiao Quantao, Xie Peidong, Xu Xiaochun, and Lin 
Jinming. 
  The 63 presidium members are: Ding Fengying, Wang Zhizhuo, 
Wang Hanzhang, Hui Liangyu, Liu Guoyu, Guan Guangfu, Xia 
Quantao, Zhong Shuqiao, Qian Yunlu, Han Hongshu, Xie Peidong, 
and others. [passage omitted] 
  Secretary General is: Zheng Yunfei; 
  The duputy secretay generals are: Liu Xuelun, Gao Fengwu, Li 
Linzhi (female), Li Dehua, Zhou Yetao (female), Chen Diren, Sun 
Hua, and Zhao Wenbiao (female). 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1639 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_f_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  31 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Near East &amp; South Asia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Radio Reports Li Peng's Meeting With Ambassador </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Radio Reports Li Peng's Meeting With Ambassador </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   BK3103021594 Dhaka Radio Bangladesh Network in English 0130 
GMT 31 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> BK3103021594 </F>
<F P=104>  Dhaka Radio Bangladesh Network </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Chinese Prime Minister Li Peng has said the bonds 
of friendship between Bangladesh and China will always remain 
strong. He expressed the sentiment when the ambassador of 
Bangladesh to China, Mustafizur Rahman, called on him in Beijing 
on Tuesday. The Chinese prime minister expressed his deep 
satisfaction at the close and cordial ties between the two 
countries. He said he will like to visit Bangladesh at the 
earliest opportunity in response to the invitation extended to 
him by Prime Minister Khaleda Zia. Mr. Li Peng recalled the 
visit of the Bangladesh prime minister to China in 1991 and 
conveyed his greetings and best wishes to the government and 
people of Bangladesh. 
  The ambassador thanked the Chinese prime minister for the 
help and cooperation that China extended to Bangladesh. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1640 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_k_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   Authorities Ban Wei Jingsheng Seeing Foreign Journalists </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Authorities Ban Wei Jingsheng Seeing Foreign Journalists </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0104112394 Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 1 
Apr 94 pp 1, 6 </F>

<F P=103> HK0104112394 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Geoffrey Crothall in Beijing and Willy Wo-lap Lam] </F>
  [Text] China's best-known dissident, Wei Jingsheng, has 
been barred from seeing foreign journalists for the next three 
years. 
  Sources in the dissident community said last night that 
because of intensified pressure from security officials, a 
number of dissidents were considering leaving the country 
temporarily. 
  The ban was slapped on Mr Wei in spite of the fact that he 
completed his 15-year prison sentence this week. 
  "Wei Jingsheng has been deprived of his political rights for 
three years and is not allowed to meet foreign journalists 
during that time," the Foreign Ministry said in a statement 
yesterday. 
  However, ministry spokesman, Wu Jianmin, was unable to 
specify the legal basis for such a statement. 
  Deprivation of political rights usually refers to the right 
to vote, stand for public office or join the Communist Party. 
  There does not appear to be any specific provision banning 
those deprived of their rights from meeting journalists. 
  The Foreign Ministry also refused to say whether the ban 
extended to foreign diplomats and government officials. 
  China severely criticised United States Assistant Secretary 
of State, John Shattuck, for meeting Mr Wei in February, 
claiming he had violated Article 75 of the criminal code since 
at that time Mr Wei was a "criminal on parole". 
  Since Mr Wei completed his period of parole on Tuesday, 
Article 75 can no longer be cited as a reason not to meet 
foreigners. 
  Analysts said the only way a ban on meetings could be 
justified was if it were deemed that by talking to foreign 
reporters, Mr Wei was "engaging in political activities". 
  The Foreign Ministry statement reflects the determination of 
the Government to keep China's "No 1 trouble maker" under 
control for the foreseeable future. 
  Mr Wei, who was pressured into leaving Beijing prior to the 
arrival of U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher, has still 
not returned to the capital and there is no indication of when 
he might come back. 
  The leader of the Democracy Wall movement originally said he 
was just going out of town for a "few days" for reasons of poor 
health but most analysts believe he has been ordered to take an 
extended vacation. 
  There is speculation Mr Wei might be kept out of the way for 
a few more months given the upcoming 75th anniversary of the May 
4th movement and the fifth anniversary of the June 4 massacre, 
both highly sensitive dates in the Chinese political calendar. 
  Dissidents in Beijing and Shanghai faced stepped-up 
harassment by police and state-security agents. A source said 
several blacklisted dissidents were considering heading towards 
the south-east coast, the traditional springboard for fleeing 
the country. 
  It is understood these pro-democracy elements feared being 
taken into custody in the run-up to June 4. 
  "Security agents hauled in scores of `trouble-makers' in 
Shanghai, Beijing, and other cities in May and June in 1992 and 
1993, and some of these detainees are still behind bars," the 
source said. 
  Sources in Beijing said authorities in the industrial city 
of 
Tangshan were investigating the escape late last month of 
activist Wang Jiaqi, a 34-year-old postgraduate law student at 
Beijing University. 
  Together with law lecturer Yuan Hongbing and underground 
labour unionist Zhou Guoqiang, Wang was detained on March 2 for 
allegedly organising a petition on political reform. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1641 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_k_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   Pro-Democracy Activists Placed Under `Strict Control' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Pro-Democracy Activists Placed Under `Strict Control' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0104032894 Hong Kong LIEN HO PAO in Chinese 1 Apr 94 p 10 </F>
<F P=103> HK0104032894 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong LIEN HO PAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Report from Hong Kong" by reporter Huang Tien (7806 1131) ] </F>
  [Text] On the eve of the Ching Ming festival, Beijing's 
situation has become increasingly tense. According to a source 
from Beijing, yesterday state security and public security 
departments in Beijing once again received instructions from 
their higher authorities to place pro-democracy activities under 
strict control before the Ching Ming festival and adopt resolute 
measures if necessary. 
  The source said: Departments concerned began to launch 
operations yesterday and made covert arrangements to watch the 
homes of dissidents and the places where they usually carried 
out their activities. The higher authorities ordered their 
subordinate departments to persuade, as far as possible, 
pro-democracy activists to travel outside Beijing and persuade 
the pro-democracy activists who were currently in the other 
parts of China to "spend a few more days amusing themselves" 
there. 
  Well-known pro-democracy activist Wei Jingsheng previously 
planned to hold a gathering in Beijing on 29 March to mark the 
15th anniversary of the pronouncement of his court verdict. 
However, as of now, he has not returned to Beijing, and is 
still in Qingdao. 
  May 4 is a sensitive day during which the mainland 
authorities maintain sharp vigilance. During the Ching Ming 
festival every year, Beijing Municipality is on the alert and 
all relevant personnel renounce vacation and do their utmost to 
throw themselves into security work. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1642 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_k_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  31 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   Minister Targets Corruption, Torture in Security Forces </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Minister Targets Corruption, Torture in Security Forces </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK3103141194 Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in English 1121 GMT 
31 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK3103141194 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 31 (CNS) -- China's Minister of 
Public Security, Mr. Tao Siju, speaking at a meeting recently, 
said that problems regarding unfairness in enforcing the law, 
bending the law for the benefit of relatives or friends and 
imposing fines instead of instituting criminal proceedings had 
been rectified to some extent since the anti-corruption campaign 
got underway last year. The unhealthy trend of participating in 
smuggling by public security departments in coastal regions had 
also been effectively stopped. 
  However, such achievements should not be over-estimated, Mr. 
Tao said, and special attention should be paid to problems 
facing public security departments. He called for public 
security departments at various levels to take serious action 
with crimes committed by leaders and members of the police, 
particularly cases involving bending the law for relatives or 
friends, bribery and corruption and torture as well as seeking 
private benefits through the office they hold. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1643 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_d_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Northeast Asia </F>
<H3> <TI>   ROK Says Security Council Statement `Appropriate' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    ROK Says Security Council Statement `Appropriate' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104082394 Beijing XINHUA in English 0801 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104082394 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Seoul, April 1 (XINHUA) -- South Korea said today 
that the statement of the United Nations Security Council on 
Pyongyang's nuclear issue is "an appropriate action". 
  Foreign Ministry spokesman Chang Ki-ho said in a statement, 
"the (South Korean) Government urges North Korea to take due 
note of such concern and will of the international community and 
come forth positively on the terms of the presidential 
statement." 
  On Thursday, president of the U.N. Security Council 
Jean-Bernard Merimee issued a statement in New York, urging the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) to allow the 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to complete its 
inspection of Pyongyang's nuclear facilities. 
  The 15-member U.N. Security Council adopted the statement by 
consensus without a vote. The statement is not legally binding 
and does not carry the same weight as a resolution which 
requires a vote. 
  "The council has decided to remain actively interested in 
the 
matter and further Security Council consideration will take 
place if necessary in order to achieve full implementation of 
the IAEA-DPRK safeguards agreement," the spokesman said. 
  He also said that South Korea "plans to continue with all 
possible efforts for an early solution to the North Korean 
nuclear issue through peaceful means in concert with all nations 
seeking nuclear non-proliferation." The IAEA and the DPRK have 
been engaged in a row recently over the inspection of the 
latter's nuclear sites. The Vienna-based IAEA claimed that 
Pyongyang rejected full inspection while the DPRK said that it 
met the IAEA's demands. 
  On March 21, the IAEA's board of governors adopted a 
resolution referring the DPRK's nuclear dispute to the U.N. 
Security Council. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1644 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_p_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  31 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Central-South Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Guangdong Tightens Factory Fire Safety Regulations </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Guangdong Tightens Factory Fire Safety Regulations </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK3103053294 Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 
31 Mar 94 p 2 </F>

<F P=103> HK3103053294 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Stella Lee] </F>
  [Text] Tougher fire safety regulations for Hong Kong 
factory operators are to be adopted by the Guangdong Government. 
The new rules are being drafted in an effort to prevent 
tragedies such as the Zhili Handicrafts factory fire last 
November which killed 84 people and left 25 injured. 
Authorities were devising management rules for foreign-owned 
enterprises in the province where there are 70,000 such 
operations, vice-director of Guangdong Public Security 
Department's Fire Bureau, Zhong Jiaorong, said. Eighty per cent 
of the foreign-owned enterprises have Hong Kong investors. 
  Ms Zhong said Guangdong had recorded the nation's highest 
number of industrial accidents for four consecutive years. 
Fires caused losses of 300 million yuan (HK$266 million) last 
year, and 130 million yuan in 1992. Sixty percent of the losses 
were attributed to foreign-owned factories. "Although the 
foreign-owned enterprises will have to meet the same fire safety 
requirements as local ones, the new rules will be tailored for 
them," Ms Zhong said. 
  She was speaking after a seminar on fire safety in 
foreign-owned factories, during which a 10-minute video of the 
rescue and aftermath of the Zhili fire was shown. The seminar 
heard in detail about factors which contributed to the high 
death toll including blocked exits, sealed windows and work done 
by unlicensed electricians. The fire caused 2.6 million yuan in 
damage. Five people, including the Hong Kong owner of the 
factory, Lo Chiu-chuen, have been arrested, but no hearing date 
has been set. 
  New penalties came in on March 1, with fines to be 
calculated 
on the basis of 30,000 yuan per death, 3,000 to 5,000 yuan per 
injury, plus one to five percent of the total cost of damage. 
Factory management may also face criminal penalties. Chief 
executive of the Hong Kong Confederation of Trade Unions, Lee 
Cheuk-yan, called for more compensation for victims of 
industrial accidents, and urged the Chinese Government to set up 
more channels for workers' complaints. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1645 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_f_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  31 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Near East &amp; South Asia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Egypt, China Sign Geology, Mineral Cooperation Protocol </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Egypt, China Sign Geology, Mineral Cooperation Protocol </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW3103131094 Beijing XINHUA in English 1241 GMT 31 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW3103131094 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, March 3l (XINHUA) -- Egypt and China signed 
here today a protocol for exchange of expertise in the field of 
geology and mineral wealth. 
  The protocol was signed by Chinese Minister of Geology and 
Mineral Wealth Zhu Xun, who is currently visiting Egypt, and 
Egyptian Minister of Industry and Mineral Resources Ibrahim 
Fawzi ['Abd-al-Wahid]. 
  Following the signing of the protocol, Zhu Xun told 
reporters 
that his current visit was fruitful, hoping that it would 
contribute to promoting the existing cooperation between the two 
countries, especially in the field of geology and mineral wealth. 
  Among those attending the signing ceremony was Chinese 
Ambassador to Egypt Yang Fuchang. 
  The Chinese minister and the delegation accompanying him 
arrived here on March 27 for a five-day visit to Egypt. 
  Egyptian Prime Minister 'Atif Sidqi received Zhu Xun Tuesday 
[29 March]. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1646 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_f_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  25 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Near East &amp; South Asia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Israel Agrees To Dispatch Observers to Hebron </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Israel Agrees To Dispatch Observers to Hebron </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW2503193894 Beijing XINHUA in English 1900 GMT 25 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW2503193894 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Tunis, March 25 (XINHUA) -- Sources close to the 
PLO said today that Israel has agreed on dispatching 50 
lightly-armed Norwegian international observers and another 50 
Palestinian policemen to the West Bank town of Hebron. 
  However, the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) demands 
dispatching an international-observer battalion of about 400 
persons and a Palestinian battalion of the same size. 
  The sources told XINHUA that this is the first time for 
Israel to agree on dispatching lightly-armed international 
observers to the occupied West Bank. 
  This agreement came in the context of a draft accord 
achieved 
between the Palestinian and Israeli delegations after a 14-hour 
negotiation in Cairo Thursday [24 March]. 
  The PLO-Israeli talks on the implementation of the September 
13 PLO-Israeli peace agreement was stalled in the wake of the 
February 25 massacre, in which a Jewish settler gunned down some 
40 Palestinian worshipers at a mosque in Hebron. 
  The sources said the PLO has not agreed so far on the number 
of Palestinian policemen and international observers as Israel 
did. 
  The Cairo talks focused on dispatching international armed 
observers to Hebron, early access of Palestinian policemen to 
Hebron, nominating a municipality head of Hebron town by the PLO 
and evacuating 42 Jewish families from Hebron. 
  The sources said that Israel agreed in principle on the 
evacuation of the Jewish settlers from Hebron to Keriat Arba' 
settlement near Hebron. 
  The PLO calls for dispatching a total of 1,500 international 
observers to the occupied Palestinian territories. 
  The sources said the PLO-Israeli negotiations are expected 
to 
resume next week. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1647 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_f_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Near East &amp; South Asia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Article Notes Kuwait's `Uncertain' Future </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Article Notes Kuwait's `Uncertain' Future </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW1303161594 Beijing XINHUA in English 1420 GMT 13 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW1303161594 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Ma Xiaolin: "Kuwaitis Wander for an Unknown Future" -- </F>
XINHUA headline] 
  [Text] Kuwait City, March 13 (XINHUA) -- When the new moon 
of ending Ramadan was sighted Saturday [12 March] night, the 
first day of Id al-Fitr (the festival of fast-breaking) began 
and greeted by all Kuwaitis. 
  A mass prayer of 50,000 worshipers was held in a grant 
mosque 
today. Restaurants and cafes reopened normally, families began 
visiting each other and men can return to diwaniyas during 
daytimes to smoke the hubble-bubble, drink and chat. Kuwait was 
permeated with an atmosphere of easiness, but not an overmuch 
happiness. 
  Kuwaitis did not feel easy even when they celebrated the 
33rd 
National Day and the third anniversary of liberation from the 
Iraqi occupation last month. At home and abroad, over a dozen 
of problems were still bothering Kuwaitis. They don't know 
whether they will have a bright tomorrow or a dark one. 
  The top question for Kuwait is that about 600 Kuwaiti POWs 
and civilians are allegedly detained by Iraq and they are 
unlikely to return in the near future. So, many families of the 
missing have to spend the current festival with sadness. 
  New demarcation between Kuwait and Iraq was rejected by the 
latter, even though it is risking serious international 
pressure. Iraq has also refused the compensations paid by the 
Kuwait Government for Iraqis who withdrew into Iraq to follow 
the new border demarcation rules. Iraq's strong stance has 
shocked Kuwaitis, and may ruin their confidence in a safe and 
stable future of the ever-occupied country. 
  Relationships between Kuwait and its "opposition countries" 
-- some Arab states which once supported or sympathized with 
Iraq during the 1990-91 Gulf crisis -- remain suspended or have 
limited progress in the direction of reconciliation. But the 
Gulf anti-Iraq front has begun to break up when Kuwait got angry 
at Qatar that tried to establish "balanced and clear relations" 
with Iraq. Also a marine transportation line was reportedly to 
be established between Iraq and the United Arab Emirates. 
  Meanwhile, the trial of attempted assassination of former 
U.S. president George Bush was adjourned again and again. There 
are signs that the lawsuit which could have created a more 
intense tie between Iraq and its opponents may have an 
advantageous end for Iraq. The international embargo against 
Iraq could be softened if the alleged Iraq-backed plot was 
turned down. 
  All these developments are really a bad news for Kuwaitis 
who 
are fearful of another invasion and occupation by a strong 
neighbor. 
  At home, Kuwaitis are also confused by the economic 
situation 
which is not quite good. Foreign funds are badly needed by the 
government for supporting the reconstruction, while domestic 
funds are flowing abroad because the market is tiny and safety 
prospect is still uncertain. 
  Suffering from a double financial impact, Kuwait lost 
hundreds of millions of U.S. dollars last year when crude oil 
prices slumped, while its overseas investment returns achieved a 
lower level. Also, the hard debt plan is expected to cost the 
government about 20 billion dollars. The government is forced 
to cut public spending by 20 percent to cope with an increasing 
deficit. 
  Kuwait is likely to carry out a package of privatization 
steps and impose more charges on various public services. It 
means that the Kuwaitis will get less money owed to them and 
lose a lot of benefits from the welfare policies which they 
lived on for a long time. 
  On the other hand, the legislature and the authorities are 
likely at a cross road. There are reports that the current 
cabinet and house will resign in order to form newer and 
stronger government and parliament after the fast-breaking 
festival. When asked about the reshuffle of the cabinet 
earlier, Kuwaiti crown prince and Prime Minister Sa'd 
al-'Abdullah al-Sabah neither denied nor confirmed. It made 
Kuwaitis feel that everything is possible. 
  Another reason for Kuwaitis to consider the upcoming days as 
uncertain is that the country is closer to be an Islamized one. 
Of the 60 parliamentarians, 39 had signed a bill on amending 
Article Two of the Constitution to allow the implementation of 
the Islamic Sharia (law) in the country. If it is passed, 
Kuwait will be turned into "a complete Islamic state." The 
local citizens will find a series of limits and obstacles in 
their social, cultural even family lives. Some entertainment 
facilities such as satellite dishes will possibly be banned and 
the life will become dull. 
  Those who oppose Islamization warned that the national 
economy may collapse in case the Islamic Sharia is established 
as the main source of legislation in the country. 
  Kuwaitis are waiting for the days following the festival, in 
which they will experience some changes and reforms at home and 
abroad. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1648 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_f_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Near East &amp; South Asia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Correction to Rong, Qian Meet With Libyan Leader </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Correction to Rong, Qian Meet With Libyan Leader </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW2903181794 </F>
<F P=103> OW2903181794 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
BFN 

    Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese at 1455 GMT on 
29 March transmits a service message correcting the item 
entitled "Rong Yiren, Qian Qichen Meet With Libyan Foreign 
Minister" published on page 16 in the 29 March China Daily 
Report: 
  Page 16, column one, first paragraph, only sentence reads: 
...with visiting Libyan Secretary of External Liaison and 
International Cooperation 'Umar Mustafa al-Muntasir.... 
(correcting official title) 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1649 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_n_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Commentary' Deplores `Alarming' Losses of State Enterprise </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    `Commentary' Deplores `Alarming' Losses of State Enterprise </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0104102894 Hong Kong AFP in English 0933 GMT 1 April 94 </F>
<F P=103> HK0104102894 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 1 (AFP)--China's state-run firms, 
stuck in a quagmire of bureaucratic mismanagement and 
half-hearted reforms, are still haemorrhaging funds at an 
alarming rate, the People's Daily said Friday. 
  In a lengthy, signed commentary, the official communist 
party 
organ said reforms granting more autonomy to state enterprises 
had not been fully implemented, resulting in "contradictions" 
between management and government over industrial policy. "The 
functions of the government and enterprises are mixed up" the 
commentary said, causing damaging delays in such areas as the 
purchase of sorely needed modern equipment. 
  Many state firms are still operating the "iron rice bowl" 
system guaranteeing jobs for life, which burdens management with 
welfare obligations that are incompatible with China's emerging 
market economy, it added. At the same time, increased 
production costs resulting from a shortage of energy and raw 
materials are exacerbating the losses suffered by state sector 
firms producing essential goods that are still subject to 
government price controls. 
  Reform of the state sector is an extremely sensitive issue 
in 
China, given the inevitability of bankruptcies and mass layoffs 
that goes with it. New fiscal reforms introduced at the 
beginning of the year have also taken their toll, the newspaper 
said, as many firms have lost essential financial and tax breaks. 
  Sorely unable to compete in an increasingly market-driven 
economy, more than one third of China's 13,000 medium to large 
state firms are in the red and a similar proportion in 
difficulty. Losses in 1993 totalled around 30 billion yuan (3.4 
billion dollars), up more than 20 percent from the previous year. 
  However, according to the People's Daily commentary, the 
only 
way out of the crisis is to deepen the reform programme and 
create a national economic environment that will benefit the 
state sector in the long term. Meanwhile, steps should be 
taken to clarify and strengthen the administration of state 
firms, improve product quality and upgrade technical equipment. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1650 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_n_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  31 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   Ministry Announces Top 500 Enterprises in Foreign Trade </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Ministry Announces Top 500 Enterprises in Foreign Trade </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW3103122294 Beijing XINHUA in English 1140 GMT 31 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW3103122294 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 31 (XINHUA) -- China announced its 
top 500 enterprises in foreign trade in 1993 here today, with 
China National Chemicals Import and Export Corporation (CNCIEC), 
registering a trade volume of 6.63 billion U.S. dollars, topping 
the list. 
  At a press conference given by the Chinese Ministry of 
Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation (MOFTEC), China National 
Metals and Minerals Import and Export Corporation and China 
National Cereals, Oils and Foodstuffs Import and Export 
Corporation (CNCOFIEC) were listed in second and third place 
among the top 20 enterprises. 
  China National Technical Import and Export Corporation, 
which 
was No. 6 in 1992, last year rose to No. 4 with an import and 
export volume of 2.72 billion U.S. dollars, which is only 40 
million U.S. dollars less than that of CNCOFIEC. 
  This was the fifth MOFTEC ranking of the top 500 
enterprises. 
A spokesman for the ministry said that with the approval of the 
State Council, the MOFTEC will henceforth announce a list of top 
enterprises, according to their import and export volumes, so as 
to strengthen their international image and reinforce their 
reputation. 
  Last year, the total import and export volume of the 500 
enterprises was 106.384 billion U.S. dollars, occupying 54.4 per 
cent of the country's total volume, which was 195.7 billion U.S. 
dollars. 
  According to the list, there are 14 enterprises whose import 
and export volume surpassed 1 billion U.S. dollars, with four 
more squeezing onto the list since 1992. And there are 248 
enterprises whose trade volume was more than 100 million U.S. 
dollars. 
  The No. 500 enterprise had an import and export volume of 
44.6 million U.S. dollars, 5.78 million U.S. dollars more than 
the same place in 1992. 
  Also announced today was a list of the top 200 enterprises 
with the biggest export volumes. The first three were CNCIEC, 
the CNCIEC Liaoning Company and CNCOFIEC. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1651 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_n_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   Government Launches Crackdown on Tax Evasion </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Government Launches Crackdown on Tax Evasion </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0104075094 Beijing CHINA DAILY in English 1 Apr 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> HK0104075094 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing CHINA DAILY </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["CD News" item: "State Goes After Fake Invoices, Tax </F>
Evasion"] 
  [Text] The State Taxation Administration has announced a 
fresh nationwide crackdown starting today on the increasing 
number of forgers, sellers and thieves of invoices, which are 
then used to evade or cheat on taxes. 
  These crimes -- especially the forgery of invoices for 
value- 
added tax -- are greatly disturbing the country's new tax reform 
that began this year, State Council Secretary-General Luo Gan 
said on Wednesday. 
  Co-organized the campaign are also the Public Security 
Ministry, the Supreme People's Court and the Supreme People's 
Procuratorate. [sentence as published] 
  The reform centers on a consumer tax system with the 
value-added tax at its core. 
  Invoices are critical documents for the calculation of the 
tax, and any forgery is detrimental to the tax reform package. 
  Speaking at a national telephone conference announcing the 
start of the drive, Luo called on the country's police, taxation 
and judicial workers to take severe measures to stop criminal 
activities concerning invoices. 
  Currently, businesses in many large- and medium-sized cities 
take advantage of the forged and stolen invoices to evade or 
cheat on taxes. 
  Luo called on the Public Security Ministry, the State 
Taxation Administration, the Supreme People's Court and the 
Supreme People's Procuratorate to form a special coordination 
office to guide the campaign, which will continue through June. 
  The move will focus on big cities and areas where the crimes 
are most prevalent. Other areas and regional governments should 
also put the fight on their agenda for their daily work, Luo 
said. 
  Targeting forgery and theft gangs, the drive aims to net 
underground printshops that produce large batches of bogus 
invoices, as well as those who sell the fraudulent documents. 
  People who use the fake invoices to evade taxes or cheat on 
their tax returns should also be sought out and dealt with 
harshly. Luo added. 
  By the end of June, the campaign must meet its goals to 
ensure the smooth implementation of China's new tax measures. 
  Local protectionism and professional corruption must be 
cleared away to carry out this battle. 
  In addition, it is imperative to educate and encourage 
people 
to check for and reject fake invoices, he added. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1652 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_n_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  31 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   China To Spend 20 Billion Yuan on Highways, Railroads </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    China To Spend 20 Billion Yuan on Highways, Railroads </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0104062494 Hong Kong LIEN HO PAO in Chinese 31 Mar 94 p 22 </F>
<F P=103> HK0104062494 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong LIEN HO PAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special dispatch": "China To Build Southwest Mainlines of </F>
Communication; Cost of Railway Construction To Exceed 20 Billion 
Yuan"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 30 March (LIEN HO PO) -- During the Eighth 
and Ninth Five-Year Plans (1991-2000), the Chinese mainland will 
inject a huge amount of funds into construction of the mainlines 
of communication in southwest China, including railways and 
highways, of which over 20 billion yuan will be invested in 
railway construction. 
  Sichuan, Yunnan, Guizhou, and Guangxi are involved in the 
projects which were planned to be built in the Southwest. 
According to the plan, by the end of this century, more than 
3,000 kilometers of railways will have been built or rebuilt in 
the abovementioned region. The projects have now started 
construction. The projects, which are scheduled to have 
completed construction before 1995, include the northern 
thoroughfare of the Southwest or the multiple- track 
Yangpingguan-Chengdu section of the Baoji-Chengdu Railway, the 
eastern thoroughfare or the Daxian-Chengdu Railway, and the 
western thoroughfare or the Guangtong-Dali Railway in Yunnan. 
Moreover, the 2.6 billion-yuan electrification reconstruction 
project of the Chengdu-Kunming Railway also has started 
construction. The Chongqing-Daxian Electric Railway, the 
Wanxian-Daxian Railway, and the Neijiang-Kunming Railway will 
begin construction one after another, and they are expected to 
be completed by the end of this century. 
  In road construction, some 5,000 km of arterial highways 
will 
be built and rebuilt. Sichuan Province will invest 1.13 billion 
to build and rebuild high-grade arterial highways that fan out 
to other parts of China -- with the Chang Jiang as the backing, 
key ports as the linking point, and Chengdu and Chongqing as the 
center -- and to link cities, prefectures, and counties with 
roads of grade-2 and above so as to form a coordinated 
land-and-water transport network in which expressways are linked 
with water transport carried out with other parts of the 
country. The project of the Shanghai- Chengdu arterial highway, 
as planned by the Ministry of Communications, will run through 
Chengdu, Chongqing, Wanxian in Sichuan, and expand from 
Chongqing, Guaiyang, Nanning to a sea port in Beibu Bay. 
According to the ministry's plan, in the first step, 800 km of 
high-grade arterial highways will be built and some 2,000 km of 
regional arterial highways will be built and rebuilt. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1653 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_n_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  31 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   World Bank, ADB Loans Assist Chemical Industry </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    World Bank, ADB Loans Assist Chemical Industry </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW3103142294 Beijing XINHUA in English 1335 GMT 31 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW3103142294 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 31 (XINHUA) -- China's chemical 
industry has used loans from the World Bank (WB) and the Asian 
Development Bank (ADB) to accelerate the construction and 
improvement of fertilizer and chemical mining projects. 
  Liu Mingyou, president of the China National Chemical 
Construction Corporation (CNCCC), said CNCCC has engaged in a 
dozen projects involving a total volume of 500 million U.S. 
dollars in loans from WB and ADB. 
  Of the total sum, 430 million dollars was granted by WB and 
70 million by ADB, he said. 
  CNCCC is one of the four corporations in China responsible 
for the utilization of loans from the World Bank. It has been 
entrusted to invite bidding for procurement using WB and ADB 
loans obtained by the Ministry of Chemical Industry through 
China's financial ministry. 
  The WB and ADB loans were allocated for the power-saving 
innovation of five large fertilizer factories, 
product-restructuring in five medium-sized fertilizer factories, 
the development of a phosphorus mine in Guizhou Province, the 
development of phosphate in Hubei Province and agricultural 
development in Hebei Province. 
  Liu said that CNCCC announced separate bidding, instead of 
package bidding, for the projects to reduce the costs by nearly 
10 percent. 
  Moreover, CNCCC also undertook projects using soft loans 
from 
Britain, Canada and Italy and introduced technology for 
chemical, petrochemical, fertilizer, membrane electrolysis, 
steel radial tyres and other projects. 
  In addition to importing technology and equipment, CNCCC 
extended its business scope to cover import and export trade and 
contracting foreign projects. Last year alone, the total volume 
of imports and exports and project contracts amounted to 1 
billion U.S. dollars. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1654 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_n_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   Regulations on International Economic Cooperation Fund </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Regulations on International Economic Cooperation Fund </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK3103140894 Beijing GUOJI SHANGBAO in Chinese 2 Mar 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> HK3103140894 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing GUOJI SHANGBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Interim Provisions of the Ministry of Foreign Economic </F>
Relations and Trade and the Ministry of Finance Concerning the 
Administration of the International Economic Cooperation Fund" 
-- promulgated by the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic 
Cooperation in Beijing on 5 October 1993] 
  [Text]Chapter 1 General Provisions 
  Article 1. The purpose of the establishment of the 
"International Economic Cooperation Fund" (called the "Fund" 
hereafter), sanctioned by the central government, is as follows: 
To support the development of China's cooperation with foreign 
countries in the fields of economics and technology and to 
provide part of the working funds (Chinese or foreign currency) 
for the International Economic Cooperation and Technological 
Company (called the "Company" hereafter) and relevant units that 
contract projects abroad, operate wholly-owned enterprises or 
joint ventures, or work in coordination with bilateral or 
multilateral technical aid projects given gratis to China. 
  Article 2. The main resource of the Fund is the sum returned 
to China from countries that received loans from China during 
the period from 1984 to 1988. 
  Article 3. The Fund is administered by the Ministry of 
Foreign Economic Relations and Trade [MOFERT]. The actual work 
is conducted by the Bank of China (foreign currency) and the 
Bank of Construction (renminbi). Financial administration is 
guided and supervised by the Ministry of Finance and the banks 
concerned. 
<H5>  Chapter 2 Loan Procedures </H5>
  Article 4. All companies and other relevant units, which are 
sanctioned by the State Council or MOFERT, are entitled to loans 
from the Fund for contracted projects abroad, wholly-owned 
enterprises or joint ventures, and bilateral or multilateral 
technical aid projects given to China. The conditions for 
receiving loans are as follows: 
  1. The contracted projects abroad, the wholly-owned 
enterprises, and the joint ventures should have sound economic 
returns; 
  2. The borrowing unit should have the capacity to 
repayment and should be able to guarantee repayment of loans and 
payment of service charges on schedule; 
  3. The borrowing unit should be able to provide a 
letter of guarantee from the financial department of the 
ministry or state commission in charge, or from the planning 
commission or financial department of a province, autonomous 
region, or municipality; 
  4. The borrowing unit may apply for the loan only 
after it has fully utilized its own funds and bank loans and its 
financial means are still insufficient. Projects encouraged by 
the state are given priority for loans. 
  Article 5. The principles for use of a loan are: The 
borrowing and repaying units must be the same entity and must 
pay back both the loan and all charges. The interim annual 
interest rate for renminbi is 3.0 percent, and for foreign 
currency 4.0 percent, both of which include a 0.2 percent bank 
service charge. If the loan is in foreign currency, the service 
fee is calculated according to provisions of the Bank of China, 
and collected once every six months. If the loan is in 
renminbi, the service fee is calculated according to regulations 
of the Bank of Construction. 
  Article 6. In case a borrowing unit is unable to repay a 
loan in time, it generally must apply for postponement of the 
payment to MOFERT and the bank concerned. If the reason is 
justified, the postponement will be approved. If the reason is 
not regarded as justified, the postponement will be denied and 
the service charge will be raised by 50 to 100 percent of the 
original charge rate after it becomes overdue. If necessary, 
the bank can act upon the agreement by directly deducting the 
sum from the borrowing unit's bank account. Or MOFERT can order 
the guaranteeing unit to pay back both the loan and charges. 
  Article 7. The borrowing unit must abide by the principle 
that the loan must be used for the approved purpose; it should 
not be used for any other purpose. Otherwise, the loan will be 
taken back within a limited period of time, and the service 
charge will be doubled. If necessary, the borrowing unit will 
be deprived of the right to future loans. 
<H5>  Chapter 3 Loan Procedures </H5>
  Article 8. In applying for a loan from MOFERT, a borrowing 
unit must first submit a written application (see the form 
attached to these Provisions) and a letter of guarantee from the 
guaranteeing unit. Duplicate copies of the application and the 
letter should be sent to the bank concerned. In the 
application, the reason for the loan, its purpose, amount, time 
limit, and repayment schedule should be stated. Then it should 
be signed and sealed before submission. The guaranteeing unit 
should state in its letter of guarantee that it shall be 
responsible for repayment in case the borrowing unit fails to 
clear the debt. 
  If the loan is used for a joint project abroad, a 
certificate 
of approval issued by the State Council or MOFERT should be 
submitted. In case of a labor service or contracted project 
abroad, a duplicate copy of the contract signed with a foreign 
company should be produced. 
  Article 9. Upon receiving the written application and 
guaranteeing unit's letter, MOFERT must immediately examine them 
(if necessary, the Ministry can examine them together with the 
Ministry of Finance and a bank, or entrust the bank to do the 
examination) and determine the amount of the loan. Once the 
application is examined and the amount fixed, the Ministry 
should notify the applicant to go to the bank to go through the 
necessary paperwork. 
  Article 10. Before the loan is approved, the bank and the 
borrowing unit should sign a contract in duplicate--one for the 
bank, the other for the borrowing unit. Copies of the contract 
should also be sent to MOFERT, the Ministry of Finance, and 
departments concerned. 
  Article 11. MOFERT, the Ministry of Finance, and the bank 
have the right to supervise and examine the use of the loan, for 
which the borrowing unit should provide the necessary 
information and materials. 
<H5>  Chapter 4 Supplementary Provisions </H5>
  Article 12. MOFERT should draw up an annual plan covering 
the revenue and expenditures of the Fund and final accounts, and 
submit them to the Ministry of Finance. Operational expenses 
for necessary activities, such as investigation, research, and 
printing of certificates, conducted by MOFERT should be covered 
by the service fees. 
  Article 13. These interim provisions shall go into effect on 
January 1, 1985. 
MOFERT Ministry of Finance October 24, 1984 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1655 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_n_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   Foreign Exchange System Change Said Sparking Controversy </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Foreign Exchange System Change Said Sparking Controversy </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0104111794 Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST (BUSINESS 
POST) in English 1 Apr 94 p 1 </F>

<F P=103> HK0104111794 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST (BUSINESS 
POST) </F>

<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Foo Choy Peng] </F>
  [Text] A bold move to unify China's antiquated foreign 
exchange system into a single national interbank network from 
today has sparked a controversy which threatens to escalate into 
a diplomatic issue. 
  Banking and diplomatic sources said yesterday foreign 
bankers 
were confused and angry about proposed changes. 
  Some bankers have turned to their embassies in Beijing to 
pressure Chinese authorities to clarify the changes, which they 
believe will put millions of dollars of capital at risk. 
  The changes establish a China Foreign Exchange Trading 
System 
based in Shanghai, ostensibly to replace existing foreign 
currency swap centres, but Beijing said this week foreign firms 
must continue to use the swap centres. 
  Foreign companies are upset that they are kept out of the 
interbank system while mainland competitors are allowed to 
participate in the new network. Swap centres provide an 
inefficient venue for foreign companies to offload yuan and buy 
hard currencies, which are usually in short supply. 
  Until the end of last year, when authorities scrapped the 
confusing dual currency system, China had three exchange rates 
-- the swap rate of about 8.7 yuan to the U.S. dollar, the 
official rate of about 5.7, and a fluctuating black market rate. 
  Since then, the exchange rate has been set by the country's 
18 swap centres. 
  From today the rate will be set by the Foreign Exchange 
Centre, an interbank system made up of 13 domestic banks, plus 
foreign banks and financial institutions. 
  Of China's 100 foreign banks and financial institutions, 
those wishing to join will have to deposit up to U.S.$850,000, 
with no interest return, for the dubious privilege of being 
allowed to sell, but not buy, foreign currencies, one banker 
said. 
  During meetings with China's central bank, the People's Bank 
of China (PBOC), foreign banks have received conflicting 
messages about membership in the exchange centre. 
  Banking sources said at first they were told there would be 
two kinds of foreign exchange banks: 13 domestic banks, which 
would be allowed to buy and sell specified foreign currencies, 
and foreign banks, which would be allowed to only sell the 
currencies. 
  Before they could join the new centre, foreign banks were 
told they would have to deposit $350,000 in yuan with no 
interest payable and with the consequent risk of losses from 
exchange rate fluctuations. 
  Then banks were told they would also have to transfer five 
percent of their capital -- for most foreign banks about 
$500,000 -- into a settlement account before they could join. 
The PBOC did not say whether interest would be paid on this 
deposit. 
  Foreign banks will be able to do business only on behalf of 
exporters and will have to work through approved Chinese banks 
to handle importers. 
  "This is banking regulation on the run and it is a 
disaster," 
said one Shanghai-based Western banker. 
  To add to the confusion, the CHINA DAILY reported that 
authorities were considering retaining the existing swap centres 
to serve foreign-funded ventures. 
  Another Beijing-based Western banker said he and his 
colleagues were totally confused and had sought clarification 
from the PBOC and had asked individual embassies to help. 
  Yang Gonglin, from the State Administration of Exchange 
Control, admitted that "some problems arose" but told the CHINA 
DAILY the Government would deal with them "in time". 
  One Western diplomat suggested that confusion over the 
banking changes, coupled with even greater confusion over 
proposed tax changes, could trigger a slowdown in foreign funds. 
  China last year attracted the equivalent of all investments 
for the past 10 years to reach $111 billion. 
  "There might not be a lot of business done here in the next 
few months until all of this is sorted out," the diplomat said. 
  Hong Kong and Taiwan investors already are holding back 
investments. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1656 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_n_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  24 Feb 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   CCTV Lecture on Characteristics of Value-Added Tax </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    CCTV Lecture on Characteristics of Value-Added Tax </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104060194 Beijing Central Television Program One Network 
in Mandarin 0535 GMT 24 Feb 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0104060194 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing Central Television Program One Network 
in Mandarin 0535 GMT 24 Feb 94 </F>

<F P=105> Mandarin </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Second of seven lectures cosponsored by the State Economic </F>
and Trade Commission and the State General Administration of 
Taxation entitled: "Answers to Questions on Enterprise 
Implementation of the New Tax System," moderated by Jiang 
Qiangui, director of the State Economic and Trade Commission's 
Enterprise Department; this one entitled: "Characteristics of 
Value-Added Tax (VAT), Part One" -- recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [Jiang] Viewers and comrades, we are 
presenting today the second lecture in the series "Answers to 
Questions on Enterprise Implementation of the New Tax System." 
Today, we would like to discuss VAT issues. VAT yields the 
largest tax revenue of all the taxes since we carried out reform 
of the enterprise tax system. It accounts for about 40 percent 
of total tax revenues from enterprises, or more than 60 percent 
of total tax revenue from all industrial and commercial 
undertakings. Enterprises, therefore, are very interested in 
any reform of this tax. Chen Jie, deputy director of the State 
General Administration of Taxation's Circulation Tax Department, 
will you please tell us the differences between the old and the 
new VAT? 
  [Chen] There are many differences between the old and the 
new VAT. The major ones are: First, the old VAT only applied 
to certain industrial end-products. We only levied product tax 
and VAT, with each accounting for about 50 percent of total 
industrial tax revenue. We did not previously charge VAT on 
wholesaling and retailing processes. They were only subject to 
business tax. Under the new VAT system, however, we have 
imposed VAT on all processes, including production, wholesaling, 
and retailing. This is the first variation. 
  Second, we have considerably reduced and thoroughly assessed 
tax rates. In the past we had more than 30 different rates for 
product tax and VAT. The figure was even higher if you include 
rates for wholesaling and retailing processes too. Under the 
new VAT system, we have only two rates, a basic rate of 17 
percent and a low rate of 13 percent. 
  Third, we have changed the taxable bases or foundations on 
which we levy taxes. Previously, we included taxes such as 
product tax, VAT, and business tax in the sale price. Under the 
new VAT system, we have listed taxes on all the processes, 
including production, wholesaling, and retailing, separately 
from the sale price. 
  Fourth, we have implemented a system of tax refunds 
according 
to invoices. In other words, when selling commodities, 
enterprises should issue to buyers a special VAT invoice, 
listing the sales price exclusive of tax, and VAT. When 
applying for tax refunds after making the purchase, buyers can 
only quote the tax payments listed on the invoices. Previously, 
we did not use invoices when handling VAT refunds: The value of 
a tax refund is equal to an enterprise's purchase price of 
commodities or procurement cost multiplied by the deductible tax 
rate. 
  Fifth, we have made remarkable improvements in tax reduction 
or exemption: 1. The number of items eligible for tax reduction 
or exemption has been greatly reduced. 2. Tax reduction or 
exemption for individual enterprises has been revoked. 
Previously, an enterprise with difficulties could apply for tax 
exemption, but that is forbidden under the new tax system. 
  Why have we instituted these five changes? The reasons are 
as follows: We want to fully incorporate the principle of 
equitable taxpaying. Under the old tax system, for instance, 
product tax was levied in accordance with sales revenues and 
[words indistinct]; it was charged in accordance with various 
sales prices at every stage without any deduction. Therefore, 
the more specialized an enterprise's processes were, the heavier 
tax burden it shouldered. The more generalized an enterprise's 
processes were, the lighter the tax burden. This was unfair. 
  Another seemingly unfair aspect was that among enterprises 
producing identical products, some had to pay tax in accordance 
with regulations, while others qualified for tax reduction or 
exemption. Such injustice was gravely detrimental to rational 
competition among enterprises. [passage omitted] 
  With a built-in mechanism to beat tax evasion, the new VAT 
system will greatly increase tax revenue and be easier to 
manage. The new tax system requires that, when making a sale, 
an enterprise must issue an invoice listing the tax paid. When 
applying for tax refunds after making the purchase, the buyer 
can only quote the tax payment listed on the invoice. If the 
vendor evades tax, he cannot list the tax payment on the 
invoice; consequently, the buyer will not be eligible for a tax 
refund. The buyer will, therefore, insist that the vendor issue 
him an invoice listing tax payment. [passage omitted] 
  [Jiang] If viewers, particularly those with enterprises, 
have questions after watching our program, please contact us 
promptly. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1657 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_n_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   State-Run Telecommunications Industry To Be Commercialized </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    State-Run Telecommunications Industry To Be Commercialized </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0104103494 Hong Kong EASTERN EXPRESS in English 1 Apr 94 p 
24 </F>

<F P=103> HK0104103494 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong EASTERN EXPRESS </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Lulu Yu in Beijing] </F>
  [Text] An official of the Ministry of Posts and 
Telecommunications yesterday revealed plans to commercialise 
China's state-run telecom industry, a move intended to boost 
efficiency and speed up telecom development. 
  An autonomous telecom authority would be spun off from the 
ministry this year, to be given charge of all telecom 
developments in the country and more power would be devolved to 
regional authorities, Li Zhigang, the section chief of the 
ministry's department of policy and regulation, said. 
  "We want to separate policy matters from commercial 
operations to make the sector more efficient. There will be 
more competition and greater liberalisation," Li said after 
giving a speech at a business conference sponsored by the 
Institute for International Research. 
  He said the establishment of China United Telecommunications 
Corporation (CUTC), a state company responsible for its own 
financing, was an example of increased competition in the 
sector. The Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications has had a 
monopoly over all domestic and international services. This 
would change after CUTC became operational. 
  Li confirmed CUTC was permitted to compete in almost all 
areas, including the construction of the country's second 
network, although the company was expected to initially 
concentrate on mobile phones and value-added services in coastal 
areas. 
  He said CUTC was likely to have registered share capital of 
600m renminbi (about HK$533m [Hong Kong dollars]), around 40 
percent of which could come from the Ministry of Electronic 
Industry, the Ministry of Electric Power and the Ministry of 
Railways. 
  Companies including China International Trust and Investment 
Corporation, China Huaneng and China Everbright are considering 
taking stakes. Li said CUTC would probably be established in 
May. 
  He said China's telecom law, in the making since the 1950s, 
was likely to be completed next year, giving a legal framework 
to all telecom developments. Li told the business conference at 
the Great Wall Sheraton Hotel that China's public telecom 
switchboard capacity increased by 10.8 million lines, or 58 
percent, to 29.36 million lines last year over 1992. 
  There were 5.86 million new telephone subscribers, a rise of 
51 percent, and 185,000 more long-distance circuits, up 79.5 
percent. "This means the year's overall telecom traffic had 
increased by 68.5 percent," Li said. 
  He said at the end of last year, the penetration rate of 
China's telephone lines was 1.46 percent, with the penetration 
rate of telephone sets at 2.15 percent. The number of mobile 
phone subscribers was 638,000 and pagers totalled 5.6 million, 
an increase of 2.5 times and 3.6 times respectively over 1992. 
  Li said it was hoped that by 2000, on average every 
household 
in China would have one telephone, and the number of mobile 
phone subscribers would reach 5 million. 
  The aim is for phone line penetration to reach 5.9 percent 
and phone set penetration 7.5 percent (with big and medium 
cities averaging 30-40 percent). 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1658 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_n_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  25 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   Public Ownership Affirmed as Mainstay </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Public Ownership Affirmed as Mainstay </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0104060094 Beijing RENMIN RIBAO in Chinese 25 Mar 94 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> HK0104060094 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing RENMIN RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Earnestly Study Volume 3 of the Selected </F>
Works of Deng Xiaoping column by Su Xing (5685 2502): 
"Upholding Public Ownership As the Mainstay Is the Basic 
Principle of Socialism"] 
  [Text] I. 
  In Volume 3 of the Selected Works of Deng 
Xiaoping, Comrade Deng Xiaoping pointed out: "Socialism 
has two very important aspects. First, it takes public 
ownership as the mainstay. Second, it does not pursue 
polarization." He said: "Our reform adheres to public 
ownership as the mainstay while seeing to it that it does not 
lead to polarization. This is to adhere to socialism." At the 
same time, he also said: "In reform, we adhere to two 
fundamental principles from beginning to end: One is that we 
take the socialist public-owned economy as the mainstay. The 
other is that we pursue common prosperity. The utilization of 
foreign capital in a planned way and the development of some 
individual economies are subjected to the general demand of the 
developing socialist economy. The fact that we encourage a 
number of places and a number of people to get rich first is 
also intended to enable more and more people to get rich and 
attain the goal of common prosperity." These remarks tell us 
very clearly that upholding socialism is to uphold the 
public-owned economy as the mainstay, pursue no polarization, 
and attain common prosperity. 
  Although Deng Xiaoping did not say that public 
ownership was the mainstay in his important remarks about the 
essence of socialism, which he made during his tour of southern 
China, in fact, they contain this fundamental principle. 
First, speaking on the essence of socialism, he said: "The 
essence of socialism is to liberate productive forces, develop 
productive forces, eliminate exploitation, eliminate 
polarization, and ultimately attain common prosperity." Here he 
really did not say that public ownership was the mainstay. But 
it is impossible to eliminate exploitation and eliminate 
polarization unless public ownership as the mainstay is taken as 
a precondition. Public ownership should be what was meant in 
the remarks. Second, speaking on the special economic zones, he 
said: "The special economic zones are socialist, not 
capitalist." Judging from the situation of Shenzhen, public 
ownership is the mainstay and foreign investment only accounts 
for one quarter. Moreover, we can profit from foreign investment 
in such areas as tax income and labor service!" The important 
proof he based his statement that the special economic zones are 
socialist, not capitalist, is that public ownership is the 
mainstay. 
  Public ownership as the mainstay is the economic 
foundation of socialism. There is no denying that public 
ownership also exists in other societies, but we must make a 
concrete analysis of public ownership as we do private ownership 
because there are different natures of private ownership, as 
well as different natures of public ownership. Karl Marx 
once criticized bourgeois economics for equating two totally 
different types of private ownership, saying: The first type is 
based on the producer's own labor, and the other is based on the 
exploitation of others' labor. The latter has grown out of the 
grave of the former. Public ownership can also be based on the 
laborer's own labor and on the exploitation of others' labor. 
The public ownership of capitalist countries can be public 
ownership as well, but it has not changed the capitalist nature 
and still belongs to the entire bourgeoisie class. The 
public ownership of socialist countries is based on the labor of 
the laborers themselves. Ownership by the whole people is that 
which belongs to the laboring people as a whole (since the state 
is the representative of the whole people, this type of 
ownership can be called state ownership), and collective 
ownership is that which belongs to some of the laboring masses. 
These two types of public ownership have eliminated the 
exploitation system. Therefore, by saying that pubic ownership 
is the mainstay, we not only refer to ownership by the whole 
people, but also collective ownership. 
  Taking public ownership as the mainstay is different 
from the unitary public ownership pursued in the past. 
Practice proves that, at least at the initial stage of 
socialism, pursuing the unitary system of public ownership will 
hinder the development of productive forces. Our present 
principle is that we take public ownership as the mainstay, 
while simultaneously developing a diversity of economic sectors. 
At the same time, we are also opposed to privatization. 
In the experience since China's reform, small state-owned 
enterprises can be sold to private owners and shareholding 
state-owned enterprises can have their shares sold to 
individuals, but the privatization of all or most state-owned 
assets is out of the question. Today, there is a wave of 
privatization across the world. In this wave, there are two 
different natures of privatization. In capitalist countries, 
both private ownership and state ownership are capitalist 
private ownership forms, so privatization will not shake 
capitalism to its foundation, but rather, it may possibly 
consolidate this foundation. This is not true of socialist 
countries, where privatization is in fact the exploitation of 
all the property owned by the laboring people, and will surely 
shake and disintegrate the socialist economic foundation. 
Therefore, in upholding socialism, we must uphold public 
ownership as the mainstay. 
<H5>  II. </H5>
  Public ownership comprises ownership by the whole people and 
collective ownership. 
  Large and medium-sized state enterprises, which are owned 
by the whole people, are the pillar of the national economy and 
take a leading role in economic development. 
  At present, large and medium-sized state enterprises are 
encountering many difficulties in production and management, 
such as decreasing profit margins, the slow turnover of 
circulating funds, escalating costs, the persistently large 
losses....There is no consensus about how these difficulties are 
caused. Some say they are caused by the economic structure. 
Others say they are caused by the system of ownership. I am 
more inclined to agree with the former argument. 
  No one denies that at one time, large and medium-sized state 
enterprises played a great role in the process of China's 
socialist construction and had glorious years. But since reform 
and opening up, faced with a new situation in which a diversity 
of economic sectors coexist and market competition arises, they 
have appeared to be rigid and to be lacking in vitality. What 
is the problem? In my opinion, the management mechanism that 
originally suited the planned economic structure no longer suits 
the market economic environment. For a while, many enterprises 
find it very difficult to produce in keeping with market needs, 
as they are used to producing in keeping with plans. In the 
process of the changeover from the old structure to a new one, 
state-owned enterprises lag behind in changing their management 
mechanisms and encounter many new difficulties. For example, 
given the coexistence of planned prices and market prices, some 
products are produced by state-owned enterprises in keeping with 
mandatory plans and are sold at planned prices, while energy 
resources and raw and processed materials are fixed at market 
prices. Some raw and processed materials are sold at planned 
prices and their product prices are, in fact, regulated by the 
market. In this way, enterprises are bound to suffer losses 
whether these materials are "bought at high prices and sold at 
medium prices" or whether they are "bought at medium prices and 
sold at low prices." This difficulty is not present in other 
economic sectors, however. 
  The main weakness in the planned economic structure is that 
planning has control over enterprises. This produces two 
consequences: First, enterprises are rigidly controlled. 
Second, a huge economic management machinery is formed. There 
are 70 to 80, or even 100 organizations in charge of projects, 
finance, and materials in each of our provinces. While such 
organizations exist in higher-level authorities, they also exist 
in lower-level ones as a must. The key to changing the 
management mechanism of state-owned enterprises is to change 
government functions, separate government and enterprise 
functions, and ensure that enterprises have their own 
decisionmaking power. But is it easy to ensure that enterprises 
have their own decisionmaking power? Since the Third Plenary 
Session of the 11th CPC Central Committee, China's urban reform 
has begun with the expansion of the decisionmaking power of 
state-owned enterprises. By having enterprises assume complete 
responsibility for profits, replacing profit taking by taxes, 
using contracted responsibilities systems, and experimenting 
with the shareholding system, the decisionmaking power of 
enterprises has expanded to varying degrees. In this way, many 
enterprises in the coastal areas have been revitalized and a 
number of revitalized large and medium- sized enterprises have 
also appeared in the hinterland. Approximately one third of 
China's enterprises have comparatively good performance. But 
the management mechanism of most state-owned enterprises has not 
really been changed. There are many reasons it has not been 
changed. The main reason is that the change of government 
functions has proceeded slowly, government and enterprise 
functions are not separated, and interference in enterprises is 
too great. In the circumstances, it is very difficult to ensure 
that enterprises have their own decisionmaking power. A 
comprehensive analysis of 16 key enterprises in 11 provinces and 
municipalities made by relevant quarters in the first six months 
of 1993 shows that, of the 14 powers provided for in the 
"Regulations on Changing the Management Mechanism of Industrial 
Enterprises Owned by the Whole People," only five are basically 
ensured, namely, making decisions about management, purchasing 
materials and supplies, selling products, distributing wages and 
bonuses, and amalgamations and mergers. Six others are 
partially ensured, and the remaining three are not ensured at 
all. Therefore, in order to revitalize large and medium-sized 
state-owned enterprises, it is first necessary to change 
government functions so that enterprises can operate 
independently. The 14th CPC National Congress report points 
out: "This is a big question regarding the superstructure 
suiting the economic foundation and promoting economic 
development. If no substantive progress is made in this 
respect, it is difficult for reform to deepen and it is 
difficult to establish the socialist market economic structure." 
  For a long time, the profits and taxes turned over by 
state-owned enterprises have been the main source of the state's 
revenue (in 1991, the taxes and profits turned over by 
state-owned enterprises within the budget accounted for 65 
percent of the domestic revenue in the same period). Under the 
planned economic structure, there was no big problem with the 
unitary system of public ownership and with unified state 
control over the revenues and expenditures of enterprises. 
Since reform, the problem has become salient now that 
enterprises have to operate independently, assume sole 
responsibility for profits and losses, accumulate their own 
profits, and expand on their own. Accumulation and expansion on 
their own is intended to make enterprises the mainstay of 
investment so they are able to carry out reproduction on an 
extended scale. But before tax reform, the tax rate for 
state-owned enterprises was higher than that for other economic 
sectors. For a period of time, they even had to turn over the 
"two types of funds [liang jin 0357 6855]" with the result that 
profits they could retain gradually decrease. In 1990, the 
actual profits retained by state-owned enterprises across the 
country within the budget only accounted for 8.9 percent of the 
profits they made. With such little funds, reproduction on an 
extended scale was totally out of the question. Moreover, with 
the low depreciation rate of fixed assets and the rising prices 
of procuring new ones, some enterprises found it difficult even 
to maintain simple reproduction. 
  With their equipment seriously outdated and without the 
money to acquire new technology, how can these enterprises be 
competitive? 
  Furthermore, the old distribution structure has created a 
heavy social burden on state-owned enterprises. In market 
competition, non-state enterprises can easily compete while 
state-owned enterprises enter the market with a burden and 
cannot develop smoothly. 
  Of course, the backward management of state-owned 
enterprises 
is another important reason that causes difficulties. 
  In short, the reasons causing difficulties for 
state-owned enterprises are very complex. Some inevitably occur 
in the process of changing the economic structure. Some have 
been left over from the old structure and have not been resolved 
quickly. Some are caused by the failure of specific measures in 
the course of reform. Others are related to the quality of 
enterprises themselves and should not be simply summed up as 
ownership problems. Moreover, is it not true that many 
other state-owned enterprises obtain very good returns and are 
competitive? 
  At present, the external environment for state-owned 
enterprises is improving. The "Enterprise Law" and the 
"Regulations" are being implemented, the income tax rate has 
lowered, and the "two types of funds" have been canceled. We 
should, in keeping with the direction affirmed at the Third 
Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, continue to 
change the management mechanism of state- owned enterprises and 
gradually establish a modern enterprise system which meets the 
requirements of the market economy, which clearly defines 
property rights, whose rights and responsibilities are clear, 
which separates the functions of the government from those of 
the enterprise, and which is scientific in management. This is 
the only right path. 
<H5>  III. </H5>
  When establishing a modern enterprise system, we must 
clearly 
define the property rights relationship. The CPC Central 
Committee's "Decision on Issues Concerning the Establishment of 
a Socialist Market Economic Structure" points out: The 
ownership of state-owned assets in the enterprises belongs to 
the state; the enterprises, as legal entities, possess all 
rights over the asset formulated by investments from various 
sources including the state, and become legal entities that 
enjoy rights and shoulder responsibilities under civil law. 
Simply speaking, the state is the owner of state-owned assets 
and has ownership over them, and enterprises, as legal entities, 
have rights over assets. This both guarantees that state-owned 
assets are owned by the whole people and clearly defines the 
rights of enterprises over assets as legal entities. The 
realization of state ownership in the economic field is that 
enterprises have to turn over profits and shareholding 
enterprises have to turn over dividends and bonus dividends. As 
for enterprise management, shareholding enterprises can select 
and appoint directors and solely funded enterprises can choose, 
hire, and appoint managers. The right to use and manage 
state-owned assets belongs to enterprises. Enterprises have 
independent controlling right over the assets of legal entities, 
namely, they can renew, amalgamate, sell, or transfer them on 
the precondition of maintaining and increasing their value. 
  The major form of a modern enterprise system is the 
shareholding system or the corporate system. By pursuing the 
shareholding system, state-owned enterprises will not have its 
public ownership nature changed. As an enterprise 
organizational pattern, the shareholding system can accept 
different types of ownership, and by holding shares, enterprises 
can maintain public ownership as the mainstay. According to a 
survey of listed companies in Shenzhen, Hainan, Shanghai, and 
Sichuan conducted by the State Commission for Economic 
Restructuring and other units in 1993, through straightening out 
the property rights relationships, these companies got out of 
the burdens of their traditional subordination to the 
government, achieved the separation of government and enterprise 
functions, and were able to operate independently. This is 
mainly reflected by the fact that they have straightened out the 
interest relationships with the government and changed from 
being responsible to their supervisory organs to being 
responsible to all shareholders. They now turn over taxes to 
the state and profits to their owners, thus achieving the 
separation of profits and taxes, and enterprises have complete 
right over the use of assets. The previous practice that 
enterprise leaders were appointed by the government has now been 
changed to appointment by the board of directors. Regarding an 
enterprise's investment and project development, the board of 
directors put forward investment proposals to the general 
meeting of shareholders for it to make decisions, so the 
enterprise has both the decisionmaking power and the money at 
its disposal. Managers of the listed companies maintained that, 
of the 14 powers to be delegated to enterprises as provided for 
in the "Regulations," all powers have been obtained by these 
enterprises except for the power to refuse exaction of fees. 
The majority of these companies, of course, have not succeeded 
in obtaining these powers, however. Some of these enterprises 
are unclear about the objective of adopting the corporate 
system, which is to change their management mechanism, and often 
are enthusiastic about having their shares traded on the market, 
pooling funds, setting up new businesses, and even setting up 
"renamed companies," taking to the beaten track with new shoes. 
Therefore, we must not agree that changing the name of a 
company is the same as making it a modern enterprise. 
  After state-owned enterprises have practiced the 
shareholding system, there can be state shares and personal 
shares. That is, some are owned by individuals and others are 
owned by the state, but this is not to reinstate individual 
ownership. The individual ownership Karl Marx talked about in 
chapter 24, volume 1 of Das Kapital refers to 
the fact that consumer goods are owned by individuals on the 
foundation of the public ownership of the means of production, 
and does not refer to the means of production. Engels, in 
Anti-Duhring, clarified this question when he 
criticized Duhring for imposing a future society on Marx, which 
is a nebulous world owned both by individuals and by the public. 
  Engels said it was not Marx, but Duhring who was in this 
nebulous world. He clearly pointed out: "The state of things 
brought about by the expropriation of the expropriators is 
therefore characterized as the reestablishment of individual 
property, but on the basis of the social ownership of the land 
and of the means of production produced by labor itself. To 
anyone who understands plain language, this means that social 
ownership extends to land and the other means of production and 
individual ownership to the products, that is, to articles of 
consumption." I think this is an important principle of 
Marxism. In a socialist society, or even a future communist 
society, the means of production are owned by the public, but 
individual consumer goods are owned by individuals. Many 
utopian socialists argue that, in a socialist society or a 
future society, the means of production are owned by the public, 
and so are the means of consumption. This view has also 
influenced some Marxists. In the process of agricultural 
collectivization in the Soviet Union, it happened that not only 
were the means of production publicly owned, but they also were 
consumer goods. In 1958, when the "wind of communism" 
prevailed, we also wanted to make consumer goods publicly owned. 
All this conflicted with Marxist principles. Engels also made a 
statement about Marx's use of negation as a negation. He said: 
"Marx shows in a simple historical way that, just as formerly 
petty industry, by its very development, necessarily created the 
conditions for its own annihilation, so now the capitalist mode 
of production has itself created the material conditions which 
will necessarily make it perish. The process is a historical 
one, and if it is at the same time a dialectical one, it is 
negation of the negation." He did not view the reinstating of 
individual ownership as the negation of the negation. 
  Marx was still alive when Engels wrote the 
Anti-Duhring. Chapter 10 on the history of political 
economy in its second part was written by Marx. Therefore, we 
can maintain that Engels' explanation reflects Marx's viewpoints. 
  Finally, we should point out that public ownership is the 
direction for the reform of the state-owned enterprise system. 
But it is impossible to change all of China's state-owned 
enterprises into shareholding companies. Only some of the 
enterprises of capitalist countries use the shareholding system, 
while the remainder are solely funded or in partnership. Of 
state-owned enterprises, large and medium-sized enterprises are 
suited for the shareholding system and should be gradually built 
into corporations according to law. Medium and small 
enterprises can be leased out, have its management contracted 
on, and changed into the cooperative shares system, or sold to 
private owners. This will not change the principle of taking 
public ownership as the mainstay. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1659 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_n_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  21 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   Official Interviewed on Gold Industry </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Official Interviewed on Gold Industry </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0104095694 Hong Kong CHING CHI TAO PAO in Chinese No 11, 
21 Mar 94 pp 24-25 </F>

<F P=103> HK0104095694 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong CHING CHI TAO PAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Ai Dacheng, deputy director of the </F>
Gold Bureau of the Ministry of Metallurgical Industry, by Wu 
Chen (2477 1057); place and date not given: "Mainland Gold 
Industry Moving Gradually Toward the Market"] 
  [Text] As the mainland moves toward the market economy, 
signs of relaxation of the decades-old monopoly on the gold 
industry have emerged. During a special interview with this 
reporter a few days ago, Ai Dacheng, deputy director of the Gold 
Bureau of the Ministry of Metallurgical Industry on the 
mainland, expressed: The move to readjust gold prices on the 
mainland in September 1993 can be regarded as the beginning of 
the turn to the market economy for the gold industry and the 
establishment of a gold exchange market, for which preparation 
work is in full swing, will mark a crucial step toward the 
market. Although the state-monopolized gold purchase and 
management system will be maintained for some time to come, and 
the chaos in the gold industry since last year has been dealt 
with, the direction of the development of the gold industry will 
eventually be opening wider and moving toward the market. 
<H5>  Making the First Step in the Transition to the Market Economy </H5>
  Ai Dacheng pointed out: At present, no fundamental change 
has taken place in the gold management system instituted on the 
mainland. This is expressed in the fact that the gold industry 
is still being operated along the orbit of the planned economy, 
gold enterprises are carrying out production in accordance with 
mandatory plans, and the purchase, allocation, and marketing of 
gold products are monopolized by the People's Bank of China. 
Gold in the form of mineral products (including gold ingots, 
gold nuggets, and gold bullion) are still mainly used for state 
reserves, and have not really entered the market as commodities. 
No standard gold exchange market has yet been set up in China, 
and gold still cannot be traded freely. Because of this, Ai 
Dacheng said: Since the direction of developing the socialist 
market economy was fixed at the 14th CPC National Congress, 
fundamental changes have taken place in the macroeconomic 
environment on the mainland. If the gold industry continues to 
stick to the tradition of the planned economy, it will have 
difficulty in its development. Therefore, the only way out for 
the gold industry, and even the gold trade, is to carry out 
reform to bring about a transition to the market economy. 
  Ai Dacheng held that the move to put gold prices in order 
and 
to readjust the price mechanism this year is a reform carried 
out with great effort by the gold trade in recent years. It is 
totally different from remedial methods used in the old system 
in the past and is the first step taken in the transition to the 
market economy. 
  The mainland has all along pursued the policy of letting the 
People's Bank of China, together with other departments, fix 
gold prices on behalf of the state. The gold prices had been 
distorted over a long period, and when gold prices were at their 
lowest, the domestic purchase price of gold was less than half 
of the international prices, but the prices of gold ornaments 
were higher than international gold prices. Since the reform 
began on 1 September 1993, the purchase prices of gold have 
become floating prices determined by the international market 
instead of fixed prices determined by the state. The purchase 
price of gold is fixed at a level 10 percent less than that on 
the international market, and the prices for allocating and 
marketing are maintained at the same level as those of the 
international market. At the same time, existing subsidies 
related to policies, low-interest loans, and preferential 
policies of tax exemption have been abolished. 
<H5>  Focus of Reform of the Gold Trade This Year </H5>
  According to Ai Dacheng's personal view, the focus of reform 
of the gold trade on the mainland this year is to speed up the 
establishment of a domestic gold exchange market. The state's 
approval of letting gold in the form of mineral products enter 
the market for business as commodities will mean a fundamental 
change in the gold management structure. At present, the State 
Council has instructed the State Economic and Trade Commission 
to give macro guidance, the People's Bank of China to take the 
lead, and the State Administration of Gold Control and other 
departments concerned to assist in the work of investigation, 
studies, the design of plans, and the formulation of plans in 
the establishment of the gold exchange market. 
  It is held that, because of limitations in the management 
level and the means of regulation and control on the mainland at 
present and the reality of imbalance in the purchase and 
marketing of gold, if restrictions on the gold market are 
completely removed, the price of gold may rise as a result of 
supply falling short of demand. Therefore, even if a primary 
gold exchange market is established on the mainland in the near 
future, it will still be put under control as in other 
developing countries. At present, there are three kinds of 
situations in open gold markets in the world: One is free 
buying and selling of gold without any restriction; another is 
free buying, selling, import, and export of gold by legal 
persons, but not by private individuals; the third is free 
buying and selling of gold inside the country, but the import 
and export of gold are restricted. This last form will most 
likely be adopted for the gold market on the mainland in the 
future. 
  Ai Dacheng held that in the early stage of the establishment 
of the gold exchange market on the mainland, the state possibly 
will follow the mode of foreign exchange management, set up a 
standard market in Beijing or in a big city along the coast, and 
carry out unified management. Gold business will have to be 
carried out within the market. Details on the scope of 
management and whether or not individuals are allowed to do 
business in the market remain to be studied. Ai Dacheng also 
said: At present, the demand for setting up a gold exchange 
market of various localities is very strong, and more than 10 
provinces and municipalities have already submitted their 
investigation and study reports asking to be selected as the 
venue for a gold exchange market at the national level or as the 
first provincial gold exchange market. However, the attitude of 
the State Council is to let the state make overall arrangements 
for the establishment of a gold market, and it does not approve 
of carrying out experiments at selected points in various 
provinces for the time being. 
<H5>  Speeding Up the Process of the Establishment of the Gold </H5>
Exchange Market 
  Ai Dacheng stressed: The establishment of the gold exchange 
market is a matter of complicated systems engineering, and a 
great deal of work remains to be done, such as, passage of 
relevant laws, regulations, and rules; training of specialized 
personnel; acquisition of necessary hardware facilities, and so 
on. Therefore, it is very difficult to work out a timetable, 
and it is not yet clear whether or not such a market can be 
established in 1994. The only thing definite is that work in 
this respect will certainly be accelerated in 1994. 
  Ai Dacheng said that the gold trading policy on the mainland 
at the present stage is, on the one hand, to energetically open 
wider to the outside world, and, on the other hand, to 
strengthen management and establish a good environment and order 
for development. 
  It is learned that over a long period, an enormous 
underground invisible gold exchange market has been formed on 
the mainland. In the second half of 1993, because the economic 
order on the mainland was out of control in some way, a few 
localities spontaneously began to establish their own local gold 
markets which were run by the people. To a great extent, 
underground exchanges became half-open exchanges. More 
localities were making preparation for setting up gold markets. 
This resulted in the running away from management of the gold 
market by the authorities and the reduction in the procurement 
of gold. Therefore, Ai Dacheng said that departments concerned 
stressed again a few says ago that the state-monopolized gold 
purchase and management system will continue to be upheld, and 
they have decided to carry out an overall check-up of the 
existing local gold exchange markets; to ban gold exchange 
markets spontaneously set up, including gold markets which are 
being built; to prohibit gold processing enterprises from 
directly purchasing gold from gold mines; and to make it a rule 
that all gold in the form of mineral products should be sold to 
the People's Bank of China. At present, the governments of all 
provinces, municipalities, and autonomous regions, together with 
departments concerned, are taking joint actions to change as 
quickly as possible the present chaotic situation in management 
of gold products. 
  Besides, the State Council reaffirmed not long ago 
regulations on forbidding private gold mining. According to 
what Ai Dacheng said, before the price readjustment in 
September, local illegal gold exchange markets set up 
spontaneously purchased gold at prices much higher than those 
fixed by the state. Stimulated by high profits, gold mining by 
individuals revived. In remote mountain and border areas of 
Henan, Shaanxi, Xinjiang, Gansu, Qinghai, and other provinces 
and regions, gold mining by individuals is especially rampant. 
At the high tide, the number of individual gold miners reached 
as many as 300,000. 
  Ai Dacheng pointed out that individual mining does various 
kinds of serious harm: First is damage to resources. Gold is a 
valuable resource which is nonrenewable. Individual gold miners 
violate scientific laws and sequence in mining. They operate 
gold mines in a plundering manner, working at mines with rich 
ore and abandoning those with poor ore. As a result, it is 
difficult to recover and utilize mines, causing great waste of 
resources. Second is pollution of the environment. Individual 
gold miners lack funds and equipment. Extremely toxic chemicals 
such as cyanide and mercury are used in ore dressing and 
smelting, and inappropriate handling often causes serious 
pollution. Third is the emergence of hidden dangers in 
production. Many individual gold miners illegally carry out 
mining in places close to state-owned gold mines and damage the 
geological structure. This gives rise to accidents in 
production. Fourth is numerous public security problems caused 
by individual mining. Large numbers of individual miners gather 
in border and remote areas where management is relatively weak. 
They often fight with weapons in contending for claims. A few 
lawless miners even kill others to seize their gold. They give 
rise to many social problems. Fifth is that gold mined by 
individuals is usually not sold to the state. It is stored up 
by individuals or turned into ornaments. Much of the gold is 
traded on the black market or even smuggled abroad. This causes 
great loss of state resources and hard currency. 
<H5>  Methods for the Management of Mining Gold in Cooperation </H5>
With Foreign Countries 
  While strengthening the management of the gold trade on the 
mainland, attempts to open the trade to the outside world has 
started. Ai Dacheng said: The mainland will cooperate with 
foreign businessmen in exploiting gold resources within a 
limited scope. At present, foreign businessmen who intend to 
cooperate with the mainland are provided with data concerning 
gold resources in Lannigou of Guizhou, Jinya of Guangxi, and 
Donggualin of Yunnan. Many foreign businessmen have carried out 
on-the-spot studies and negotiations for cooperation. 
  Ai Dacheng disclosed: The State Administration of Gold 
Control drafted procedures for the management of mining gold in 
cooperation with foreign countries a few days ago, and the 
procedures have been sent to departments concerned to solicit 
their views. These procedures are expected to be published in 
the first quarter of 1994. He also talked about several general 
principles included in the "management procedures," which are 
being discussed: 
  First is determining the scope of cooperation and 
development. Gold mines which have been preliminarily considered 
to be of low grade, to contain arsenic, carbon, and other 
materials, or to have difficulties in ore-dressing and smelting, 
and those which are considered to have difficulties in mining, 
ore-dressing, and smelting given the existing technology of the 
mainland, but which have good prospects for exploitation can be 
approved for carrying out experiments on mining in cooperation 
with foreign businessmen. 
  Second is determining requirements for selecting points for 
experiments and procedures for approving development projects. 
General speaking, mines with sufficient domestic prospecting 
data and relatively favorable external construction conditions 
can be selected for experiments in cooperation with foreign 
countries in mining gold. The procedures for approving 
cooperative projects should be like this: Gold management 
departments of various provinces should first put forward a 
report of intent on a cooperative project. After this report is 
examined by the Ministry of Metallurgical Industry, it is to be 
submitted to the State Planning Commission and the State 
Economic and Trade Commission for examination and approval 
before negotiations are held. 
  Third is determining the principles for carrying out 
experiments on cooperation in gold mining at selected points and 
ways of introducing foreign capital. A preliminary view under 
consideration is that the Chinese side may use as capital for 
cooperation mineral resources, land, water and electricity 
supply facilities, mining equipment, and so on, and the foreign 
side may use funds, technology, and equipment as their shares of 
investment. Specific percentage can be fixed through 
negotiations between the two sides. However, profits in the form 
of foreign exchange should be shared between the two sides, gold 
products should still be sold to the People's Bank of China, and 
foreign businessmen participating in mining gold should not be 
allowed to take the gold abroad. The duration of cooperation 
shall be determined by the characteristics and years of service 
of the mines. When the period of cooperation expires, all the 
assets of the mine should go to the Chinese side. 
  Ai Dacheng stated that the above principles are only a 
preliminary framework of ways to manage gold mining and of 
opening up gold mines to the outside world. Revision by 
departments concerned and approval by the State Council are 
needed before final regulations can be promulgated. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1660 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_n_94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  22 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   PRC Trade Union Role in Market Economy Viewed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    PRC Trade Union Role in Market Economy Viewed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0104103694 Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 0516 GMT 
22 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK0104103694 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Two Sessions" column by staff reporter Zhang Mingxin (1728 </F>
2494 2450)] 
  [Text] Beijing, 22 March (ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE)--With the 
emergence of the labor market and the upgrading of the 
enterprise system, trade unions in China will surely play a 
bigger role in the market economy. 
  All trade unionists attending the "two sessions" were aware 
of their own new role: Being the "mouthpiece" of the interests 
of staff members and workers. They presented their views 
vehemently on numerous issues ranging from staff and worker 
ability to withstand the strains that should be given 
consideration in the course of reform, the status of workers and 
trade unions after the introduction of "a company system" to 
state-owned enterprises, protection of the legitimate rights and 
interests of Chinese personnel of foreign-funded enterprises, 
and perfection of a social security mechanism. Under the 
planned economy characterized by single ownership, the main role 
of trade unions was to care for staff and worker well-being and 
to ensure production. Thus the work of the then trade unions 
was figuratively summarized into "issuing film tickets, managing 
meal coupons, and collecting bathing tickets." 
  China's trade unions are now becoming "antishock valves" 
enabling reform to progress in a stable society. At present the 
problem of Chinese enterprises suffering losses in operation, 
and suspending or partially suspending production remains 
pronounced. In many localities, prices have gone up quite 
rapidly, making life difficult for some staff members and 
workers. Many deputies to the National People's Congress and 
members of the National Committee of the Chinese People's 
Political Consultative Conference who were trade union members 
appealed to the government to give full consideration to the 
economic and mental ability of the general public to withstand 
the resulting strains of the various major reform measures to be 
taken. Meanwhile, they also briefed the sessions on moves taken 
by the trade unions in various localities to alleviate 
contradictions and reduce friction. Sun Hongrong, president of 
the China Textile Trade Union, said: As Shanghai's textile 
industry was confronted with structural readjustment, staff and 
workers would have to leave their current posts and seek new 
jobs. The trade union of the municipality's textile departments 
sponsored all types of training courses to pass on job-seeking 
knowledge free of charge to staff members and workers who had 
quit their current posts, and ran job introduction centers and 
undertakings in the tertiary industry to find jobs for them. Li 
Guozhong, president of the Liaoning Provincial Federation of 
Trade Unions, remarked: Liaoning is a heavy industrial base. 
In recent years, some enterprises have been in depression. 
Trade unions kept files of staff members and workers who had 
exceptionally great financial difficulties and reported their 
situations to the government so they could receive relief funds. 
Trade unions also organized retired staff and workers of 
state-owned enterprises to do part-time jobs in township and 
town enterprises. This enabled them both to bring their 
remaining energies into play and to increase their incomes. 
  Whether the status of staff members and workers drops after 
state-owned enterprises establish a modern enterprise systems is 
also a hot point with which trade unionists are very much 
concerned. In the past, a state-owned enterprise had an 
enterprise management committee, a congress of representatives 
of staff members and workers, and an administrative affairs 
office, dubbed "three old bodies," and its staff and workers had 
a great say in enterprise policy making. Once enterprise 
structural reform is introduced, an enterprise has a congress of 
shareholders, a board of directors, and a supervisory organ, 
dubbed "three new bodies." In some newly established 
shareholding enterprises, the "three old bodies" have come to a 
standstill. Fang Jiade, vice president of the All-China 
Federation of Trade Unions, informed this reporter: Currently, 
in giving publicity to enterprise reform, undue emphasis is laid 
on property rights relationship to the neglect of labor 
relationship and on funds and equipment to the neglect of the 
role of laborers in pushing productive forces forward. 
  As China further opens up to the outside world and the 
number of foreign-funded enterprises expands, labor-capital 
disputes are also increasing in number. The question of 
infringement of the rights and interests of Chinese personnel 
has attracted the attention of trade unionists. Jiang Rong, 
former president of the Shanghai Municipal Federation of Trade 
Unions, provided this reporter with material like this: A 
foreign-funded restaurant in Shanghai gave half an hour for job 
aplicants to read the Chinese- version contracts and then asked 
them to sign English-version contracts. During the probation 
period, when the employees who could not bear the illegal 
actions of searching their bodies and bags asked to renounce 
their contracts with their 340 yuan in cash pledge lost in 
accordance with the Chinese-version contracts, the enterprise 
showed them the English-version contracts, which stipulated that 
if the employees wanted to renounce contracts, apart from 
returning their cash pledge, they should pay 5,000 yuan in 
compensation fees. Hence, there was an outcry among the 
employees. On the issue, he said: In foreign-funded 
enterprises, it is imperative for trade unions to hold 
collective talks with enterprises on the employees' behalf on 
such issues as wages, working hours, labor protection, and 
safety in production, and to sign common collective contracts. 
The pressing matter of the moment is to speed up establishment 
of trade unions in foreign-funded enterprises. According to 
statistics, of the foreign-funded enterprises which have already 
started operation, less than a half have set up trade unions. 
  Trade unionists also confessed: To safeguard the interests 
of staff members and workers once and for all, it is necessary 
to perfect the social security system and solve for members of 
society the difficulties caused by old age, diseases, injury and 
disability, unemployment, and poverty. At present, it is 
necessary to enact "labor," "social security," "labor 
protection," "minimum wage," and "labor contract" laws as 
quickly as possible. Trade unions should be invited to 
participate in the whole process of drafting laws which have a 
bearing on staff member and worker immediate interests. Just as 
a labor expert said: Internationally, no country in the world 
can effect an economic takeoff when labor-capital relations are 
strained and society is turbulent. In countries with a 
developed market economy, a "three-party" principle has been 
developed, under which labor relations are handled by the 
government, enterprises, and trade unions through consultations. 
China joined the "Treaty on Promotion of the Implementation of 
International Labor Standards Through Three-Party Consultations" 
four years ago. This clearly shows China's positive attitude 
toward the issue. With the improvement of the socialist market 
economic structure, the "three-party" principle will be 
gradually established in China and the status or role of trade 
unions will become increasingly important. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1661 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_o_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  27 Feb 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> East Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Anhui Congress Standing Committee Session Ends </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Anhui Congress Standing Committee Session Ends </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW3003143094 Hefei Anhui People's Radio Network in Mandarin 
1100 GMT 27 Feb 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW3003143094 </F>
<F P=104>  Hefei Anhui People's Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Mandarin </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Provincial Hookup" program] </F>
  [Text] The Eighth Standing Committee Session of the 
Eighth Anhui Provincial People's Congress concluded in Hefei 
this afternoon. 
  The session adopted a resolution on convening the Second 
Session of the Eighth Anhui Provincial People's Congress, 
"Regulations of Anhui Province for Handling Land Ownership 
Disputes," "Regulations of Anhui Province on Protection of 
Minors" and approved personnel appointments and removals. 
  Meng Fulin, chairman of the Provincial People's Congress 
Standing Committee, spoke at the concluding session. He said: 
The year 1994 is a year for deepening reform, promoting 
development, and advancing the socialist market economy, 
socialist democracy, and socialist spiritual civilization in an 
all-around way. The new situation and new tasks set forth new 
demands on the people's congress. For this reason, the standing 
committees of people's congresses at all levels must devote more 
efforts to studies. They should conscientiously study Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics, the decision adopted by the Third Plenary 
Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, new reform measures 
announced by the Central Government, knowledge about market 
economics, the Constitution, laws, and regulations so that they 
will have a better understanding of the basic policy of the 
Central Committee and the overall task of the whole party and 
whole nation for this year, a better understanding of the 
relations between reform and opening to the outside world, and 
economic development and social stability -- the three promote 
one another and form a single entity. Efforts should be made to 
promote socialist democracy, speed up the drafting of economic 
laws, conduct publicity and education on the laws and 
regulations with redoubled efforts, step up supervision over law 
enforcement, and use laws to guide, advance, and guarantee the 
smooth progress of reform and construction. We must support 
and take an active part in reform and construction. The 
people's congress must make economic construction the focus of 
its work and subordinate itself and serve the overall task of 
the whole party and the whole nation so as to advance the great 
cause of socialism with Chinese characteristics. 
  The session was presided over by Shao Ming, vice chairman of 
the provincial people's congress Standing Committee. Present at 
the meeting were Vice Chairmen Liu Guangcai, Lu Shengdao, Wu 
Changqi, Lu Zixiu, Jiang Zehui, Chen Jiyu and Secretary General 
Lu Desheng. Present as observers were Deputy Governor Yang 
Duoliang; Han Yunping, president of the provincial Higher 
People's Court; Liu Sheng, chief procurator of the Provincial 
People's Procuratorate; chairmen of some city and county 
people's congresses standing committees, and officials of the 
People's congress's liaison committees in the prefectures. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1662 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_o_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  8 Mar 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> East Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Anhui Leads Nation in 36 Confirmed Mineral Deposits </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Anhui Leads Nation in 36 Confirmed Mineral Deposits </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW3103142994 Hefei ANHUI RIBAO in Chinese 8 Mar 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> OW3103142994 </F>
<F P=104>  Hefei ANHUI RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Xu Donqin (6079 2639 0530): "Providing Sufficient </F>
`Grain' for Industrial Development, Anhui Leads Other Provinces 
in Confirmed Mineral Resources"] 
  [Text] After years of arduous struggle, geological workers 
have discovered over 90 various categories of minerals -- of 
which 64 have their deposit volumes ascertained -- in more than 
1,900 areas in Anhui, of which over 540 are found to be workable 
and usable. Anhui is leading other provinces in deposit volume 
of 36 minerals, including coal, iron, copper, sulfur, alum 
stone, cement limestone, and bentonite with a potential value of 
700 billion yuan, winning Anhui not only a spot as a leading 
province in mineral deposits but also an economic superiority . 
  The outcome of a recent evaluation on the extent of 
guarantee 
that Anhui's 37 major mineral resources can provide to the 
national economic construction in the year 2010 showed that the 
province's 146 confirmed coal bases -- mainly scattered in areas 
between Huainan city and Huaibei city -- with a deposit volume 
of nearly 25 billion tonnes rank seventh in the nation and tops 
other provinces in Eastern China. The close to 3-billion-tonnes 
confirmed iron deposits in 92 explored iron-producing areas 
representing 40 percent of the eastern China region's total, 
ranking first in the region and fifth nationwide. These iron 
deposits are mainly dispersed in the Maanshan, Lujiang, and 
Huoqiu areas, of which deposits in Maanshan and Lujiang account 
for 52.4 percent of the provincial total. It is estimated that 
additional potential iron deposits throughout the province may 
reach 1.2 billion tonnes. Confirmed copper deposits also rank 
fifth in the nation and second in eastern China region, mainly 
concentrated along the Chang Jiang River, of which deposits in 
Tongling, Wuhu, Guichi, and Anqing alone account for over 83 
percent of the provincial total. Additional potential copper 
deposits are estimated to be 160 percent more than the existing 
known figures. 
  What is particularly gratifying is that, of all the 
confirmed 
mineral deposits, 55 categories are concentrated along both 
sides of the Chang Jiang River, representing 60-100 percent of 
total deposits of the same minerals across the province. 
Besides iron, copper, and sulfur, cement limestone is also a 
major mineral resource along the Chang Jiang River, with 
confirmed deposit volume reaching 3.48 billion tonnes in 72 
explored areas throughout the province. Ranking fifth in the 
nation and representing about 80 percent of the provincial 
total, these cement limestones are primarily scattered along the 
Chang Jiang River and in Chaohu Prefecture. Anhui's rich and 
diversified mineral deposits have provided an effective resource 
guarantee for its economic development. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1663 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_o_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  9 Feb 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> East Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Briefing on Anhui Economic Situation in 1993 </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Briefing on Anhui Economic Situation in 1993 </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0303030694 Hefei ANHUI RIBAO in Chinese 9 Feb 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> OW0303030694 </F>
<F P=104>  Hefei ANHUI RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "The Provincial Government Makes </F>
Public Anhui's Economic Situation in 1993, Marked by Rapid 
Growth, Great Vitality, and Sound Development"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Gross National Product Up 22 Percent Over 1992; Ranked Among </H5>
Provinces With Relatively Rapid Economic Development in China 
  On 7 February, the Information Office of the provincial 
government held a news briefing. Entrusted by the provincial 
government, Cui Zhikang, director of the provincial statistics 
bureau, made public economic development in Anhui Province: 
  Last year, in the course of establishing a socialist market 
economy in Anhui, while further emancipating our mind and 
deepening opening up, we witnessed rapid growth in the national 
economy; the overall economy showed the most rapid growth, 
greatest vitality, and most sound development since reform and 
opening to the outside world. According to preliminary 
estimates, the gross national product for the whole year topped 
94 billion yuan, an increase of 22 percent over 1992, and higher 
than the national growth by about 9 percentage points. Anhui 
has already been ranked among provinces with relatively rapid 
economic growth. 
  In 1993, there were three salient features in the economic 
operations of the province: 
<H5>  By Seizing Opportunities, our Economy Shows Rapid Growth </H5>
  -- Industrial production saw the most rapid annual growth 
since 1978. In 1993, the total industrial output value of the 
province reached 140.2 billion yuan, up 44.6 percent over the 
previous year; of which industrial output value at and above 
township level reached 94.9 billion yuan, up 26 percent over the 
previous year, bringing our national ranking from the 14th place 
in 1992 to the 12th place in 1993. Along with industrial 
growth, economic efficiency improved markedly. Total sales of 
industrial products reached 95.5 percent, up 0.8 percentage 
points over last year. Income and profits, and taxes from sales 
of industrial products are estimated to have grown by 42.1 
percent and 90 percent respectively. 
  -- Agricultural production reaped an all-around bumper 
harvest. Since last year, the central government has issued a 
series of measures in a bid to improve agricultural production 
and develop the rural economy. These, along with various other 
factors such as favorable climatic conditions, price hikes for 
grain and other farm and sideline products, reduction of 
peasants' burdens, and cash terms for purchases of farm and 
sideline products, have provided a favorable environment and 
external conditions for enhancing agricultural production. 
Initial estimates indicate the total agricultural output value 
for the year will reach 41.7 billion yuan, an increase of 8.5 
percent over the previous year, which would be far higher than 
the average yearly growth of 2.8 percent achieved during the 
Seventh "Five-Year Plan." Total production of grains, edible 
oil products, and silkworm cocoons all registered their highest 
levels of growth, while cotton and aquatic products neared their 
highest levels in history. 
  -- Investments showed robust growth. Investment in fixed 
assets by state-owned units totaled 17.17 billion yuan, up 42.6 
percent over last year. Of this, investment in infrastructure 
realized 10.03 billion yuan, up 40.3 percent; and investment in 
renovations and transformation accounted for 6.26 billion yuan, 
up 42.6 percent. A large number of infrastructure projects in 
communications and transportation, as well as on key raw 
materials were completed and put into operation. Construction 
of a large number of infrastructural projects, including the 
Chang Jiang Bridge in Tongling and the Hefei-Jiujiang railway, 
which have a bearing on the overall situation, made good 
progress. Construction of a number of raw and semi-finished 
materials projects, including the Anqing acrylic nitrile and 
Tongling cement plants, were quickened to further build up 
Anhui's strength for further economic development. 
  -- Steady increase of market sales. The total volume of 
retail sales reached 39.17 billion yuan, up 15.9 percent from 
1992. 
  -- Rapid rise in the income of urban and rural residents. 
Per capita income of urban residents was 2,025.7 yuan, up 24.8 
percent, or 9.1 percent after deducting price rises; that of 
peasants was 724.5 yuan, a net increase of 151 yuan and the 
biggest since the introduction of reform and opening up, or an 
increase of 9.4 percent after deducting price rises; and the 
average wage of workers of state-owned units reached 3,095 yuan, 
up 20.8 percent from 1992, or 5.6 percent after deducting price 
rises. Residents' savings deposits have increased markedly. At 
yearend, the balance of savings deposits by urban and rural 
residents throughout Anhui was 34.181 billion yuan, or 8.518 
billion yuan more than at the beginning of the year. 
<H5>  Vitality for Economic Growth Increases Continually </H5>
  -- Gradual invigoration of the internal mechanisms of state 
enterprises. In 1993, we conducted active and fruitful 
experiments on transforming the operating mechanisms of state 
enterprises, strengthening property rights, and establishing a 
modern enterprise system. For example, we achieved notable 
results in introducing the share-holding system to large and 
medium state-owned enterprises, in instituting the contracting 
and management of deficit-ridden state enterprises by 
nongovernment sectors, in allowing superior enterprises to 
absorb inferior ones, in inducing foreign capital to upgrade 
domestic industries, and in auctioning small state enterprises. 
So far, 377 enterprises have implemented the standardized 
share-holding system. The successful issuing and listing of 
stocks of the Meiling Enterprise, Anhui Energy Corporation, and 
Maanshan Iron and Steel Company has not only helped these 
enterprises expedite the pace of transforming operating 
mechanisms and become better known, but also raised over 7 
billion yuan to accelerate the development of enterprises. 
  -- Versatile ideas for developing the rural economy. Guided 
by market-oriented agriculture, we have made headway in 
readjusting the agricultural structure while the principle of 
stressing "high yields, high quality, and high efficiency" has 
brought about sweeping changes in traditional agriculture. 
Noteworthy is the new road of transferring surplus rural labor, 
pioneered by 4 to 5 million peasants from Anhui at the beginning 
of the year. Judging from actual results, the exodus of 
peasants did not have an adverse effect on agriculture but 
slightly increased the province's revenue. Moreover, some 
peasant laborers, who acquired new knowledge and learned 
technical skills while working in the coastal regions, have 
played an active role in local economic development. 
  -- Vigorous development of non-state economic sectors. In 
1993, non-state economic sectors, with village and town 
enterprises as the mainstay, have expanded rapidly. The annual 
total output value of village and town enterprises is expected 
to set a record 110 billion yuan. In terms of growth rate, 
while it took Anhui only two years to increase the total output 
value of village and town enterprises from 30 billion to 110 
billion yuan, it took such coastal provinces as Jiangsu and 
Zhejiang from three to five years. 
  -- Flourishing export-oriented economy. The total volume of 
foreign trade exports was $960 million, up 16 percent from 1992. 
The total supply of foreign trade goods increased 43.6 percent 
over the previous year. A total of 1,040 new Sino-foreign 
ventures, cooperative ventures, and solely-foreign funded 
enterprises were approved, the largest number since the 
introduction of reform and opening up. The actual amount of 
foreign capital utilized was $370 million, up 160 percent from 
the previous year. 
  -- Flexible macroeconomic regulation and control. Since last 
June, we have conscientiously implemented the central 
authorities' Document No. 6 in a timely manner, and carried out 
macroeconomic regulation and control in the light of realities 
in Anhui. We have refrained from demanding uniformity in 
implementation, adopted realistic measures to curb the 
overheated economy in localities as deemed necessary, and 
conducted structural readjustment while keeping the same scale 
of currency issuance, loans, and investment, thereby maintaining 
a good momentum for economic growth and warding off economic 
upheaval. 
<H5>  Macroeconomic Regulation and Control Yields Positive Results </H5>
  -- Noticeable alleviation of "bottleneck" constraints. The 
production of major energy, and raw and semi-finished material 
products has increased. The output of raw coal was up 6.6 
percent, while that of electricity generated, rolled steel, and 
cement were all up by more than 10 percent. Raw coal, rolled 
steel, cement, and timber in stock were basically able to meet 
demand. Meanwhile, prices of capital goods began to drop 
sharply. In the second half of 1993, the index of purchasing 
prices of major capital goods registered an average increase of 
23.8 percent [sentence as published], or 10 percentage points 
lower than the margin of increase in the first half of the year. 
  -- Fairly rational investment structure. In 1993 investment 
in the tertiary industry province-wide rose 61.5 percent, 
increasing its ratio to the total investment in capital 
construction to 42.8 percent from 37.1 percent of the same 
period of 1992. Investment in such basic industries as energy, 
raw and semi-finished materials, transportation, and posts and 
telecommunications accounted for 68.2 percent of the total 
investment in capital construction, or 70 percent if allocations 
for improving investment environment were included. The rate of 
allocating funds for key state construction projects also rose 
sharply. 
  -- Conspicuous increase in financial revenue. The annual 
financial revenue totaled 7.32 billion yuan, up 32.8 percent 
from 1992, thus ending the stagnant situation, in which the 
revenue amounted to some 5 billion yuan for four successive 
years since 1989. All 16 prefectures and cities overfulfilled 
the annual budgeted revenue, with most of the prefectures and 
cities registering an increase of more than 20 percent. 
  -- Improved financial order. Anhui's efforts to rectify 
financial order brought about a turn for the better in the 
banking situation. Savings deposits have increased by a wide 
margin. As of the end of 1993, the balance of savings deposits 
throughout the province was 49.4 billion yuan, or 8.2 billion 
yuan more than the figure at the end of June. Currency supply 
has gradually returned to normal. The total volume of currency 
supply in 1993 rose 45 percent over the previous year, while 
currency withdrawn from circulation was up 47.1 percent. The 
rate of reserve funds has also returned to standard. 
  Cui Zhikang also discussed a number of contradictions and 
problems in Anhui's economic life. They are mainly high price 
rises, poor economic efficiency, and a shortage of funds. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1664 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_o_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Feb 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> East Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   ANHUI RIBAO Commentary on Foreign Investment </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    ANHUI RIBAO Commentary on Foreign Investment </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW1902101594 Hefei ANHUI RIBAO in Chinese 2 Feb 94 p 6 </F>
<F P=103> OW1902101594 </F>
<F P=104>  Hefei ANHUI RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by reporter Liu Xuanwu (0491 6693 2976): "A </F>
Look at Our Province's Foreign Contacts by Looking At How It 
Utilizes Foreign Investment"] 
  [Text] Last year, our province's aggregate volume of 
contractual investment totaled $1.4 billion, the largest amount 
since the introduction of reform and opening up. The newly 
approved projects included 1,039 foreign-funded enterprises, and 
the contractual volume of investment was $700.2 million, 
exceeding the figures of the past nine years combined. 
Investors came from 33 countries and regions. After Maanshan 
Iron and Steel Company's H shares were listed in Hong Kong, they 
attracted many overseas buyers because of the company's powerful 
economic strength and good reputation. A total of $500 million 
in stocks was sold. This was a new step by our province in 
utilizing foreign capital. In addition, some foreign capital 
was also used by the methods of borrowing from foreign banks and 
foreign governments, conducting compensatory trade, and 
processing products from materials imported from abroad. 
Furthermore, last year our province also accepted $16 million in 
foreign aid. As a whole, our province's utilization of foreign 
capital is entering a new period as the channels, methods, and 
scale for its utilization are expanding. 
  The arrival of this new period shows that the scope and 
channels of our contacts are expanding, that more people in the 
world are beginning to understand and like Anhui, and that Anhui 
is advancing in big strides in the world arena. 
  In opening up to the outside world, it is necessary, to a 
large extent, to expand contacts and ties with various 
countries. The contacts and ties should include those in the 
economic, scientific, technological, educational, cultural, and 
personnel areas. However, these contacts should, finally, be 
based on economic contacts and should be embodied by economic 
interests and benefits. How should we expand our province's 
contacts and ties with foreign countries? From a long-range 
point of view, an important thing we should do is to use and 
manage foreign capital well and strive to constantly increase 
its value and make it yield benefits. 
  The purpose of foreign businessmen who invest in our 
province 
is to make money, and it is because there are profits to be made 
that we introduce foreign capital. This is reasonable. 
Cooperation and contacts with foreign businessmen will continue 
to consolidate and develop only if both sides can profit. There 
is a humorous saying by the people of Hefei which goes like 
this: When foreign businessmen get rich, we also get rich; both 
sides "will get fat if they cooperate." Therefore, we must not 
fear that foreign businessmen will make money; instead, we 
should create conditions for them to make money. This is an 
"economic chain" which leads to expansion of contacts and 
enhancement of friendship. Many practical situations have shown 
that if foreign businessmen who have invested in our province 
fail to make money in two to three years, they will lose 
interest in our province. Besides, this will adversely affect 
investment by other foreign businessmen in our province. If 
their capital increases in value quickly and if the projects 
built with their aid yield profits, they will show greater 
interest in cooperating with us. Besides, this has also 
increased our confidence and attracted more people who are 
willing to invest in Anhui and to cooperate with and aid us. 
For example, at first foreign businessmen invested only several 
hundred thousand U.S. dollars in some foreign-funded enterprises 
such as the Zhongyuan Shoes Manufacturing Company, Limited, in 
Jieshou and the Hongqing Precision Machine Tool Plant in Anqing. 
Before long, the value of the U.S. dollars increased like 
nuclear fission in Anhui, turning the two enterprises into 
pacesetters in cooperation with foreign businesses. Later, 
under the influence of the pacesetters, many more foreign 
businesses came to invest in Anhui. 
Having achieved great successes, the Huabei [North China] plain 
agricultural project, the first project of Anhui's agricultural 
sector that introduced foreign investment, became a banner of 
China's agricultural sector in introducing foreign investments. 
It attracted one batch after another of larger foreign-invested 
agricultural projects. The successes achieved by the Anhui 
Provincial XINHUA Printing Factory in implementing a project 
with German assistance also caught the attention of some 
overseas personages. All these showed that successful 
utilization and management of foreign investments as well as 
projects with foreign assistance is an important step in 
expanding contacts with the outside world, attracting more 
foreign investment, and achieving greater successes. 
  There are many institutions in Anhui that have made good use 
of foreign funds. However, there are also some localities that 
often think the job is finished after foreign funds are 
introduced. They do not spend the time and effort to use and 
manage foreign funds. As a result, the value of foreign funds 
fails to increase quickly, thereby adversely affecting the 
expansion of cooperation and contacts with the outside world. 
Actually, the introduction of foreign funds is only the 
beginning of the job. More difficult work lies ahead. We must 
establish highly efficient operating mechanisms step by step for 
the three kinds of partially or wholly foreign- owned 
enterprises and for other projects under cooperation with 
foreign businessmen so as to really give full play to the role 
of introduced foreign funds as a yeast. Some localities in our 
province are handling the task now. For example, the Hefei City 
Government last year established an "office responsible for 
providing services to foreign-owned enterprises," called 
"Foreign- Owned Enterprises Office" for short, in addition to 
its "Foreign Funds Office." After the "Foreign Funds Office" 
has introduced foreign funds, the "Foreign-Owned Enterprises 
Office" will be specifically responsible for the establishment 
of the three kinds of partially or wholly foreign-owned 
enterprises, for providing services and coordination for them, 
and for their administration and supervision. It created 
conditions for highly efficient operation of the three kinds of 
partially or wholly foreign-owned enterprises. Such a practice 
is recommendable. 
  At present, the spring tide of reform and opening is surging 
from coastal areas to the hinterland; our province is benefiting 
from the development strategy for areas along the Chang Jiang; 
more foreign businessmen will commit investments in Anhui. In 
the face of such an opportunity, we must greet it in a more 
sincere attitude and with more solid work and better services so 
we may establish more extensive contacts with the world. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1665 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_o_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Feb 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> East Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Jiangsu Banker on Banking Reform </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Jiangsu Banker on Banking Reform </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW2702131194 Nanjing XINHUA RIBAO in Chinese 6 Feb 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> OW2702131194 </F>
<F P=104>  Nanjing XINHUA RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Lin Zhenxiong (2651 2182 7160), </F>
president of the People's Bank of China's Jiangsu branch, by 
staff reporter Zhu Xinhua (2612 2450 5478): "The Investment 
Scale Remains Overextended, the Contradiction Between Fund 
Supply and Demand Remains Glaring" -- place and date not given] 
  [Text] The year 1993 was unusual for our province's 
banking sector. What will our province's banking situation be 
in 1994? With this question in mind, this reporter interviewed 
Lin Zhenxiong, president of the provincial branch of the 
People's Bank of China. 
  Lin Zhenxiong first affirmed our province's achievements in 
banking work last year. In 1993, our province scored remarkable 
achievements in macroeconomic regulation and control of the 
banking sector. Everybody credits "three factors" with bringing 
about the hard-won change from the extremely dire situation 
during the first six months to the trend toward basic stability 
by year's end: The effort by the central authorities to 
increase and improve the weight of policy decisions regarding 
macroeconomic regulation and control, the joint efforts by party 
committees and governments at all levels and by all departments, 
and the joint efforts by the entire banking sector. 
  Thereafter, he said: Because some deep-seated problems 
pertaining to economic and banking operations have yet to be 
solved fundamentally, the foundation for basically stabilizing 
the current banking situation remains rather fragile, and there 
are still many contradictions and problems. He analyzed the 
main contradictions and problems in banking work as follows: 
  Although the investment scale for fixed assets has been 
determined, it remains overextended, and the contradiction 
between supply and demand of funds remains glaring. The 
commodity price index has risen rather swiftly, posing 
formidable tasks for containing inflation. Working capital is 
still in short supply. On the one hand, the proportion of 
working capital to new loans in the state's credit plan for this 
year is the smallest in history; on the other, the substantial 
proportion of processing industries in our province's economy 
demands large amounts of working capital. Therefore, this year, 
banks will face new contraditions in arranging loans for use as 
working capital. Banking institutions of various types lack 
sound mechanisms by which they exercise self-restraint, and 
banking activity has yet to be regulated. Although banking 
order has improved somewhat, the chaotic state has yet to be 
rectified completely. A few banking institutions and some 
localities, departments, and units outside the banking sector 
have unduly pursued gains for small groups or individuals. The 
practice of indiscriminately collecting fees, providing 
financial assistance, granting loans, and raising interest rates 
will likely persist, and this will affect banking stability. 
  What are the countermeasures? Lin Zhenxiong said: The party 
Central Committee has set forth the guiding principles for work 
to be carried out by the entire party, as well as overall 
economic work. It has determined the principle for carrying out 
this year's banking work: "Continuing to restore banking order, 
advancing banking reform steadily, strictly controlling the 
total credit volume, and earnestly tightening supervision and 
control over the banking sector." The establishment of this 
principle is of vital importance for solving contradictions and 
problems in banking work, for consolidating the achievements in 
macroeconomic regulation and control, and for promoting 
sustained, rapid, and healthy economic development. According 
to this principle, our province's banking sector should focus on 
the following tasks this year: 
  It should make earnest organizational efforts to implement 
the State Council's various measures for reforming the banking 
system, and make every effort to raise funds and increase its 
financial strength through the gradual establishment of a 
banking operational mechanism suited to the socialist market 
economic system. This year, it will implement a system of 
managing assets and liabilities ratios under the guidance of 
loan quotas. It will unify foreign exchange rates, abolish the 
practice of retaining portions of foreign exchange proceeds, 
conduct foreign exchange transactions through banks, inspire 
foreign trading enterprises' enthusiasm for earning foreign 
exchange from exports, and attract foreign funds. 

    It will strictly control the total credit volume, 
especially loans for fixed assets investment, in accordance with 
the requirements of state macroeconomic policy decisions. The 
State Council recently issued a circular on continuing to 
tighten macroeconomic regulation and control over fixed assets, 
instructing that no efforts should be made to blindly increase 
investments, launch projects, and expand the investment scale 
without regard to macroeconomic conditions. As state banks, 
various banking institutions should properly perform their 
functions as banking departments in conjunction with planning 
commissions, economic commissions, and other economic 
departments under the leadership of local governments. They 
should exercise strict control over financial resources in 
accordance with the guidelines of the State Council's circular. 
  We should continue to restore banking order and create a 
good 
banking environment that is conducive to healthy economic 
development. Because of last year's consolidation efforts, 
banking order is now taking a turn for the better. 
Nevertheless, all departments and localities, as well as banks 
at all levels, should pay close attention to preventing the 
occurrence of new problems under the new situation. Various 
banking institutions should exercise greater self-restraint and 
regulate their activities. The lessons of last year have taught 
everybody that chaotic banking order will inevitably tarnish the 
reputation of banking departments and ultimately affect economic 
development. Only by maintaining banking stability can we 
promote healthy economic development. 
  Lin Zhenxiong hoped to send the following message to various 
departments through the media: According to the decision of the 
Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, we 
should take a gigantic step forward in this year's reform of the 
banking system. This reform, however, can only be completed 
after a lengthy process. We cannot implement it in only one 
move; we should advance it steadily in conjunction with reforms 
in other fields. It is hoped that people in all circles will 
show greater understanding of and support for our province's 
reform of the banking system and banking work. Banking 
departments should maintain close contact with local 
governments, provide more briefings to party and government 
leaders, attract greater attention from leading party and 
government departments, and make more contributions to our 
province's reform, opening up, and economic development. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1666 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_o_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  26 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> East Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Jiangxi Secretary Mao Zhiyong Views Agriculture </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Jiangxi Secretary Mao Zhiyong Views Agriculture </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK3003123494 Nanchang Jiangxi People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 1100 GMT 26 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK3003123494 </F>
<F P=104>  Nanchang Jiangxi People's Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Mandarin </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] A provincial conference of prefectural and city 
party committees secretaries as well as prefectural 
commissioners and city mayors concluded today. The conference 
called for acquiring a clear understanding of the current 
situation; seizing each and every excellent opportunity; and 
earnestly strengthening agricultural and rural work. The 
provincial conference of prefectural and city party committees 
secretaries as well as prefectural commissioners and city mayors 
was held in Nanchang 25-26 March. 
  The conference relayed the spirit of a recently concluded 
national rural work conference and a recently concluded national 
family planning symposium. It also discussed and arranged for 
the province's work at the moment. Provincial party committee 
Secretary Mao Zhiyong and provincial Governor Wu Guanzheng 
delivered important speeches at the conference. Also attending 
the conference were the provincial leaders, including Zhu 
Zhihong, Lu Xiuzhen, Ma Shichang, Zhang Fengyu, Su Shengyou, Shu 
Huiguo, Huang Zhiquan, Peng Kunsheng, Zhong Qihuang, Feng 
Jinmao, Zheng Liangyu, Zhang Yunchuan, and Huang Maoheng, 
prefectural and city party committee secretaries, prefectural 
commissioners and city mayors, as well as persons in charge of 
the provincial departments concerned. 
  In his speech, Secretary Mao Zhiyong first and foremost made 
a comprehensive analysis of the excellent situation in Jiangxi 
at the moment and called for sumbitting to and serving such 
overall interests as grasping each and every excellent 
opportunity, deepening reform, expanding opening up, promoting 
development, and maintaining stability. To this end, Mao 
Zhiyong noted, it is imperative to correctly handle relations 
between reform, development, and stability. Given the actual 
conditions of Jiangxi, first, we should make continued efforts 
to promote development with an eye on boosting the province's 
national economic growth; second, we should cultivate a new 
train of thought and adopt new measures to improve labor quality 
and push ahead with economic and educational development by dint 
of scientific and technological progress and structural 
readjustment; third, we should strive for faster growth and 
rapidly build a socialist market economic structure and a 
socialist market economic operative mechanism in the course of 
the on-going in-depth reform; fourth, we should strive for 
faster growth while maintaining overall stability. To this end, 
we should actively, cautiously, and appropriately implement each 
and every reform measure to avoid drastic unheavals or turmoil 
and secure sustained, rapid, and healthy economic growth. 
  Secretary Mao Zhiyong stressed: We should make unreserved 
efforts to step up agricultural and rural work. Agriculture, 
rural areas, and peasants have always been fundamental issues 
with an important bearing on the country's overall development. 
In order to maintain social stability, we should first maintain 
stability in rural areas where over 80 percent of China's 
population reside. Without agricultural development, it would be 
impossible to successfully further and speed up overall 
development, nor will it be possible to deepen reform and 
maintain stability. Only when agriculture is developed will we 
be able to make a success of other types of work. 
  Secretary Mao Zhiyong pointed out: Given Guangxi's situation 
at the moment, we should strive to make a success of this year's 
agricultural and rural work by focusing on the following six 
aspects: 
  1. Maintaining stable grain output. To this end, we should 
strive to maintain the total provincial grain output at or above 
30 billion jin and the total provincial cotton output at or 
above 200 million kilograms. 
  2. Increasing income on the part of peasants. To this end, 
we should strive to raise per capita net income on the part of 
peasants by 150 yuan on the basis of last year. 
  3. Further developing township and town enterprises. To 
this end, we should strive to raise the total provincial 
township and town enterprises output value to or above 80 
billion yuan. 
  4. Taking firm measures to reduce the natural population 
growth rate. 
  5. Popularizing advanced science and technology; 
implementing the joint-stock system on a large scale; and 
establishing and perfecting all types of socialized service 
systems; 
  6. Building more infrastructure facilities. 
  Secretary Mao Zhiyong stated: Now that we have clear-cut 
principles to follow and specific policies and measures to go by 
in agricultural and rural work, we should implement these 
principles, policies, and measures to the letter. The 
provincial party committee and government hope that all areas 
and departments in the province will display a strong sense of 
political responsibility, resolutely implement to the letter the 
central rural work principles, and successfully carry out 10 
aspects of work while making continued efforts to stabilize and 
perfect the basic operating system. Now the province's spring 
plowing production has been unfolded on a large scale, all areas 
should make overall arrangements for and strive to accelerate 
grain, cotton, oil crops, vegetables, aquatic products, fruit, 
forest, and other types of production as well as township and 
town enterprises development. 
  Secretary Mao Zhiyong also called for taking overall 
interests into account and successfully carrying out reform, 
promoting development, and maintaining stability in a 
down-to-earth manner. To this end, first, it is imperative to 
successfully develop industrial production; second, it is 
imperative to maintain social and political stability; third, it 
is imperative to persistently and incessantly further the 
on-going anti-corruption struggle; and fourth, it is imperative 
to conscientiously intensify comprehensive social order 
management. 
  In the end, Secretary Mao Zhiyong called on all areas and 
departments across the province to practically strengthen 
leadership, conscientiously carry out study, take overall 
interests into account, improve work style, and implement to the 
letter a series of policies, decisions, and measures formulated 
by the CPC Central Committee as well as the Jiangxi Provincial 
CPC Committee and People's Government. 
  At the conference, Governor Wu Guanzheng also delivered a 
speech in which he spelled out the following specific 
requirements for how to implement the spirit of the above 
mentioned national rural work conference and national family 
planning symposium: 
  1. Increasing agricultural input. This year, Wu Guangzheng 
noted, all levels in the province have attached more importance 
to increasing agricultural input. The province's estimated 
financial expenditure on agricultural production has reached 410 
million yuan, up by 12.4 percent over last year. Prefectures, 
cities, and counties should abide by this estimated financial 
expenditure. 
  2. Making a success of production, importation, 
transportation, allocation, and supply of agriculture-oriented 
production means. Departments concerned across the province 
should make every possible endeavor to guarantee production and 
supply of agriculture-oriented means of production with an eye 
on ensuring smooth agricultural production. They should also 
provide agricultural production with sufficient funds, raw and 
processed materials, energy, and transportation, and see to it 
that all chemical fertilizer factories operate at full capacity. 
  3. Deepening grain purchase and marketing system reform and 
setting up a grain risk fund aimed at pushing ahead with grain 
purchase and marketing system reform. To this end, it is 
imperative to strengthen state macroeconomic regulation and 
control over grain production, further improve grain purchase 
measures, and raise grain purchase prices. 
  4. Strictly controlling price hikes. To this end, it is 
imperative to keep this year's price index at or below 10 
percent. Prefectures and cities across the province should 
strive to stabilize grain and vegetables prices. Governments at 
all levels across the province should assume full responsibility 
for vegetable supplies. It is imperative to institute a system 
under which city mayors assume full responsibility for vegetable 
supplies in cities. At present, it is imperative to strengthen 
control of prices of agriculture-oriented means of production 
and to formulate strict rules governing competitive prices 
listed by different grain enterprises. 
  5. Banning the practice of indiscriminately paying wages and 
bonuses to staff and workers. To this end, all areas and 
departments in the province should strictly implement the 
current wages system and ban the above mentioned malpractice. 
  6. Strictly control the total number of new projects under 
construction, make continued efforts to screen, suspend, or 
cancel a batch of duplicate and non-profitable projects being 
built in violation of the state industrial policies, and stop 
building capital construction projects or technological 
transformation projects short of construction funds. 
  7. Successfully fulfilling social stability maintenance 
tasks and adopting effective measures to tackle each and every 
major problem that has given rise to strong resentment among the 
masses. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1667 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_o_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> East Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Shandong Procuratorate Work Report </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Shandong Procuratorate Work Report </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   SK1603123494 Jinan DAZHONG RIBAO in Chinese 5 Mar 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> SK1603123494 </F>
<F P=104>  Jinan DAZHONG RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] On 3 March, Zhao Changfeng, chief procurator of the 
provincial people's procuratorate, reported to the deputies 
participating in the second session of the eighth provincial 
people's congress on the "work report of the Shandong Provincial 
people's procuratorate." 
  Zhao Changfeng said in his report: In the past year, the 
procuratorial organs at various levels across the province took 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics and the guidelines of the 14th party 
congress as a guidance; conscientiously exercised the legal 
supervisory functions under the leadership of the provincial 
party committee and the Supreme People's Procuratorate, under 
the supervision by the people's congresses at various levels and 
their standing committees, with the support of the governments, 
and closely in line with the central link of economic 
construction; strictly enforced laws; paid firm attention to 
handling cases; comprehensively carried out the procuratorial 
work; and made positive contributions to promoting economic 
development and administrative honesty. 
  Zhao Changfeng said: Last year, we constantly and 
persistently unified our thinking with a series of instructions 
made by the party Central Committee and the provincial party 
committee on opposing corruption and advocating administrative 
honesty, strictly enforced laws, firmly attended to handling 
cases, attached prominent importance to investigating and 
handling major and appalling cases, and made outstanding 
achievements. The province accepted 6,034 economic criminal 
cases of various categories; put 3,720 economic cases, including 
cases of corruption and bribery, on file for investigations and 
handling; and investigated and handled 1,769 major and appalling 
cases of various categories, showing an increase of 82 percent 
and setting a historical record. 
  Zhao Changfeng said: From the beginning of last year, we 
continued to persistently take the struggle against serious 
criminal activities and the overall improvement of social order 
as another important task for safeguarding social stability and 
guaranteeing the smooth progress of reform, opening up, and 
economic construction. We resolutely implemented the principle 
of "strictly and rapidly handling various criminal activities" 
and sternly dealt blows to various kinds of serious criminal 
activities. Last year, we accepted the reports on arresting 
26,365 criminals submitted by the security organs and arrested, 
with approvals, 23,156 criminals, respectively increasing 4.4 
percent and 4.5 percent over the previous year; handled 25,359 
criminals whose lawsuit cases were submitted by the security 
organs; and brought prosecutions against 20,443 persons to the 
people's courts through examinations. 
  Zhao Changfeng said: Last year, the procuratorial organs 
across the province strengthened the supervision over the 
enforcement of laws and disciplines and comprehensively carried 
out civil administration, the work of prisons, accusations, and 
appeals. In coordination with the struggle against corruption, 
we strengthened the examinations of the enforcement of laws and 
disciplines and concentrated energy on investigating and 
handling the criminal cases of state working personnel 
"violating power" and neglecting functions. We also 
strengthened the examinations of prisons; conscientiously 
examined and corrected various unlawful activities within 
prisons and reformatories, particularly the unlawful activities 
of replacing punishment by money and wantonly collecting money; 
ensured the accurate implementation of state laws and the 
party's policies on reform-through-labor and 
reeducation-through- labor; and ensured the strict enforcement 
of laws and the management in a civilized manner. We should 
attach prominent importance to the trial of civil cases and the 
examination of administrative lawsuits and make positive efforts 
to handle cases. We conscientiously received and appropriately 
handled visitors and incoming letters from citizens and strictly 
investigated and handled accusation and lawsuit cases. 
  Zhao Changfeng said: Over the past year, we persisted in 
the principle of "building procuratorial organs according to 
laws and sternly administering procuratorial work" and 
continuously regarded the building of contingents as an urgently 
strategic task. Procuratorial organs helped party committees to 
accomplish the elections of procurators at three levels and 
strengthened the leading bodies' ideology, organizational 
ability, and work style. At the time of positively engaging in 
the struggle against corruption, the procuratorial organs at 
various levels strengthened administrative honesty. According 
to the central authorities and the provincial party committee's 
regulations on being honest in performing official duties, the 
procuratorial organs conscientiously launched the 
self-investigation and self-correction activities; resolutely 
eliminated the problems that a small number of units exceeded 
their power to handle cases, took part in economic disputes, and 
wantonly collected funds and charges; strengthened the 
in-service training of cadres and policemen; and upgraded the 
cadres and policemen contingents' political integrity and 
professional abilities. Under the circumstances where tasks 
were arduous and work conditions were comparatively arduous, the 
broad masses of procuratorial cadres and policemen demonstrated 
extremely good mental outlook, carried forward the revolutionary 
spirit of fighting indomitably and making selfless sacrifice, 
tempered themselves in the course of waging the struggle against 
corruption, and experienced the grim tests of justly enforcing 
laws under the market economic conditions. A group of advanced 
collectives and individuals emerged. 
  Zhao Changfeng said: The year 1994 is an extremely important 
year to deepen reform. The new situation of reform and opening 
up sets higher demands on the procuratorial work. We should 
continue to persistently take Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on 
building socialism with Chinese characteristics as a guidance; 
persist in the principle of taking a two-hand approach and 
ensuring both hands are tough; attach primary importance to 
safeguarding social and political stability; and further 
investigate and handle major and appalling cases of corruption 
and bribery, the illegal cases of not strictly enforcing laws, 
and the illegal cases involving legal persons; take the overall 
procuratorial work situation into consideration by strictly 
enforcing laws and firmly handling cases; press forward the work 
in a down-to-earth manner; and crate a good social environment 
and a good legal environment for reform, opening up, and 
economic construction. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1668 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_o_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> East Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Shandong People's Court Work Report </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Shandong People's Court Work Report </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   SK1603120894 Jinan DAZHONG RIBAO in Chinese 5 Mar 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> SK1603120894 </F>
<F P=104>  Jinan DAZHONG RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Yu Peigao, president of the Shandong Provincial 
Higher People's Court, delivered "the work report of the 
provincial higher people's court" to the second session of the 
eighth provincial people's congress on the morning of 3 March. 
  Yu Peigao said in his report: In 1993, the provincial court 
conscientiously implemented the major policy decisions of the 
party Central Committee and the State Council and the decisions 
and resolutions of the provincial people's congress; strictly 
enforced the constitution and laws; positively carried out the 
judicial work in line with the requirements for safeguarding 
social and political stability, strengthening the macroeconomic 
regulation and control, and waging the struggle against 
corruption; and better accomplished the tasks. In the past 
year, the courts across the province accepted 329,733 lawsuits 
of various types, an increase of 22.5 percent over the previous 
year; and concluded 328,003 cases of this kind, an increase of 
23 percent. Through the trial activities, the courts brought 
into play their judicial and guaranteeing roles in safeguarding 
social and political stability, punishing the corrupt, and 
promoting reform, opening up, and economic development. 
  Yu Peigao said: To safeguard social and political stability, 
the courts at various levels across the province strengthened 
the trial of criminal cases and sternly dealt blows to various 
criminal activities according to laws. Last year, the courts at 
various levels accepted first rulings on 19,071 criminal cases 
and concluded 19,133 criminal cases. The courts at various 
levels prominently dealt blows to serious cases and examined and 
handled, according to laws, 8,169 criminal cases of seriously 
jeopardizing social order and examined and handled 2,262 
economic criminal cases under first rulings. 
  Yue Peigao said: Last year, the courts at various levels 
across the province conscientiously implemented the central 
authorities' major policy decisions on setting up the socialist 
market economic system and strengthening macroeconomic 
regulation and control and vigorously strengthened the trial of 
economic cases. The courts accepted first rulings on 148,745 
economic dispute cases and concluded 146,336 cases of this kind, 
both showing increases of nearly 50,000 cases over the figures 
of last year. The cases that had been concluded were estimated 
at 8.5 billion yuan, showing an increase of 210 percent and 
surpassing the total sum in the previous 14 years. 
  Yu Peigao said: Along with the development of the market 
economy, great changes have taken place in the mainstays, 
contents, and categories of the civil lawsuits. At the time 
when the number of traditional civil dispute cases continues to 
increase by a big margin, the proportion of civil cases due to 
economic disputes gradually rose. To this end, the courts at 
various levels further strengthened the trial of civil cases. 
The courts across the province accepted first rulings on 
146,740 civil cases and concluded 147,644 cases of this 
category, respectively increasing 7.6 percent and 8.9 percent. 
  Yu Peigao said: Achieving the administrative trial work is 
of extremely importance to supervise and safeguard 
administrative organs to exercise their functions according to 
laws; protect the legal rights and interests of citizens, legal 
persons, and other organizations; and promote the building of 
socialist democracy and politics. In line with the Supreme 
Court's guiding ideology of boldly accepting and handling cases, 
last year, the provincial court made efforts to carry out the 
administrative trial work. A total of 1,444 administrative 
cases were accepted and 1,436 cases were concluded, respectively 
increasing 55.8 percent and 64.1 percent over the previous year. 
  Yu Peigao said: Strengthening the supervision over the 
trial work is an effective measure for upgrading the judicial 
quality and ensuring the strict enforcement of laws. Last year, 
the courts at various levels strictly carried out the system of 
bringing lawsuits such as open trial, defense, second rulings, 
last rulings, and retrials; comprehensively strengthened the 
supervision over the trial work; and ensured the quality of 
handling cases. Judging from the assessments and examinations 
of cases and the general inspections on the enforcement of laws, 
we know that 98 percent of the cases that had been handled 
attained the qualifications. 
  Yu Peigao said: Last year, the courts at various levels 
positively explored ways for reforming the forms of trying 
civil, economic, and criminal cases; carried out the method of 
opening an court session "in one step;" and ensured to state 
reasons at courts, to publicly give evidence, clearly make 
statements, and investigate facts at courts. Thus, the 
functions for trying cases at courts were intensified, the 
efficiency and quality of handling cases were upgraded, and the 
unhealthy trends interfering in the trial work were effectively 
prevented. 
  Yu Peigao said: The year 1994 is a key year to 
comprehensively promote China's economic restructuring and to 
make a key breakthrough in the reform. So, the people's courts 
are confronted with heavier and more arduous tasks. We should 
take Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics as a guidance, conscientiously implement 
the guidelines of the third plenary session of the 14th party 
Central Committee and the sixth provincial party congress, 
strictly enforce the resolutions of this session, further 
emancipate the mind, conduct reform, blaze new trails, 
comprehensively strengthen the trial work, create prestige 
through the strict attacks against criminal activities, make 
achievements in cracking major and appalling cases, make big 
development in readjusting the relationship between various 
sectors of the economy, and comprehensively upgrade the judicial 
quality. 
  Yu Peigao said: In the new year, we should further 
consciously rely on the leadership of the party committees, more 
actively accept the supervision by the people's congresses, 
positively strive for the support of the governments and the 
departments concerned, comprehensively achieve the trial work, 
and make new contributions to safeguarding the province's social 
and political stability and ensuring the smooth progress of 
reform, opening up, and economic construction. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1669 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_o_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  28 Feb 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> East Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Shandong Economic Development Communique </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Shandong Economic Development Communique </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   SK0903232294 Jinan DAZHONG RIBAO in Chinese 28 Feb 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> SK0903232294 </F>
<F P=104>  Jinan DAZHONG RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Statistical Communique of the Shandong Provincial </F>
Statistical Bureau on Shandong Economic and Social Development 
in 1993] 
  [Text] In 1993, guided by the guidelines of the 14th party 
congress and the third plenary session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee, the people throughout the province conscientiously 
studied Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics, further emancipated the mind, 
seized the opportunity to deepen reform, opened still wider to 
the outside world, and invigorated the province through science 
and education. As a result, the national economy continued to 
increase, comprehensive economic strength was enhanced further, 
industrial structure was optimized, economic efficiency improved 
gradually, the market was brisk, and living standards of urban 
and rural residents improved gradually. In 1993, the gross 
domestic product was 270.088 billion yuan, an increase of 24.2 
percent over the previous year, an increase of 330 percent over 
1980, fulfilling the fighting goal of quadrupling the 1980 GNP 
seven years ahead of schedule. Both the total supply and total 
demand maintained a relatively rapid growth rate, and the 
difference rate between total supply and demand was kept within 
a rational scale. 
  1. Primary Industry 
  In 1993, the province continued to profoundly implement the 
central authorities' "decision on strengthening agriculture and 
rural work," actively increased input to improve the conditions 
for agricultural production, and vigorously developed the 
agriculture characterized with fine quality, high yield, and 
high efficiency, thus reaping a relatively bumper harvest 
despite serious natural calamities. The annual added value of 
agriculture was 59.682 billion yuan, up by 6.1 percent over 
1992. The total annual agricultural output value was 99.4 
billion yuan, up by 14.3 percent. Except for cotton, all major 
agricultural products set a record high in output. A relatively 
big increase was effected in output of grain, cooking oil, 
fruits, and vegetable. 
  The output of major agricultural products was as follows: 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                         |1993                     |Percentage increase over | 
|                         |                         |1992                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Grain                    |41.00 million tonnes     |14.2                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Of which: wheat          |20.24 million tonnes     |7.8                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Cotton                   |410,000 tonnes           |-39.4                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Oil-bearing crops        |2.68 million tonnes      |61.4                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Of which: peanuts        |2.67 million tonnes      |61.9                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Vegetable                |27.12 million tonnes     |39.4                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Fruits                   |5.014 million tonnes     |34.9                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  Relatively big progress was made in forestry production. In 
1993, the province afforested a total of 358,000 hectares of 
land, up by 47.9 percent over 1992. 
  Animal husbandry production continued to develop. The output 
of major animal products and livestock inventories increased. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                         |1993                     |Percentage increase over | 
|                         |                         |1992                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Total meat output        |3.63 million tonnes      |23.8                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Of which: pork           |2.03 million tonnes      |9.9                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|beef and mutton          |630,000 tonnes           |35.4                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Milk                     |390,000 tonnes           |15.1                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Poultry eggs             |2.14 million tonnes      |25.4                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Pigs slaughtered         |25.13 million head       |8.7                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Draft animals (year-end  |10.58 million head       |21.0                     | 
|figure)                  |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Pigs (year-end figure)   |21.15 million head       |4.8                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Sheep (year-end figure)  |27.25 million head       |14.8                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  Fishery production increased by a large margin. In 1993, the 
annual output of aquatic products was 3.193 million tonnes, up 
by 28.7 percent over 1992. Of this figure, output of marine 
products was 2.896 million tonnes, up by 28.6 percent; and that 
of freshwater products was 297,000 tonnes, up by 28.9 percent. 
Aquatic product exports amounted to 100,000 tonnes, an increase 
of 30,000 tonnes over 1992, earning $350 million in foreign 
exchange, or $100 million more than the 1992 figure. 
  Conditions for agricultural production improved further. By 
the end of 1993, the aggregate power of farm machinery was 35.18 
million kilowatts, of which, the power of tractors for 
agricultural use was 8.38 million kilowatts, up by 3.6 percent. 
Rural consumption of electricity was 10.66 billion kilowatt 
hours, up by 6.4 percent. The acreage effectively irrigated was 
4.624 million hectares, up by 0.6 percent. 
  Rural economy developed rapidly. The 1993 total product of 
the rural society was 537 billion yuan, up by 84.4 percent over 
the previous year. Of this, output value of the 
non-agricultural industries, such as rural industries, 
construction, transportation, commerce, and catering service, 
increased by 110 percent over the previous year. The proportion 
of these non-agricultural industries in the total rural economy 
rose from 70.8 percent in 1992 to 81.5 percent in 1993. 
  2. The Secondary Industry 
  According to the requirements for setting up the socialist 
market economic system, in 1993, the province accelerated the 
pace of enterprise reform, positively readjusted the industrial 
structure, made efforts to improve efficiency, firmly grasped 
the improvement of product quality, and ensured sustained and 
fast development of the secondary industry. The added value of 
the secondary industry was 144.206 billion yuan, an increase of 
29.9 percent. The proportion of the added value of the 
secondary industry in the gross domestic product rose from 49.3 
percent in 1992 to 53.4 percent. 
  The industrial production increased at a high speed. In 
1993, total industrial output value reached 598 billion yuan, an 
increase of 57.2 percent. Of this, the total output value 
realized by the industries at or above the township level 
reached 342.92 billion yuan, an increase of 35.7 percent; and 
the sales value was 328.922 billion yuan, an increase of 39.25 
percent. The added value of industries reached 129.4 billion 
yuan, an increase of 29.2 percent. 
  The pace of structural readjustment was accelerated. The 
industries of various economic sectors developed at a high 
speed. The output value realized by enterprises not owned by the 
state accounted for a large proportion. The output value of 
state-owned industrial enterprises increased by 14.85 percent; 
and that of collective industrial enterprises increased by 56.37 
percent. Of this, that of township-run industrial enterprises 
increased by 85.59 percent; and the industries of other economic 
sectors with "three types of foreign-funded enterprises" 
constituting the mainstay increased by 150 percent. Of the 
output value of the industries at or above the township level, 
49.9 percent were realized by enterprises other than the state 
ownership, an increase of 5.5 percentage points over the 
previous year. Light and heavy industries increased at the same 
fast pace. With the high investment demands, the increase in 
heavy industry was accelerated. The output value of heavy 
industry was 183.941 billion yuan and the sales value was 
175.985 billion yuan, an increase of 36.61 percent and 37.34 
percent. The output value of light industry was 158.98 billion 
yuan and the sales value was 152.937 billion yuan, an increase 
of 34.85 percent and 39.70 percent. The product mix was 
continually readjusted and optimized according to market demands. 
  The yield of major industrial products was as follows: 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                         |1993                     |Percentage Increase Over | 
|                         |                         |1992                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Cameras                  |360,300                  |2.4                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Color television sets    |476,800                  |26.9                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Household washing machin-|773,300                  |27.2                     | 
|es                       |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Electric fans            |1,650,100                |-30.1                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Household refrigerators  |508,200                  |134.2                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Chemical fiber           |95,600 tonnes            |40.4                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Yarn                     |711,000 tonnes           |-1.3                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Cloth                    |2.601 billion meters     |13.2                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Beer                     |1,737,600 tonnes         |24.7                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Machine-made paper and p-|1,875,400 tonnes         |17.6                     | 
|aper board               |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Synthetic detergents     |173,900 tonnes           |10.3                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Raw coal                 |8,917,300 tonnes         |8.5                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Crude oil                |32,700,000 tonnes        |-2.3                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Electricity              |60.5 billion kilowatt ho-|6.8                      | 
|                         |urs                      |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Steel                    |3,286,200 tonnes         |16.9                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Steel products           |2,231,900 tonnes         |9.6                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Soda ash                 |1,085,100 tonnes         |16.6                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Caustic ash              |463,100 tonnes           |7.7                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Chemical fertilizer      |1,555,200 tonnes         |0.6                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Farm chemicals           |20,800 tonnes            |-4.1                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Plastic sheds            |50,600 tonnes            |-21.1                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Synthetic rubber         |121,900 tonnes           |5.7                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Cement                   |39,745,000 tonnes        |25.7                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Metal cutting machine to-|19,286                   |-0.6                     | 
|ols                      |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Vehicles                 |20,700                   |19.3                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Medium-sized tractors    |4,986                    |-48.4                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Small tractors           |171,400                  |-43.8                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  Production and marketing became better coordinated. The 
marketing rate of the industrial enterprises at and above the 
township level throughout the province was registered at 95.92 
percent in 1993, up 2.98 percentage points from the preceding 
year. Translated, the marketing rate of state-owned enterprises 
was 97.7 percent, that of collective enterprises 93.96 percent, 
and that of other enterprises 96.88 percent, up 0.68, 5.4, and 
4.88 percentage points, respectively, from the preceding year. 
Relying on their advantages in personnel and technology, large 
and medium-sized industrial enterprises made active efforts to 
transform their operating mechanism to notably increase the 
competitive edges of their products. The annual marketing rate 
of their products was 97.66 percent, 1.74 percentage points 
higher than the provincial average. 
  Economic efficiency improved steadily. The general index of 
the economic efficiency of the industrial enterprises at and 
above the township level which adopted the independent 
accounting system was 98.69 percent in 1993, up 8.65 percentage 
points from the preceding year; the added value they achieved 
was 84.699 billion yuan, up 42.08 percent; the profits and taxes 
they turned over to higher authorities totaled 28.132 billion 
yuan, up 43.19 percent; and their profits totaled 11.469 billion 
yuan, up 76.39 percent. The six indicators adopted to calculate 
the general index of economic efficiency were all better than in 
the preceding year. Of them, the profit-tax rate of funds was 
10.06 percent, up 0.78 percentage points; the profit rate of 
cost 4.71 percent, up 0.52 percentage points; labor productivity 
14,897 yuan per capita, up 41.37 percent; and the turnover of 
circulating funds 1.84 times, up 0.07 times. 
  Construction industry registered faster development, and its 
efficiency improved steadily. Thanks to the rapid growth in 
fixed asset investment and continuous in-depth development of 
the reform of construction enterprises, the production of the 
construction industry was notably accelerated, with the added 
value of the construction industry achieved by construction 
enterprises totaling 14.8 billion yuan in the year, up 36.5 
percent. The output value achieved by state-owned construction 
enterprises and the collective construction enterprises at and 
above the county level totaled 12.43 billion yuan, up 25.9 
percent. The annual construction output value was 12.15 billion 
yuan, up 26.3 percent; 23.739 million square meters of houses 
were under construction, up 13.8 percent, and 36.9 percent was 
completed; and the per capita productivity (calculated based on 
output value) was 26,124 yuan, up 21 percent. 
  3. Tertiary Industry 
  In 1993, the provincial party committee and government 
formulated a series of specific policy measures for the great 
development of the tertiary industry and added impetus to 
reform, thus notably accelerating the tertiary industry. The 
annual added value of the tertiary industry was 66.2 billion 
yuan, up 32.5 percent from the preceding year, and its 
proportion to the gross domestic product rose from 22.6 percent 
in the preceding year to 24.5 percent, up 1.9 percentage points. 
  Conditions for transportation improved notably. In 1993, 
Shandong intensified construction of basic transportation 
facilities, thus improving the transportation capacity and 
increasing the cargo and passenger transportation volumes. Road 
mileage increased by 2,899 km to reach 46,033 km by the end of 
the year, of which 30,685 km were roads with high-grade and 
second high-grade surface, which ranked among the best in the 
country. The volume of cargo transported through roads totaled 
408,20 million tonnes, up 8.22 percent, and the volume of 
passengers transported through roads was 297 million persons, 
the same as in the preceding year. The volume of cargo loaded 
and unloaded by ports totaled 76.28 million tonnes, up 12.5 
percent from the preceding year, which was another best record. 
  Aviation developed rapidly. By the end of 1993, Shandong had 
opened 70 air routes to 65 cities. The annual volume of cargo 
and mails transported by air rose by 40.05 percent, and that of 
passengers rose by 49.2 percent. 
  The development of post and telecommunications undertakings 
was noticeably accelerated, with business volume in 1993 
totalling 2.75 billion yuan, up 76.2 percent. There were 33,300 
long-distance circuits, up 80.8 percent over the previous year. 
The year-end capacity of long-distance automatic switchboards 
reached 52,000 channels, up 69 percent over the previous year. 
Domestic long-distance telephone direct dialing service opened 
in 101 prefectures, cities and counties across the province. Of 
this, 73 cities and counties had international long-distance 
telephone direct dialing services. The year-end capacity of 
urban telephone switchboards reached 1.037 million channels, up 
45.2 percent over the previous year, of which 880,000 channels 
were program- controlled urban telephone switchboards, up 73.6 
percent. The capacity of rural telephone switchboards reached 
712,000 channels, up 72.8 percent. 
  The domestic markets were brisk and the sales of commodities 
increased quite rapidly. In 1993, the circulation sphere paid 
attention to the favorable opportunity of economic development 
to actively develop and cultivate the markets and expanded the 
sales of commodities. The retail sales of social commodities 
during the year totalled 99.38 billion yuan, up 24.8 percent 
over the previous year, showing an increase of 12.7 percent if 
the rise of commodity prices was factored in. The retail sales 
of consumer goods totalled 84.23 billion yuan, up 28.9 percent, 
of which, 76.39 billion yuan worth of consumer goods were sold 
to residents, up 29.1 percent; and the retail sales of 
agricultural means of production reached 15.16 billion yuan, up 
5.8 percent. Of the retail sales of consumer goods, 57.58 
billion yuan worth of consumer goods were sold at the urban 
markets, up 32.0 percent while sales at the rural markets were 
26.64 billion yuan, up 22.7 percent. 
  An overall increase was registered in retail sales of 
commodities by commercial units of all economic forms, and the 
proportion of retail sales of commodities by individual units 
and peasants also rose. In 1993, the sales of state-owned 
retail units amounted to 37.21 billion yuan, up 19.7 percent 
over the previous year; the sales of the collective retail 
enterprises reached 33.55 billion yuan, up 18 percent; the sales 
of individual retail units reached 21.63 billion yuan, up 39.7 
percent and its proportion rose from 19.4 percent in the 
previous year to 21.8 percent; farm sales to non-agricultural 
residents reached 6.62 billion yuan, up 49.9 percent and its 
proportion rose from 5.5 percent to 6.7 percent. 
  Retail sales of all kinds of consumer goods increased 
comprehensively and rapidly. In 1993, the retail sales of food 
products increased 27.6 percent, clothing, 27.9 percent, and 
daily necessities, 33.1 percent. Analyzed by the sales of 
consumer goods, of the food products, the sales of grain 
declined by 1.3 percent and the sales of edible cereal oil 
increased 1.4 percent. Among clothing items, the sales of all 
sorts of cloth declined by 13 percent, the sales of knitted 
goods rose by 9.9 percent, and the sales of other garments rose 
by 8.3 percent; and the sales of durable consumer goods all 
registered growth to varying degrees. The sales of color 
television sets increased 32.1 percent, cassette recorders, 12.1 
percent, video recorders, 14.2 percent, cameras, 28.5 percent, 
washing machines, 43.7 percent, and refrigerators, 25.1 percent. 
  The urban and rural markets were brisk. In 1993, Shandong 
Province invested 3.4 billion yuan in building country fairs, up 
21.2 percent over the previous year. The transactions at the 
country fairs totalled 55.29 billion yuan, up 82.3 percent. Of 
this, the transactions on the urban country fairs reached 30.7 
billion yuan, up 110 percent, and that of rural country fairs, 
24.59 billion yuan, up 55.9 percent. 
  The purchase and marketing at the markets of the means of 
production were brisk. The materials supply departments across 
the province purchased 54.305 billion yuan worth of all kinds of 
means of production, up 24.14 percent over the previous year, 
and marketed 57.059 billion worth of all kinds of means of 
production, up 24 percent. 
  The market system was well developed, and 825 networks of 
various kinds and 638 country fairs were built. By the end of 
the year, Shandong Province built 8,100 tangible markets, 
ranking first in China. Of these markets, 1,100 were wholesale 
markets and 230 were markets of the means of production. The 
banking markets became brisk every day and established 
interlending loan relations with 26 provinces and cities across 
the province and more than 100 large and medium-sized cities. 
Shandong Province developed more than 130 stock organs, 14 of 
which established ties with stock exchange centers in Shanghai 
and Shenzhen. There were 61 personnel markets in the province. 
Technology, real estate, and cultural markets were further 
developed. 
  New breakthroughs were won in foreign economic relations 
and trade, exports developed substantially, and economic 
efficiency notably improved. Shandong's 1993 imports and 
exports totaled $7.416 billion, up 33.6 percent from the 
preceding year; of which exports totaled $5.976 billion, up 27.1 
percent. In the total volume of exports, local trade exports 
totaled $5.126 billion, up 44.2 percent, of which $2.102 billion 
were exports by the "three types of foreign-funded enterprises," 
an increase of 153 percent and accounting for 35.2 percent of 
the total exports. The cost of foreign exchange earning 
declined, and the long period of deficits of foreign trade 
enterprises was further changed. 
  The investment climate notably improved, and the foreign 
capital we used showed a substantial increase. Shandong 
approved 8,012 projects using foreign capital, with the promised 
amount of foreign capital totaling $7.55 billion, and the amount 
of foreign capital we actually used was $2.26 billion, an 
increase of 72.3, 59.9, and 64.2 percent, respectively, over the 
preceding year. Of these projects, 7,229 were the three types 
of foreign-funded enterprises, which promised $7.05 billion 
foreign investment, and the amount actually made was $1.84 
billion, up 75.9, 79.8, and 89.4 percent, respectively. Among 
the newly approved three types of foreign-funded enterprises, 
1,305 were exclusively invested by foreign firms, up 867. A 
total of 123 foreign loan contracts worth $326 million were 
signed, and the amount actually used was $347 million. 
  Foreign economic and technological cooperation made new 
headway. Shandong signed 299 contracts worth $202 million on 
construction projects and labor service cooperation abroad, up 
55.7 and 131 percent, respectively, from the preceding year. 
Approval was given to establishment of 106 enterprises 
overseas, and the investment made overseas was $26.17 million, 
thus enabling Shandong's enterprises to make a new step toward 
the world. 
  International tourism developed even more vigorously. In 
1993, Shandong received 284,000 tourists from foreign countries 
and Hong Kong, Macao, and Taiwan who came for sight-seeing, 
visits, and economic and trade exchanges, an increase of 17.8 
percent. Of the total, 144,700 were foreigners, up 13.8 
percent; 5,182 were Overseas Chinese, showing a decline; 70,500 
were Hong Kong and Macao compatriots, up 18.1 percent; and 
64,000 were Taiwan compatriots, up 36.7 percent. Foreign 
exchange earned from tourism totaled 395 million yuan (foreign 
exchange certificates in renminbi), up 16.5 percent from the 
preceding year. 
  The budget was implemented successfully, and a balance with 
some surplus was achieved. Shandong's 1993 revenue was 19.443 
billion yuan, accounting for 127.3 percent of the budget and 
registering an increase of 38.8 percent over the preceding year; 
and its expenditure was 18.846 billion yuan, accounting for 
100.5 percent of the budget. Excluding Qingdao city, whose 
financial plan was directly listed in state plan, Shandong's 
revenue was 15.425 billion yuan, accounting for 125.4 percent of 
the budget and increasing by 37.8 percent; and its expenditure 
was 16.668 billion yuan, accounting for 100.5 percent of the 
budget. Expenses on key areas, such as agriculture, education, 
and science and technology, exceeded the budgeted amounts by 
17.5, 25.1, and 17.7 percent, respectively. Overall calculation 
showed a surplus of 23.77 million yuan, which enabled Shandong 
to register a financial balance for the seventh year in a row 
and to play an important role in facilitating economic 
development and reform. 
  The monetary situation was fairly stable. By the end of 
1993, savings deposits totaled 182.197 billion yuan, an increase 
of 35.98 billion yuan from the figures registered at the 
beginning of the year, and loans totaled 207.694 billion yuan, 
an increase of 35.61 billion yuan. Credit was restructured, 
with loans for fixed assets and agriculture increasing by a 
large margin and those for circulating funds declining. The 
annual cash income of banks totaled 354.162 billion yuan, up 
50.9 percent from the preceding year, and their cash expenditure 
totaled 359.979 billion yuan, up 49.6 percent. This made the 
net amount of currency put into circulation total 6.567 billion 
yuan, an increase of 512 million yuan over the preceding year. 
  Progress was made in the insurance business. In 1993, the 
premium for insurance undertaken by the province totaled 460 
billion yuan, an increase of 12 percent. Some 28,000 
enterprises participated in enterprise property insurance, 5 
million households participated in household property insurance, 
and 12 million persons took part in life insurance programs. 
The income from domestic and foreign insurance services totaled 
3.285 billion yuan, an increase of 20.2 percent; and the 
expenditure on domestic and foreign insurance services totaled 
1,987 billion yuan, an increase of 49.6 percent. Of this, 1.308 
billion yuan were paid out for domestic property insurance, 390 
million yuan were paid out for life insurance, and $13,400 
million were paid out for foreign business. 
  New headway was made in science and technology. In 1993, the 
province made 2,858 key scientific and technological findings. 
Of this, 372 attained the international advanced levels, 1,745 
attained the domestic advanced levels, 30 won the state 
scientific and technological progress awards, 17 won the state 
invention awards, and 456 won the provincial scientific and 
technological progress awards. By the end of the year, there 
were 415 state-owned independent scientific research and 
development organizations at or above the county level and 4,080 
civilian-run scientific and technological enterprises in the 
province. 
  The province made noticeable achievements in rejuvenating 
agriculture with science and technology. In 1993, 120 
county-level governments were installed with deputy county (city 
and district) heads in charge of scientific and technological 
work, 75 percent of the towns and townships were installed with 
deputy town and township heads in charge of scientific and 
technological work, and 50 percent of administrative villages 
were installed with directors in charge of scientific and 
technological work. The province accomplished 675 "spark" 
planning projects at or above the provincial level. By 
accomplishing these projects, 4.78 billion yuan of output value 
were newly added, 950 million yuan of profits and taxes were 
created, $306 million foreign exchange were created and saved, 
300,000 technological managers were trained for the rural areas, 
and the province won 13 state "spark" awards and 88 
provincial-level "spark" awards. 
  Technology markets tended to become vigorous and the pace of 
commercializing technological findings was accelerated. By the 
end of 1993, there were 5,000 technology trade organizations of 
various categories with an employment of 57,000 persons. Of 
this, more than 56.9 percent were science professionals and 
technicians. A total of 20,639 technology contracts were signed 
with 1.04 billion yuan involved. 
  Patent work rapidly developed. In 1993, the province handled 
4,691 applications for patent rights and 4,019 were approved, an 
increase of 5.5 percent and 90.6 percent over the previous year. 
A total of 2,108 patent rights were popularized within the 
year, 5.823 billion yuan of output value were created, 877 
million yuan of profits and taxes were created, and $421 million 
foreign exchange were created and saved. 
  Large and medium-sized industrial enterprises made new 
progress in technological development. Fifty percent of the 
province's large and medium-sized industrial enterprises set up 
special technological development organizations and more than 
60,000 persons were engaged in technological development. 
Nearly 6,000 technological development projects were 
accomplished or continued. 
  The new high-tech industries developed in a sustained and 
fast manner. By the end of 1993, the overall plans for nine 
development zones at or above the provincial level covered 
816,000 square kilometers, the construction investment reached 
10.077 billion yuan, and 1,966,000 square meters of areas were 
completed. So far, 4,668 enterprises have been set up in the 
new high-tech development zones. Of them, 161 new high-tech 
enterprises were acknowledged by the provincial scientific and 
technological commission. In 1993, development zones developed 
more than 400 new high-tech products, realized 7.23 billion yuan 
of output value, and created 610 million yuan of profits and 
taxes. The province has acknowledged 99 new high-tech 
industrial production centers and accomplished 223 projects 
covered in the spark plan. Of this, 29 were state-level 
projects with an investment of 1.33 billion yuan. Upon the 
completion of these projects, 6.56 billion yuan of output value 
and 2 billion yuan of profits and taxes will newly be added and 
$720 million foreign exchange will be created and saved. 
  Lateral economic cooperation developed rapidly. A total of 
7,470 joint and cooperation items were reached. Of this, 5,817 
were really developed. The total investment in these projects 
was planned to be 4.42 billion, 1.835 billion yuan of capital 
were brought in, 2,456 technologies were imported, 11,125 
skilled persons were introduced, and the cooperation items on 
12.82 billion yuan worth of materials were reached. 
  The work and technological level of meteorology, geology, 
mapping, and standard measurement continued to improve. 
Meteorological departments forecast all kinds of natural 
calamities in a relatively correct and timely manner and 
provided service for production and lives, thus achieving marked 
economic and social results. In 1993, geological departments 
verified eight kinds of solid minerals, one kind of groundwater, 
and one kind of hot spring. These departments also discovered 
three important mineral deposits (gold deposits), submitted 37 
geological reports, and completed a total drilling of 59,675 
meters. Mapping departments surveyed and drew 1,692 maps of 
various scales, drew 572 new maps, completed aerial photography 
on 615.6 square kilometers, provided the society with 16,432 
maps of various scales, 484 wall maps, 1,294 aerial pictures, 
and 1,521 land survey results. Technological and supervisory 
departments meted out 18 provincial-level standards and checked 
and accepted 242 standards in line with the international norms, 
of which, 49 attained the advanced international level. In 
1993, the province set up 151 new measurement standards, 
completed measurement attestation for 96 units, formulated five 
regulations for examining local measurements, obtained 491 
industrial product production certificates, and conducted 
regular supervision and examination for 62,803 products 
(commodities), with 70.4 percent of products attaining 
standards. In 1993, the state conducted spot survey of 537 
products, and 73.74 percent of products were found up to 
standard. Meanwhile, the province conducted spot check for 
1,102 products, and 70.4 percent were found up to standards, 
both showing an increase over the previous year. 
  New progress was made in environmental protection. By the 
end of 1993, the province's environmental protection system 
owned 148 environment monitoring stations, of which, 128 were 
the stations of the county level. The province set up 194 smoke 
control zones, with a total area of 799 square kilometers, in 41 
cities, and set up 117 noise control zones, with a total area of 
339 square kilometers, in 38 cities. 
  Educational system positively explored the way of running 
schools in line with social demand. Educational departments set 
up new disciplines and specialities in line with the demands of 
market economy and opening up, positively trained and provided 
professional workers engaged in diverse disciplines for the 
construction at various levels, and enabled universities, 
colleges, and specialized schools to increase their enrollment 
capacity rapidly. 
  Ordinary higher education developed rapidly in the course of 
readjustment. In 1993, institutions of higher learning in the 
province enrolled a total of 1,171 graduate students, up by 52.1 
percent over 1992, with the total body of graduate students 
reaching 2,632 persons, up by 24.5 percent. Meanwhile, these 
institutions enrolled 57,900 students, up by 0.9 percent over 
1992, with the total student body reaching 151,800 persons, up 
by 17 percent. 
  Secondary education developed steadily. In 1993, there were 
1,094 vocational and technical schools in the province, and 
660,200 students were studying in these schools. The proportion 
of these schools in the total number of students at the stage of 
senior middle schools rose from 54.4 percent in 1992 to 56.4 
percent. The students attending senior middle schools increased 
by 20,500 persons, up by 4.2 percent. The students attending 
junior middle schools increased by 107,400 persons, up by 3.2 
percent. 
  On the basis of making primary education basically 
universal, 
teaching quality of primary schools improved further. In 1993, 
there were 8,535,700 pupils in primary schools. The enrollment 
rate of primary-school-age children was 98.6 percent, up by 0.6 
percentage points. Pre-school education also developed rapidly. 
In 1993, there were 2,622,500 children in kindergartens, up by 
1.5 percent over 1992. The student body of special education 
schools was 12,300 persons, up by 5.3 percent. 
  Adult education networks of various categories took shape. 
In 1993, adult colleges and universities enrolled 71,200 
undergraduates and students in special courses, an increase of 
45.1 percent; and the enrollment totaled 149,300, an increase of 
42.2 percent. The enrollment in adult secondary specialized 
schools was 160,200, an increase of 51.4 percent. 
  Cultural and literary and artistic undertakings were 
prosperous. In 1993, there were 9,568 film projection units of 
various categories; 170 new films were projected; and there were 
119 art ensembles, 126 public libraries, 157 cultural and 
artistic centers, and 173 archives; and there were a collection 
of 5.3 million books. There were 77 radio stations and 30 short- 
and medium-wave radio transmitters and relay stations. There 
were 52 television stations and 79 television transmitters and 
relay stations with a capacity of over one kilowatt each. The 
province's radio stations broadcasted an average of 685 hours 
and 42 minutes every day and the television stations broadcasted 
an average of 2,260 hours and 47 minutes each week. The radio 
and television population coverage rates reached 86 percent and 
85.2 percent, respectively. A total of 356,398,200 copies of 
2,894 books, 54.331 million copies of 185 magazines, and 
963,640,000 copies of 69 newspapers were published during the 
year. The public health undertakings continued to develop and 
the medical conditions were further improved. In 1993, the 
province had 2,968 hospitals of various kinds, an increase of 44 
over the previous year; and 177,000 sickbeds, an increase of 
6,111. There were 327,300 medical technicians of various 
categories, an increase of 3.51 percent. Of this, there were 
110,500 doctors, an increase of 4.54 percent. The traditional 
Chinese medical undertaking developed at a faster speed. The 
increase rates of the traditional Chinese medical organizations, 
traditional Chinese medical hospitals' sickbeds, and their 
working personnel surpassed 5 percent. Great achievements were 
made in prevention and health work. Despite the serious 
disasters, the rate of infectious and contagious incidence 
decreased noticeably. 
  Sports also had great achievements. In 1993, an athlete 
created a world record, 13 athletes broke 16 Asian records on 17 
occasions, and 10 athletes broke 12 national records on 12 
occasions. At the key domestic and foreign games, the province 
captured five world championships, 14 Asian championships, and 
46 national championships. Another 7,842,000 persons attained 
the "state sports training standards" and 51 counties were 
listed as the national sports advanced counties. 
  4. Investment in Fixed Assets 
  Investment in fixed assets continued in a sustained manner. 
The investment in fixed assets of society reached 87.155 
billion yuan, an increase of 44.9 percent. Of this, 72.346 
billion yuan went to the local units, an increase of 46.6 
percent. Of the investment in fixed assets, 50.652 billion yuan 
went to the state units, an increase of 47.6 percent. Of this, 
the investment in capital construction reached 25.802 billion 
yuan, an increase of 47.7 percent. The investment in 
technological transformation and equipment renewal totaled 
13.492 billion yuan, an increase of 57.2 percent; the collective 
investment was 25.986 billion yuan, an increase of 39.4 percent; 
and the individual investment was 10.517 billion yuan, an 
increase of 46.3 percent. 
  The investment structure was further optimized. The tertiary 
industry was strengthened. Of the investment in the state-owned 
enterprises, 23.977 billion yuan went to the tertiary industry, 
an increase of 66.5 percent. The proportion of the investment 
in tertiary industry rose from 42 percent in 1992 to 47.3 
percent. Of this, the 6.068 billion yuan went to 
communications, transportation, postal and telecommunications 
trades, an increase of 40.4 percent; 2.698 billion yuan went to 
commercial and catering service trades, an increase of 81.2 
percent; and 9.777 billion yuan went to real estate and public 
service trades, an increase of 99 percent. 
  The construction of key projects was under smooth progress. 
A total of 8.94 billion yuan were invested in 59 on-going large 
and medium-sized capital construction projects, fulfilling the 
annual plan by 97.5 percent. Four of them were completed and 
went into operation. 
  The technical renovations of enterprises were accelerated. 
The investments made in renewal and renovations by the 
state-owned units in 1993 were accelerated. The increased scale 
of investments in this regard surpassed that of capital 
construction by 9.5 percentage points. Of these investments, 
those made in saving energy resources, increasing the variety of 
products, improving the products' quality, and handling three 
wastes reached 3.784 billion yuan and showed a 50 percent 
increase over 1992; and those made in rebuilding the out-dated 
houses reached 5.823 billion yuan and showed a 46.2 percent 
increase over 1992. 
  The construction of marketable houses was accelerated. The 
investment made by the province in building marketable houses in 
1993 reached 6.905 billion yuan and showed an 84.2 percent 
increase over 1992. The acreage of completely-built houses 
reached 7.379 million square meters and showed a 48.2 percent 
increase over 1992. Of this investment, that made in building 
marketable residential houses reached 4.82 billion yuan and 
showed a 103-percent increase over 1992. The acreage of 
completely built residential houses reached 5.842 million square 
meters and showed a 37.4 percent increase over 1992. 
  5. Markets and Commodity Prices 
  The province accelerated the price reform in 1993, 
readjusted 
the prices of a number of farm and sideline products and of 
basic industrial products, and relaxed the price restrictions on 
the overwhelming majority of products. The general level of 
retail prices rose on a larger scale. The 1993 general level of 
social retail prices showed a 10.7 percent increase over 1992 
thanks to the improvement of macro environment, the sufficient 
supply of goods, and the basic stability in the consumers' 
feeling. Of this increase, that of urban areas was 12.3 
percent and that of rural areas was 9.1 percent. Increased 
scales in the prices of eight major consumer goods, the means of 
agricultural production, and of service trades, are as fellows 
(%): 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Province          |Urban Areas       |Rural Areas       |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Foodstuffs        |9.9               |12.8              |7.2               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Clothes           |8.6               |12.1              |5.3               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Daily commodities |6.4               |8.2               |4.7               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Culture and recre-|0.5               |1.8               |-0.7              | 
|ation goods       |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Newspaper and per-|16.3              |13.3              |19.1              | 
|iodicals          |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Medicine and medi-|7.7               |7.7               |7.7               | 
|cal goods         |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Building and deco-|17.4              |17.7              |17.2              | 
|ration materials  |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Fuel              |50.0              |65.0              |35.5              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Means of agricult-|11.6              |--                |11.6              | 
|ural production   |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Service trades    |30.8              |35.4              |26.4              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The prices of trade fairs in the year showed a 5.9 percent 
increase over 1992. The prices of residents' living expenses 
showed a 12.7 percent increase over 1992. Of this increase, 
that in urban residents' expenses was 14.6 percent and that in 
rural residents' expenses was 10.7 percent. The prices of 
purchasing farm and sideline products showed an 11 percent 
increase over 1992 and those of industrial products, which were 
first fixed by plants, showed a 23 percent increase over 1992. 
  6. People's Lives and Population 
  The income of both urban and rural residents showed a steady 
increase. The province's per capita living income of urban 
areas in 1993 reached 2,338 yuan and showed a 27.3 percent 
increase over 1992 and an 11.1 percent increase excluding the 
factor of price hikes. The per peasant net income reached 952.74 
yuan and showed an 18.7 percent increase over 1992 and a 6.1 
percent increase excluding the factor of price hikes. 
  The practical living standard of both urban and rural 
residents was further upgraded and the housing conditions 
continued to be improved. The province's per capita consumer 
expense of urban areas reached 1,923.42 yuan and showed a 20.4 
percent increase over 1992. The per peasant living expense 
reached 724.5 yuan and showed a 10.5 percent increase over 1992. 
The increase of urban residents' consumer expenses was 
basically equal to that of their incomes. However, the increase 
of rural residents' consumer expenses was lower than that of 
their incomes. The per capita housing acreage of urban areas 
reached 9.7 square meters and that of rural areas reached 20.65 
square meters. The housing quality was generally upgraded. 
  Urban and rural people's durable consumer goods increased 
continuously. The numbers of durable goods in every 100 urban 
and rural households were as follows: 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                         |Urban Areas              |Rural Areas              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Television Sets          |115                      |83.23                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Of which: Color sets     |82                       |13.9                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Cassette Recorders       |83                       |22.48                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Household Refrigerators  |75                       |4.05                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Washing Machines         |85                       |9.00                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Electric Fans            |176                      |92.26                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Sewing Machines          |73                       |74.62                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Cameras                  |26.5                     |1.31                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The contingent of staff members and workers was expanded, 
and 
their wages raised. By the end of 1993, Shandong's staff 
members and workers totaled 8.519 million, increasing by 141,000 
over the preceding year, of whom, 6.151 million were staff 
members and workers of state-owned units, increasing by 111,000. 
Among the staff members and workers of state-owned units, 1.737 
million were contractors, up 128,000, and their proportion to 
the total staff members and workers of state-owned units rose 
from 26.6 percent in the preceding year to 28.2 percent. The 
total wage bill was 26 billion yuan, up 21.3 percent, and the 
average wage was 3,050 yuan, up 17.3 percent. 
  Urban and rural people's savings deposits increased 
substantially. Their savings deposits totaled 111.824 billion 
yuan by the end of the year, an increase of 23.407 billion yuan 
over the figure registered at the beginning of the year. Of the 
total, urban people's savings came to 79.73 billion yuan, an 
increase of 19.091 billion yuan, and rural people's savings 
32.094 billion yuan, an increase of 4.316 billion yuan. 
  Social welfare continued to develop. Social welfare 
institutions totaled 4,640 by the end of the year, and they 
housed 85,000 persons. Social security foundations increased to 
29,133, and the coverage of social security networks reached 
89.5 percent. In the year, 130.27 million yuan of disaster 
relief and aid-the-poor funds were allocated to support 501,000 
households, of which 159,000 households shook off poverty. 
Social welfare enterprises totaled 4,012 in the province, which 
placed 66,000 handicapped people and achieved 7.03 billion yuan 
in output value, registering a substantial increase over the 
preceding years. 
  Family planning yielded good results, and a low population 
growth rate was attained. In 1993, party committees and 
governments at all levels intensified family planning measures, 
brought population growth under strict control, and thus 
achieved notable results. According to sample surveys on 
population changes, the 1993 birth rate was 10.47 per thousand, 
mortality rate 6.76 per thousand, and natural population growth 
was 3.71 per thousand. Calculated on this basis, the year-end 
population of the province was 86.423 million. 
  Notes: 1. The gross domestic product, added value, and 
output 
value listed in this communique were calculated based on the 
prices of the year, and growth rates, except for the total 
product of rural areas, were calculated in terms of comparable 
prices. 
  2. Figures listed in this communique were all preliminary 
statistics. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1670 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_o_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Feb 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> East Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Zhejiang's Li Zemin on Grain Production </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Zhejiang's Li Zemin on Grain Production </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW1802053594 Hangzhou ZHEJIANG RIBAO in Chinese 5 Feb 94 pp 
1, 2 </F>

<F P=103> OW1802053594 </F>
<F P=104>  Hangzhou ZHEJIANG RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Provincial Party Committee and </F>
Government Call Grain Work Conference To Propose Ensuring 
Production of Agricultural Produce Including Grain, Edible Oil, 
and Meat; and Maintaining a Balance Between Overall Supply and 
Demand, and Market Stability"] 
  [Text] On 3 February, the Zhejiang provincial CPC 
committee and government called a provincial work conference on 
grain. Participants earnestly implemented the guidelines laid 
down at the national work conference on the "vegetable basket," 
grain, cotton, and edible oil; analyzed the current situation by 
taking our province's reality into consideration; unified 
thinking; and studied ways to enhance macroeconomic regulation 
and control under the conditions of a market economy, to further 
deepen reform and improve the system of grain procurement and 
marketing, to protect and mobilize the enthusiasm of farmers for 
production, and to ensure a balance in the overall supply and 
demand of staple agricultural products including grain, edible 
oil, meat, and vegetables and market stability. Participants 
also advanced opinions and measures on ensuring the supply of 
vegetables and farm sideline products for urban and rural 
citizens. Li Zemin, secretary of the provincial CPC committee, 
and Wan Xueyan, deputy secretary of the provincial CPC committee 
and provincial governor, spoke at the meeting. Liu Xirong, 
member of the standing committee of the provincial CPC committee 
and vice governor, transmitted the guidelines laid down at the 
national work conference on the "vegetable basket." Chai 
Songyue, deputy secretary of the provincial CPC committee and 
vice governor, presided over the meeting. Liu Feng and Lu 
Zhanggong, deputy secretaries of the provincial CPC committee; 
Wang Qichao, member of the standing committee of the provincial 
CPC committee and secretary of the provincial commission for 
discipline inspection; Li Jinming, Xu Yunhong, and Zhang Youyu, 
members of the standing committee of the provincial CPC 
committee; and responsible comrades from the provincial people's 
congress and provincial CPPCC [Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference], attended the meeting. 
  Li Zemin pointed out: Under the current conditions of 
developing a socialist market economy, reaching a common 
understanding over agriculture, particularly over the grain 
situation, is an issue of primary importance. Only by reaching 
a common understanding can we possibly adopt concrete and 
effective measures to deal with the new situation and problems 
that have emerged in the current grain production and 
distribution. It is necessary to fully affirm that the 
provincial CPC committee and government have made the correct 
decision to decontrol grain prices and to develop "high-yield, 
high-quality, and high-efficient" farming, and that their 
direction of reform is correct. At the same time, we should be 
aware of the new situation and problems in the current grain 
production and distribution. Seen from the development trend, 
some of the problems are quite serious and worrisome. To be 
sure, there are rational grounds for readjusting and reducing 
grain planting acreage. What worries us is that this trend 
continues to develop and expand. If grain planting acreage 
continues to shrink on a large scale this year, it will surely 
have a great impact, and produce serious consequences for 
maintaining a balance between grain supply and demand in our 
province. Weakened efforts and negligence in farming can be 
observed in the following: A large number of rice fields have 
been diverted for other use; agriculture has received 
insufficient investment; policies and technology to support 
grain production have failed to fall into place; and instability 
has grown among personnel involved in agricultural technology 
and management. These are ominous signs for agriculture, 
particularly for grain production stability. Therefore, leaders 
at various levels need to reach a common understanding and to 
unify thinking in the following areas. 
  First, as the grain problem concerns the overall situation, 
we cannot afford to make light of it at any time. People rely 
on food to live. The grain issue concerns the national economy 
and the people's livelihood. Comrade Xiaoping warned us long 
ago that if any problems were to arise in the 1990's they would 
most likely occur in agriculture. In view of present 
conditions, it is of particular and important significance to 
recall Comrade Xiaoping's warning. Reform and development 
require stability. Agricultural stability, particularly grain 
production stability, directly affect economic and social 
stability. Increasing agricultural products' effective supply, 
doing a good job in grain work and on the "vegetable basket" 
project, and stabilizing food prices will create a good 
environment for our reform and development as well as for a good 
material foundation to solve various social contradictions. Our 
party and government leaders at all levels must fully recognize 
the importance of, and sense of urgency in doing a good job in 
grain work; attach a high degree of importance to the new 
situation and problems in the current grain production; and 
adopt concrete measures to solve them in a down-to-earth manner. 
  Second, it is necessary to adhere to the policy of 
"basically seeking self-sufficiency in grain production and 
regulating the grain surplus and shortage" to solve the issue in 
Zhejiang. Practice over the years has proved that the above 
policy is in accord with Zhejiang's reality. Despite the recent 
lifting of control on grain procurement, marketing, and prices, 
and the development of a socialist market economy, we should 
still unwaveringly persist in the aforementioned policy. 
Historically, Zhejiang has been one of the provinces basically 
self-sufficient in grain. Although population increases and 
dwindling arable land in recent years have left a certain gap in 
grain supply and demand, Zhejiang has been able to basically 
maintain self-sufficiency. Our province has a huge population 
with limited arable land; it is frequently hit by natural 
disasters. The fact that Zhejiang's processing industry and 
export trade greatly depend on agriculture makes it even more 
necessary for our province to seek basic self- sufficiency in 
grain. Therefore, it is hoped that people across the province 
will form a consensus on this point. 
  Third, it is necessary to correctly handle the relationship 
between regions and the entire province, and help form a concept 
that the entire province is an organic whole. Maintaining a 
balance in overall grain supply and demand helps maintain the 
overall situation of the entire province. By balance, we do not 
mean just achieving a balance in specific regions, but a balance 
encompassing the entire province. Differences in natural and 
geographical conditions objectively help shape a pattern that 
divides regions into grain-producing and consumption regions. 
For a long time, grain-producing zones have made great 
contributions to ensuring the supply of grain in the province. 
We still want to emphasize the need for major grain-producing 
regions to take the interests of the entire province into 
consideration and continue to undertake the task of supplying 
commodity grain. Of course, the province will attach great 
importance to protecting the benefits of grain-producing 
regions, give them support in terms of policy, funds, and 
materials, call on other trades and industries to support 
agriculture, and try its best to encourage the enthusiasm of 
farmers to grow grain. At the same time, efforts should be made 
to readjust regional interests and interests between urban and 
rural areas as well as to foster a closer link between 
production and marketing. 
  Fourth, it is necessary to maintain the direction of reform 
and to devote efforts to deepen reform and improve reform 
measures. The province's fundamental purpose and point of 
departure for implementing the reform measure of decontrolling 
grain procurement and marketing prices last year, was to try 
every possible means to help farmers increase their income, 
which was made the basic guiding thought for rural work. We 
must be firm in belief and never waver from following the 
correct direction of rural reform. Reform itself did not bring 
forth the current crop of problems. Those problems are, 
generally speaking, ones met in the course of progress. The 
major cause of those problems lays in the failure to devise an 
adequate number of supplementary reform measures and is due to 
the delay in working out macroeconomic regulation and control 
measures. Enhancing macroeconomic regulation and control is not 
only indispensable for developing a socialist market economy but 
also important in deepening the current reform and improving 
reform measures. Enhancing macroeconomic regulation and control 
must be built on the foundation of respecting the law of value. 
To deal with and solve problems, we rely on economic policy and 
economic methods as much as possible. But under the present 
situation, in addition to adopting economic means, we need to 
rely on our political superiority and to bring this superiority 
into play, as well as on adopting some necessary administrative 
methods. 
  Li Zemin said: The national work conference on the 
"vegetable basket" project, grain, cotton, and edible oil held 
by the State Council is of great guiding significance to our 
efforts in this year's agricultural production, and in planning 
the people's life in urban and rural areas centered on the 
overall situation of reform, development, and stability. We 
must correctly understand and conscientiously carry out the 
guidelines of the CPC Central Committee. To carry out the CPC 
Central Committee guidelines, our leading cadres at all levels 
must understand the guiding ideology in light of Zhejing's 
actual situation and the implementation of the various tasks put 
forward by last year's rural work conference convened by the 
provincial party committee. We must systematically study new 
situations and problems in production, circulation, consumption, 
and other fields, deepen our understanding, and work out tasks 
and policies for strengthening microeconomic regulation and 
control. 
  First, we should make prompt and solid efforts from now on. 
At present, all tasks are heavy and the farming season is 
approaching. We must do our job ahead of the season. It is the 
crucial moment right now and we must take prompt initiative as 
early as possible. As long as we do a careful and solid job, we 
will finish our work in time. We must see to it that the tasks 
and policies are carried out around the Spring Festival so as to 
help peasants strengthen the management of spring crops and 
plant enough early rice. 
  Second, we must concentrate our efforts on production and 
increase total production steadily. Our top priority is to make 
sure there is enough acreage of early rice, stop the trend of 
planting single-season rice in a vast area, and stabilize 
multiple crop indices. We must adhere to the triple cropping 
system because it tallies with the actual situation in Zhejiang, 
a province with a large population and limited land, as well as 
reflects Zhejiang's strong points in agriculture, especially in 
the production of grain and edible oil. Of course, we must 
vigorously explore new ways to implement the triple cropping 
system in line with local conditions. We must pay close 
attention to grain production and strive to stabilize the 
production of some important agricultural products such as 
cotton, vegetables, and pigs. We must develop new ways of 
thinking while promoting production. While providing guidance 
for tens of thousands households in developing production, we 
should pay even more attention to major households, production 
bases, and large-scale management. This should be the direction 
of our agriculture, in which our policy should provide 
preferential treatment. 
  Third, we should solve current problems in light of 
establishing scientific and rational mechanisms, and promoting 
long-term development. To stabilize the current production and 
market supply, it is necessary to take some interim measures. 
However, these measures should be commensurate with long-term 
development, and the establishment and perfection of 
operationally flexible and effective mechanisms for 
macroeconomic regulation and control so that they can help 
establish a socialist market economic structure. We should 
focus attention on the establishment of a risk fund and storage 
system for grain and other major agricultural products and 
should draw up specific procedures for implementation. In 
circulation, we should continue to give full play to the role of 
grain, commercial, and supply and marketing departments as the 
major channels for circulation, but should gradually separate 
policy-oriented operations from business operations under two 
different systems. Moreover, we should further cultivate and 
develop markets, and strengthen the management and supervision 
of agricultural product markets. 
  Fourth, we should make determined efforts to increase 
investment in agriculture according to the principle of "first 
ensuring enough food, and second, guaranteeing construction." 
Now, while arranging budgets and utilizing credits, governments 
at all levels must guarantee the people have enough food; they 
must adopt policies favorable to grain production and the 
"vegetable basket" project, and ensure this major task even at 
the expense of cutting back spending in other areas. 
  Fifth, to maintain a basic balance between overall supply 
and demand, and inject vitality into the province's work as a 
whole, we should have clearly defined responsibilities and 
powers, introduce a system of responsibility, and assign 
macro-control and administrative responsibility to various 
levels. 
  Li Zemin stressed: Party committees and government at all 
levels must pay great attention, and top leaders must assume 
overall charge and become personally involved -- herein lies the 
key to the success of work related to grain and vegetable 
production. Members of the party committees or government must, 
first of all, unify their thinking and enhance their sense of 
responsibility. Instead of merely relaying the assignments and 
policy measures issued by the State Council, the provincial 
party committee, and provincial government, the cities, 
prefectures, and counties must, in light of their respective 
realities, take firm, immediate action to implement them. They 
should take organizational steps by establishing a system of 
responsibility. The principal leaders of the provincial 
government shall take charge at the provincial level while the 
top leaders shall assume overall charge in their respective 
cities, prefectures, or counties. Local party committees must 
also conscientiously exercise supervision to ensure success. 
The provincial party committee and government are stressing 
once again: In pursuant of a directive from the central 
authorities, party committees and government of the prefectures, 
counties, townships, and villages must devote their main energy 
to agriculture and rural work. In the future, agricultural 
development and increases in peasant income will be given 
greater emphasis in evaluating the performance of a locality or 
a leading cadre. It is necessary to introduce some tangible, 
measurable targets and introduce a system of responsibility to 
ensure their implementation at different levels. Village and 
township cadres and agrotechnicians should be treated equally 
with others when it comes to recognition and material benefits, 
so that they will feel respected politically and not 
disadvantaged economically. It is necessary to change the style 
of work, go deep among the grass roots, and provide specific 
guidance. Leading comrades at all levels should go deep down, 
hear directly what the grass roots have to say and different 
views from various quarters, and have a good grasp of the real 
situation. A pressing matter of the moment is to make thorough 
and meticulous arrangements for the production of early rice. 
While intensifying ideological education and providing 
guidance, we should adopt economic, legal, or administrative 
measures to prevent land from being used for single cropping of 
rice. We should conscientiously publicize and implement the 
"Implementation Procedures of Zhejiang Province for Land 
Administration" amended and promulgated recently by the standing 
committee of the provincial people's congress, and firmly 
prevent farmlands from being left idle and unattended or 
illegally used for other purposes. All levels should assign one 
or more villages to a cadre whose job is to help the peasants 
prepare for and carry out spring farming. We should organize 
all trades and professions to provide support and better 
services for agriculture. Government departments must -- while 
transforming their functions -- continue to give top priority to 
agriculture; they must not think of only their own interests and 
therefore ignore providing support to agriculture. The 
provincial party committee and government have instructed all 
relevant departments to conduct a review of aid- agriculture 
work, firmly establish the idea of "three agricultures" [san 
nong si xiang 0005 6593 1835 1927], and provide good services in 
a down-to-earth manner. We should correctly guide public 
opinion and do a good job in publicity and providing guidance. 
Newspapers, radio, and television stations, and other media 
units should publicize party committee and government's plans by 
providing positive examples. Their coverage of stories related 
to grain, cotton, edible oil, and the "vegetable basket" should 
be helpful in reassuring the urban residents and in mobilizing 
the peasants' enthusiasm for production. We should, by way of 
fostering positive public opinion and propaganda, guide the vast 
number of cadres and people to contribute to promoting 
production and stabilizing the market and society. 
  At the end of the meeting, Wan Xueyuan emphasized: We must 
earnestly relay and implement guidelines of the national 
conference on the "vegetable basket" and grain, cotton, and 
edible oil, and the provincial conference on grain. In 
consideration of the seasonal nature of agriculture, we must 
seize the opportune moment. First of all, we should unify our 
thinking, be fully aware of the importance of vegetables, grain, 
and edible oil, positively grasp and implement the guidelines of 
the central and provincial meetings, and pay attention to 
linking up new guidelines with relevant policies adopted in the 
past. We should send cadres to help the grass roots implement 
policies, conduct research, and sum up and publicize the 
experience of advanced units in order to advance this work on a 
larger scale. 
  Present at the meeting were secretaries of the city and 
prefectural CPC committees, mayors, prefectural commissioners; 
party secretaries, mayors or heads of 29 major grain producing 
counties (cities); and officials of relevant provincial 
departments. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1671 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi063_o_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Feb 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> East Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Zhejiang Land Administration Measures </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Zhejiang Land Administration Measures </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0103152994 Hangzhou ZHEJIANG RIBAO in Chinese 2 Feb 94 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> OW0103152994 </F>
<F P=104>  Hangzhou ZHEJIANG RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["`The Implementation Measures on Land Administration of </F>
Zhejiang Province' Were Adopted at the 23rd Session of the 
Standing Committee of the Sixth Zhejiang Provincial People's 
Congress on 20 January 1987; the First Amendment Was Made in 
Accordance With the `Decisions on Amending the "Implementation 
Measures on Land Administration of Zhejiang Province"' adopted 
at the Eighth Session of the Standing Committee of the Seventh 
Zhejiang Provincial People's Congress on 12 March 1989; the 
Second Amendment was made in accordance with the `Decisions on 
Amending the "Implementation Measures on Land Administration of 
Zhejiang Province"' Adopted at the Eighth Session of the 
Standing Committee of the Eighth Zhejiang Provincial People's 
Congress on 29 January 1994"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Chapter I. General Principles </H5>
  Article 1. These implementation measures are formulated in 
accordance with the "Land Administration Law of the People's 
Republic of China," and in light of the practical situation in 
Zhejiang Province. 
  Article 2. Land is a valuable resource of the state. The 
land in Zhejiang Province, which has a large population but 
limited land resources, is especially precious. People's 
governments at all levels must implement the guiding principles 
governing rational utilization of the extremely valuable land. 
An overall plan should be made, and efforts should be made to 
strengthen the management, protection, development, and 
utilization of land resources, and to curb wanton occupation of 
arable land and indiscriminate use of land. 
  Article 3. According to legal provisions, land in urban 
areas belongs to the whole people, which means it is owned by 
the state. Land in the rural areas and city suburbs, other than 
that owned by the state in accordance with legal provisions, is 
collectively owned. Residential land, self-reserved land, and 
mountains fall under collective ownership. 
  In accordance with the law, land under collective ownership 
is collectively owned by rural peasants. Land which is already 
owned by various collective economic organizations in villages 
may be claimed to be owned collectively by peasants under their 
respective collective rural economic organizations. Land which 
is already owned by peasants' collective economic organizations 
in townships and (towns) may be claimed to be owned collectively 
by peasants in townships (towns). 
  Article 4. Land under collective ownership and state land 
used by units owned by the whole people, or collective ownership 
units may be contracted by collectives or individuals for 
operations in agricultural, forestry, animal husbandry and 
fishery production. 
  Collectives or Individuals who have contracted land for 
business operations shall have the obligations to protect the 
land and use it reasonably as stipulated in contracts. 
  The right to contract land for business operations is 
protected by law. 
  Article 5. All state-owned or collectively owned land 
(inclusive of residential land, self-reserved land, and 
mountains) shall not be occupied by any unit or individuals; nor 
shall it be purchased and sold or transferred by other illegal 
means. 
  Transfer of the right of use of state land and collectively 
owned land shall be conducted in accordance with the relevant 
provisions of the state and the province concerned. 
  Peasants shall enjoy the right to use contracted land, 
residential land, self-reserved land, and mountains for specific 
purposes in accordance with the relevant provisions. 
  Article 6. Ownership of collectively-owned land shall be 
registered in a book, issued with a title in confirmation 
thereof by the people's government at or above county level. 
  State-owned or collectively owned nonagricultural land 
designated for construction purposes and used by units or 
individuals shall be registered in a book, issued with a title 
in confirmation thereof by the people's government at or above 
the county level. 
  Land Ownership affirmed in accordance with the law shall be 
protected by law. 
  Article 7. Provincial, city, and county (prefectural) 
people's governments shall establish land administration 
departments to take charge of the unified administration of the 
land under their respective administration areas. 
  The people's governments in townships (towns) shall be 
responsible for land administration in their respective 
administration areas. Land administration personnel under a 
township (town) people's government shall be specifically 
responsible for land administration work under the leadership of 
the township (town) people's government concerned, and shall 
come under the leadership of the land administration department 
at the county level. 
  Article 8. The main responsibilities of land administration 
departments at all levels are: 
  (1) to implement land administration laws and regulations of 
the state and the province; 
  (2) to take charge of investigations, registrations, 
statistics and issuance of certificates in respect of the land 
under their jurisdiction.; 
  (3) to draw up, in conjunction with relevant departments, an 
overall plan for land utilization, annual plans for land 
utilization, and control targets for designating arable land for 
other uses; 
  (4) to handle procedures related to land acquisition, 
allocation, inspection, and submissions for approval concerning 
land use; 
  (5) to carry out investigations, supervision of the 
development and use of land, and also to be responsible for 
coordination work; 
  (6) to investigate and deal with violations of law 
pertaining 
to land use; 
  (7) to handle land disputes; 
  (8) to handle other land administration matters as may be 
assigned by the government concerned. 
  Article 9. Construction within urban planning areas 
involving utilization of land must accord with urban planning, 
and must follow the procedures to submit land utilization 
applications for examination and approval in accordance with the 
provisions under these measures. 
<H5>  Chapter II. The Use of Land and Its Protection </H5>
  Article 10. People's governments at and above the county 
level exercise overall control and separate management of land 
to be used for construction projects in their own administrative 
districts. Land administration departments at and above the 
county level shall draw up fiscal land use plans in accordance 
with land use quotas decided by planning departments at the next 
higher level, which after overall balancing by planning 
departments at the same level, shall be incorporated into 
economic and social development plans and implemented after 
submitting to higher authorities through the prescribed 
procedures for approval. Land use quotas set in the fiscal 
plans should not be exceeded. 
  Article 11. People's governments at and above the county 
level shall assign capital farmland protection zones and 
exercise special protection over arable land within these zones. 
  Article 12. Land shall be used economically for state and 
township (town) construction. Where undeveloped and inferior 
land can be used, arable and good land should not be occupied. 
  Article 13. Abandoned wasteland fees shall be levied on land 
which has been abandoned and has become wasteland. County-level 
land administration departments shall levy such fees on arable 
land, garden plots, and land that can yield a profit, which have 
been approved for requisition (use) by construction units but on 
which construction has not been started after six months. 
  When a user of collectively-owned land for nonagricultural 
construction projects fails to start construction in two years 
after obtaining the license, unless with approval from the 
original approving authority to extend the period of land use, 
the approving authority shall revoke the license, and the land 
use right be recalled by agricultural collective economic 
organizations. 
  Township (town) people's governments shall levy abandoned 
wasteland fees on land that has been contracted by collectives 
or individuals for management but has been left to waste for 
over a year; and such fees shall be included in the township 
(town) financial revenue especially earmarked for no other 
purposes than farmland capital construction. 
  Villagers committees or agricultural collective economic 
organizations shall recall the contracted management right of 
arable land abandoned and laying waste for more than two years, 
and shall contract the land for management by others. 
  Norms for abandoned wasteland fees shall not be lower than 
three times the annual output value of the same type land. 
  Article 14. The use of arable land for building brick kilns 
shall be strictly controlled. Hilly land should be utilized as 
much as possible for building new brick kilns that must be 
constructed. Grain producing areas in plains shall no longer be 
allowed to build new brick kilns; and those already in operation 
shall dig clay in designated areas which should not be expanded 
without authorization. Brick kilns expanding unrealistically and 
occupying excessive arable land shall be ordered to stop 
operation and return the land for better use in farming. The 
operation of brick kilns should be conducted on the condition 
that it does not cause water and soil erosion. They should dig 
for clay from hilly areas or slopes not suitable for growing 
crops, and should level the land after digging out clay. 
Digging clay in river beds and from sea walls and road 
foundations is strictly forbidden. 
  The use of arable land for building arenas for prefabricated 
cement components is strictly controlled; and those already in 
operation should not be expanded without authorization. 
  Land to be used for constructing brick kilns and areas for 
prefabricated cement components shall be approved by competent 
authority in pursuant to the provisions of Article 25. 
  Article 15. The use of arable and afforested land for 
building tombs is forbidden. It is necessary to actively 
encourage cremation, deep burial, and the use of undeveloped 
hilly areas and slopes for building public cemeteries; and to 
prevent destruction of forested hilly areas. 
  Article 16. Units or individuals shall be responsible for 
reusing the land that can be reclaimed after mining or clay and 
sand digging. 
  Article 17. Land use plans for urban and rural construction 
should be coordinated with the revamping of old cities and 
villages and should fully utilize existing residential land and 
vacant plots. 
  Article 18. Units and individuals using land for 
construction purposes must comply with urban and rural 
construction plans, abide by relevant state provisions on 
environmental protection and soil conservation, and guard 
against environmental pollution, soil erosion, and the 
desertification and salinization of nearby arable land. Where 
losses occur, they shall be responsible for taking remedial 
actions, or paying the costs of remedial actions, as well as 
compensation for losses, to the affected parties. 
  Article 19. Land within protected areas along rivers and 
near lakes shall be utilized in accordance with plans for 
comprehensively harnessing, developing, and utilizing rivers and 
lakes. The unauthorized construction of embankments, the 
blockage of harbors, and the unauthorized reclamation of land 
are prohibited in such areas. 
  Shoals along the coast shall be reclaimed, developed, and 
utilized according to plan, and such activities shall be 
reported to the authorities for approval in accordance with 
relevant provisions. 
  Article 20. With the approval of people's governments at or 
above the county level, state-owned land repossessed by the 
government according to Article 19 of the state's "Law on Land 
Administration" may be allocated for utilization in return for 
payments to units that meet the requirements for requisitioning 
land in accordance with the provisions on the limits of 
authority regarding the examination and approval of applications 
for requisitioning land. Such land may also be temporarily 
loaned to collective agricultural economic organizations for 
farming purposes; if the land is needed for construction 
purposes, the state shall repossess it without paying any 
indemnities or relocation allowances, and without making plans 
for recruiting workers for those organizations. 
  Article 21. People's governments at all levels must follow 
the principle of combining land utilization and improvement to 
ensure the completion of annual land improvement plans. 
  Land improvement fees shall be paid in accordance with 
relevant provisions in connection with arable land appropriated 
for various types of construction projects. 
  A portion of proceeds from leasing the right to use 
state-owned land shall be set aside as special land improvement 
funds in accordance with relevant provisions. 
  Taxes collected for occupying arable land, as well as 
charges 
and special funds collected and set aside for land improvement 
in accordance with relevant provisions, shall be used mainly for 
reclaiming and cultivating arable land. They may also be used 
to build other farming infrastructure after a report is filed 
with and approval is granted by the authorities in accordance 
with relevant procedures. 
  City and county land administrative departments shall 
collect 
land improvement charges and special funds under unified plans. 
Funds shall be used for their specified purposes and may not be 
diverted to other uses. The rates at which funds are collected, 
as well as the procedures for managing funds, shall be 
established in accordance with the relevant provisions of the 
provincial people's government. 
  Article 22. As a rule, land reserved for the construction of 
year-round permanent vegetable bases with the approval of 
provincial, city, and county people's governments may not be 
requisitioned. If such land must be requisitioned for major 
national and provincial construction projects, the provincial 
people's government must approve the requisition, and new land 
must be made available for growing vegetables. Units that 
utilize such land must pay for the development and construction 
of new land in accordance with relevant provisions. 
  Article 23. Land users who need to change the purposes for 
which their land is intended must meet the requirements of city, 
village, and town planning. They shall complete anew land 
utilization procedures in accordance with the limits of 
authority for examination and approval specified in Article 25 
of these measures. Additional land costs arising from changes in 
the purposes for which land is intended shall be paid according 
to relevant provisions. If the purposes for which land is 
intended are changed without approval, the right to use such 
land shall be revoked in accordance with the law or the 
departments which originally approved the land for such purposes 
shall instruct the parties concerned to complete anew land 
utilization procedures. 
<H5>  Chapter III. Land For State Construction Use </H5>
  Article 24. Construction units may apply for use of land 
only for construction projects that have been included in the 
state's and province's fixed assets investment plan or for 
approved state construction projects. 
  The following land-requisition procedures must be followed 
when state construction projects require the requisition of 
collective- owned land: 
  (1) Construction units shall apply for use of land to the 
local county-level land management department by presenting the 
project design which was approved by the State Council's 
competent departments or by the people's governments higher than 
the county- level in line with the state's basic construction 
procedures or by presenting other approved documents. Approval 
from urban planning departments is required if the construction 
site is in an urban planning zone; when the construction 
involves communications, environmental protection, cultural 
relic protection, and fire fighting, approval from relevant 
departments is also required. 
  (2) Following selection of a construction site and approval 
of the initial design of the construction project, units which 
use land for construction shall formally report land for 
construction use to the local county-level land management 
department by presenting approved relevant documents, a general 
construction layout, and a topographic map. The land management 
department shall preside over the signing of a land-requisition 
compensation and settlement agreement between land-use units and 
units whose land has been requisitioned, and report to the 
people's government higher than the county-level for examination 
and approval according to the power of examination and approval 
stipulated in Article 25 of these procedures. 
  (3) Following the approval of the application for land- 
requisition, the local county-level land management department 
shall either make a one-time land allotment or make allotment of 
land in several stages according to the progress of construction. 
  Except for requirements for disaster relief and for meeting 
a 
military emergency, units are forbidden to use the land first 
and requisition the land later. 
  Article 25. The power of examination and approval in land 
requisition: 
  The county-level land management department shall examine, 
county-level people's government shall approve and report to 
provincial and city land management departments for the 
recording of the requisitioning of arable land (including 
gardens and ponds for aquaculture -- the same applies for the 
following) that is under 3 mu and the requisitioning of 
nonarable land that is under 10 mu; the land management 
department under the city which is directly under the 
administration of the provincial government shall examine, city 
people's government shall approve and report to provincial land 
management department for the recording of requisitioning of 
arable land over 3 mu until 5 mu and the requisitioning of 
nonarable land over 10 mu until 20 mu; the provincial land 
management department shall examine and the provincial 
government shall approve the requisitioning of arable land over 
5 mu and nonarable land over 20 mu; and the provincial people's 
government shall examine and report to the State Council for 
approval for the requisitioning of over 1,000 mu of arable land 
and for over 2,000 mu of nonarable land. 
  When the need arises to make unified requisition of land for 
comprehensive development of urban and rural areas and to carry 
out supplementary infrastructure construction, urban and rural 
construction departments shall, in line with approved 
construction plans and construction projects as well as with the 
power for examination and approval stipulated in the previous 
clause, apply for land use and proceed with land-requisition 
procedures. 
  A one-time instead of piecemeal application of and approval 
for use of land for construction purposes should be made in line 
with the general project design. Land requisition should be 
carried out in stages for construction projects requiring 
several stages for completion. Prior requisition of land for 
future use is forbidden. 
  City and county people's governments shall not exceed the 
province's set annual quota for construction-use land when 
reporting, examining, and approving land for construction use. 
  Article 26. Units using requisitioned land shall pay the 
following land compensation fee, green sapling compensation fee, 
and ground appendix compensation fee: 
  (1) Land compensation fee: The standard of compensation for 
requisitioned crop land shall be five to six times its annual 
output value in the case of suburban areas of cities directly 
under the provincial government; and four to five times in other 
places. The annual output value shall be the average of the 
three years preceding the requisition. Compensation for the 
requisition of noncrop land shall, in general, not exceed 50 
percent of the standard for crop land. 
  (2) Green sapling compensation fee: The standard of 
compensation for green saplings on requisitioned land shall be 
the output value of crops of the season. Where there are no 
saplings, compensation shall not be made. Crops planted between 
requisition and the start of construction shall not be 
compensated. 
  (3) Ground appendix compensation fee: Trees, buildings, 
structures, and farmland irrigation facilities on requisitioned 
land shall be compensated at the market value or be relocated. 
Trees planted and facilities built immediately after the start 
of consultations for land requisition plans shall not be 
compensated. 
  The city and county governments shall work out specific 
procedures for computing standards of the above three fees in 
the light of actual local conditions. 
  Article 27. Units using requisitioned land shall pay 
relocation allowances in addition to various compensation fees. 
  The number of people to receive relocation allowances for 
land requisitioned shall be based on the ratio between the area 
of the land and the existing per capita crop land of units whose 
land is requisitioned. The standard of relocation allowances 
for every farming population shall be two to three times of the 
crop land's average annual output value of the three years 
preceding the requisition. The total of relocation allowances 
per mu shall not exceed 10 times of the crop land's average 
annual output value of the three years preceding the requisition. 
  Relocation allowances for requisition of noncrop land shall, 
in general, not exceed 50 percent of local allowances for crop 
land. 
  Employment arrangements shall not be made for those 
receiving 
relocation allowances. 
  Article 28. Farmers, who, after receiving compensation and 
relocation allowances prescribed in Articles 26 and 27, still 
cannot maintain their original living standards, shall, with the 
approval of the provincial land administration department, have 
their relocation allowances increased as deemed appropriate. 
However, the total of land compensation fees and relocation 
allowances shall not exceed 20 times of the average annual 
output value of the three years preceding the requisition. 
  Article 29. Except for compensation for individually-owned 
ground appendices and green saplings, compensation fees and 
relocation allowances for land requisitioned by the state for 
construction shall be used by requisitioned units to develop 
production, and relocate surplus laborers and subsidize 
unemployed people resulting from land requisition; and shall not 
be divided by individuals or diverted to other use. The use of 
various compensation fees and relocation allowances shall be 
supervised by the land administration departments and township 
(town) people's governments. 
  Article 30. The land administration departments of the local 
people's governments at and above the country levels shall 
organize the unit whose land has been requisitioned, the unit 
which is to use the requisitioned land, and other relevant units 
to find jobs, by setting up industrial, commercial, 
construction, transport, and service enterprises for surplus 
labor created by state acquisition of farmland for use in 
national construction. 
  The following methods may be used if the land using unit is 
required to arrange employment for surplus labor: (1) The land 
using unit shall give priority to hiring workers who meet its 
employment qualifications; (2) employment service agencies may 
be entrusted to find employment; and (3) other methods. 
Relocation allowances shall be paid to employment agencies. 
Individuals who are seeking jobs for themselves shall be paid 
relocation allowance. The number of jobs to be arranged shall be 
calculated on the basis of the ratio between the requisitioned 
land and the original size of the farmland, and its agricultural 
households should be shifted to nonagricultural fields in 
accordance with relevant regulations of the province. 
  Article 31. After the taxable land of a unit is 
requisitioned, the land administration department of county 
people's governments shall be responsible for adjusting its 
agricultural taxes and contract grain purchasing quotas. 
  Article 32. If the entire farmland of a unit is 
requisitioned for use in national construction, the original 
farming households may change their status to nonfarming 
households on the spot following an investigation by the county 
or city people's government and approval by the provincial 
people's government. The original collective property of the 
unit, the land subsidies obtained from the requisition, and the 
relocation allowance shall be handled by people's governments at 
and above the county level through consultations with the 
relevant township (town) authorities. Dividing up for private 
use the money earmarked for production and living subsidies for 
unemployed personnel or diverting them for other purposes shall 
be prohibited. 
  Article 33. Local people's governments at the county level 
shall be responsible for determining the amount of compensation 
for the units whose land is requisitioned by the state for use 
in the construction of water conservancy projects and 
hydroelectric power stations, and the method of resettling the 
evacuated population. 
  Article 34. The units whose land has been requisitioned in 
accordance with these Measures shall obey the needs of national 
construction, conclude a land requisition agreement, and 
surrender the requisitioned land according to schedule; they 
shall not be permitted to set forth additional demands and delay 
and hinder national construction. 
  Article 35. Unless permission to postpone its use has been 
granted by the original organ which approved the requisition, 
land which has remained idle two years after its requisition 
shall be recovered by the local people's government at the 
country level. The matter shall be reported to the approving 
organ for the record. Arbitrary disposal of the land by the 
original land using unit shall not be prohibited. No other unit 
or individual is permitted to seize the land. 
  Article 36. When land is temporarily needed for project 
construction, storage of raw materials, transportation, or other 
facilities, this problem shall be solved by using the 
requisitioned land. If land must be borrowed for temporary use, 
the land using unit shall submit an application stating the 
amount of land to be borrowed and the time limit for its use. 
If the amount of land to be borrowed is below 10 mu, the 
application must be submitted to a county-level land 
administration department for approval; if the amount of land to 
be borrowed is between 10 and 20 mu, the application must be 
submitted to a city land administration department for approval; 
if the amount exceeds 20 mu, the application must be submitted 
to the provincial land administration department for approval. 
In general, the time limit for borrowed land shall not exceed 
two years. When it is absolutely necessary to extend the time 
limit of the borrowed land, an application must be submitted to 
the original examination and approving organ for approval. 
During the period when the borrowed land is being used, the 
land using unit shall pay yearly compensation in accordance with 
the average annual output value of the land in the past three 
years. No permanent structures are to be built on land borrowed 
for temporary use. After project construction is completed, the 
land using unit shall be responsible for restoring the farming 
conditions of the land before returning it to the original unit. 
  Article 37. When rural collective land is required by urban 
collective units for construction purposes, land requisition 
applications shall be handled in accordance with the provisions 
of these Measures. 
  Land requisition shall be permitted when a jointly run 
enterprise established through joint investment between an 
agricultural economic organization and a unit owned by the whole 
people or an urban collective unit wishes to use rural 
collective land. The agricultural economic organization may use 
the land use right as a condition for participating in the joint 
enterprise, but it must submit a land use application to a land 
aministrative department together with the construction project 
documents and the agreement signed by both parties approved by a 
planning department or a competent department at or above the 
county level. The application shall be handled in accordance 
with the examination and approval authority stipulated in 
Article 25 of these Measures. 
  Article 38. When needed by national construction, 
state-owned land that has been cultivated for many years by 
rural collective economic organizations shall be recovered, and 
appropriate compensation shall be given on the basis of the 
concrete conditions. 
  Article 39. The use of state-owned land (including the use 
of their own land by state-run agricultural, forestry, 
livestock- breeding, and fish-breeding farms) by construction 
units for capital construction shall be handled in accordance 
with Articles 24 and 25 of these Measures. 
  In using state-owned land which is being used by other 
units, 
a construction unit shall pay compensation for the losses 
suffered by the original unit; the construction unit shall be 
responsible for moving the original unit to a new location. 
<H5>  Chapter IV. Land for the Development of Townships (Towns) </H5>
and Villages 
  Article 40. Plans for the construction of rural housing 
projects, the construction of township (town) and village 
enterprises, and the construction of township (town) and village 
public facilities and public welfare organizations shall be 
drawn up in accordance with the principle of rational 
distribution, economical use of land, and being beneficial to 
production and daily life. 
  Article 41. The use of land for the construction of township 
(town) and village enterprises must strictly controlled. 
Efforts must be made to use, as far as possible, only 
nonfarming land such as the original housing areas and barren 
hilly areas. When it is necessary to use land for the 
construction of township (town) and village enterprises, an 
application must be submitted to the land administrative 
department of a people's government at the country level 
together with the document of approval from a planning 
department or a relevant competent department at and above the 
country level. The application shall be handled in accordance 
with the examination and approval authority stipulated in 
Article 25 of these Measures. 
  When collective land is to be used for the construction of 
township (town) enterprises, the township (town) authorities 
shall pay appropriate compensation to the unit whose land was 
requisitioned, and make appropriate arrangements for the 
production and life of the peasants affected. 
  Article 42. When land is required for the construction of 
township (town) public facilities and public welfare 
organizations, approval from the township (town) people's 
governments must be obtained before submitting an application to 
a land administrative department at the county level. The 
application shall be handled in accordance with the examination 
and approval authority stipulated in Article 25 of these 
Measures. 
  Article 43. Use of arable land for housing construction 
shall be placed under strict control. Construction of private 
residences in rural areas shall be arranged under a unified plan 
for village or township development. No one is allowed to use 
land for housing construction without authorization or to exceed 
the approved area limits for housing construction. 
  There shall be strict limits on the area of housing sites. 
The standard area for the site of a private residence in rural 
areas (including auxiliary structures and yard) is 125 square 
meters maximum for a large household, or 140 square meters 
maximum if the land is not arable. Specific regulations on the 
classification of large, medium, or small households and the 
limits for the area of housing sites shall be formulated by the 
county-level people's government in line with local conditions. 
  When a person needs land for building a private residence, 
he shall file an application with the committee in the village 
where he resides and the village committee shall act on the 
application after discussion. Where arable land is involved, 
the township (town) people's government shall examine the 
application and submit it to the county-level land 
administration department for approval. Where the land involved 
in not arable, the township (town) people's government shall 
examine and act on the application and report to the 
county-level land administration department for the record. 
  The city and county-level land administration departments 
shall not exceed the annual quotas set by the province for lands 
to be used for building private houses in rural areas. 
  Article 44. Workers, cadres, soldiers, and other personnel 
returning home to settle down shall be treated the same as 
peasants. 
  Lands for housing sites of overseas Chinese, compatriots 
from Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macao, foreigners of Chinese 
descent, as well as housing built with overseas remittance by 
relatives of nationals living abroad shall be approved by 
county-level people's government. Limits for the area of housing 
sites may be appropriately relaxed in accordance with local 
standards. 
  Article 45. Urban housing shall be subject to unified 
planning and development. Residents with a nonrural residency 
registration who are in genuine need of building a house in the 
town or city where they reside may, after obtaining approval, 
build a house under a unified plan of the local people's 
government and pursuant to the urban development plan. 
  Standards for the area of land for housing construction 
shall be computed on the basis of the number of people in the 
urban household residency registration. On average, the maximum 
land allowed for a person is 8 square meters (including the 
housing owned by that person in the locality; the area of 
housing site shall be calculated by the vertical projection of 
the building and its auxiliary structures). 
  No individuals are allowed to use lands to build detached 
houses. 
  Article 46. Housing sites vacated when peasants move out and 
the houses are torn down shall be returned to the village 
committee. 
  Where the person sells or rents his house, he may not apply 
for another housing site (except for when his former house is 
bought by the state at the market price and the village 
committee agrees to allocate him another housing site). 
  Housing sites -- either vacated by renovation of old 
villages 
or development of new villages -- that are converted for use in 
agricultural production shall be treated as newly reclaimed 
lands and are exempt from agricultural tax for five years. 
  Article 47. Self-employed industrial and commercial entities 
in rural areas requiring the use of collectively-owned land for 
nonagricultural purposes shall pay for the use of the lands and 
file an application for examination and approval with the 
township (town) people's government, which shall handle the 
application pursuant to the stipulations on examination and 
approval authority provided in Article 25 of these Measures. 
  Where use of collectively-owned lands is approved in 
accordance with the preceding paragraph, the land user and the 
agricultural economic collective shall sign a contract pursuant 
to the approval document that specifies the purpose, area, term, 
and fees for the rented lands. 
  Upon expiration of the term of land use, the land shall be 
returned to the agricultural economic collective. Structures 
and other facilities on the land shall be handled in accordance 
with the contract. Renewal of the contract, if required, shall 
be handled pursuant to regulations. 
<H5>  Chapter V. Rewards and Punishments </H5>
  Article 48. People's governments at various levels shall 
commend or reward units and individuals satisfying any one of 
the following conditions: 
  (1) Outstanding achievements in safeguarding laws and 
regulations governing land administration and in managing land 
according to law; 
  (2) Outstanding achievements in rational planning, economic 
land use, and preserving farmland; and 
  (3) Outstanding achievements in creating and reclaiming 
land, 
in rationally developing and utilizing land resources, and in 
scientific research on land-related subjects. 
  Article 49. Violations of the state "Land Administration 
Law" and provisions of these procedures shall be separately 
handled as follows: 
  (1) Units under ownership by the whole people and units 
under 
urban collective ownership found to have been illegally 
occupying land without approval or with approval secured though 
fraudulent means shall be ordered to surrender their illegally 
occupied land and demolish within a designated period buildings 
and other facilities newly constructed on it or face 
confiscation. In addition, fines shall be imposed. Persons in 
charge of units found to have been illegally occupying land 
shall face administrative punishment. 
  Township (town) and village enterprises (including 
joint-venture enterprises) found to have been illegally 
occupying land without approval or with approval secured through 
fraudulent means shall be ordered to surrender their illegally 
occupied land and demolish within a designated period buildings 
and other facilities newly constructed on it or face 
confiscation, and may be subject to fines. 
  Occupation of land in excess of what has been approved, the 
illegally occupied portions shall be handled according to 
provisions governing illegal land occupation. 
  (2) Rural residents found to have been illegally occupying 
land for building houses without approval or with approval 
secured through fraudulent means shall be ordered to surrender 
their illegally occupied land and demolish within a designated 
period houses newly constructed on it or face confiscation. 
  (3) City and town nonagricultural household residents found 
to have been illegally occupying land for building houses 
without approval or with approval secured through fraudulent 
means shall be ordered to surrender their illegally occupied 
land and demolish within a designated period houses newly 
constructed on it or face confiscation. 
  (4) State work personnel and rural grass-root cadres found 
to 
have been using their powers to illegally occupy land for 
building houses without approval or with approval secured 
through fraudulent means shall be severely punished in 
accordance with the preceding provisions in addition to 
administrative penalty. 
  (5) Other units, individuals found to have been illegally 
occupying land without approval or with approval secured through 
fraudulent means shall be ordered to surrender their illegally 
occupied land and demolish within a designated period buildings 
and other facilities newly constructed on it or face 
confiscation, and may be subject to fines. 
  (6) Illegal income derived from illegal land sales or other 
forms of illegal land transfer shall be subject to confiscation. 
Buildings and other facilities recently constructed on land sold 
or transferred through other means shall be demolished within a 
designated period or be confiscated with cancellation of land 
contract management rights and land use rights. Parties 
involved in the deal may be fined. Personnel in charge shall 
face administrative punishment from their own units or higher 
authorities. 
  (7) Principal personnel found to have approved land use 
exceeding set targets for a particular year without 
authorization shall face administrative punishment. 
  (8) Approval documents for land occupation illegally issued 
by units or individuals not authorized to approve land 
acquisition and land use or issued by overstepping their powers 
shall be null and void; unit personnel or individuals 
responsible for approving illegal land occupation shall face 
administrative punishment. 
  (9) Construction units failing to return land borrowed for 
temporary use upon expiration shall be ordered to return it to 
the owner with economic compensation and may be subject to 
fines. Refusal to return borrowed land shall be handled 
according to provisions governing illegal land occupation. 
  (10) Whoever is found to have damaged farmland by excavating 
earth or digging sand therefrom or causing soil erosion or 
damaging land resources by blindly opening up wasteland shall be 
ordered to have such land reclaimed and rehabilitated within a 
designated period, and may be subject to fines. 
  (11) Any party illegally holding or embezzling land 
compensation fees, relocation subsidies, or land improvement 
fees shall be ordered to return the money and be liable for a 
fine. The person in charge shall face administrative 
disciplinary action, while individual wrongdoers shall be 
charged with corruption. 
  (12) In the requisition of land for national construction, 
any interested parties which insist on unreasonable demands and 
cause financial losses by hampering the construction project of 
the requisitioning unit or the production of the unit holding 
the requisitioned land shall be ordered to pay compensation and 
be liable for a fine. The person in charge shall be subjected 
to administrative disciplinary action. 
  Any buildings or other facilities subjected to demolition or 
confiscation within a specific time limit in accordance with the 
provisions in items (1) through (6) of the preceding clause, 
must be demolished if they happen to obstruct city and town 
planning, road transport, flood-water diversion, or water 
transport. 
  Article 50. All departments and units should support and 
refrain from obstructing land administration personnel 
exercising their functions and powers as well as investigating 
and dealing with violations of land administration in accordance 
with the law. 
  Land administration personnel should set an example by 
enforcing the law impartially and refraining from abusing 
official power for personal gain. 
  Article 51. The administrative punishments provided for in 
these Measures, such as confiscation, demolition, and fines, 
shall be decided upon by the land administration departments of 
people's governments at or above the county level in accordance 
with the law. 
  The administrative punishments against illegal land 
occupation by rural residents for building construction as 
provided for in item (2) of Article 49 of these Measures, shall 
be decided upon by the township (town) people's government 
concerned. 
  Article 52. Incomes from the above mentioned fines and 
confiscations shall be collected by the organ carrying out the 
punishment and be turned in to the finance department at the 
same level. 
  Article 53. Any interested parties which are not satisfied 
with the administrative punishments meted out in accordance with 
these Measures may apply for a reconsideration of the decision 
under the provisions in the "Regulations Governing 
Reconsideration of Administrative Decisions" or the 
"Administrative Procedural Law of the People's Republic of 
China," or directly file a lawsuit with the people's court. 
  All units or individuals given a deadline for demolishing 
buildings or other facilities still under construction are 
required to stop construction work immediately. The organ 
deciding on the punishment has the right to stop the 
construction work or demolish the part of a building being built 
in defiance of the order. Anyone who rejects or obstructs the 
discharging of official duties by land administration personnel 
shall be punished in accordance with the relevant provisions in 
the regulations for public order management and punishment. 
  Article 54. Those engaged in illegal activities such as 
profiteering through land transactions shall be charged with 
criminal responsibility by the justice organs in accordance with 
the law, if their cases should involve serious circumstances and 
constitute a crime. 
  Those who committ a crime by giving bribes, taking bribes, 
extorting money, committing graft, stealing state- or 
collectively- owned property, or stirring up trouble among the 
masses and obstructing national construction in the process of 
changing the land ownership and land use rights or settling 
disputes involving land ownership and land use rights, shall be 
charged with criminal responsibility in accordance with relevant 
provisions in the "Criminal Code." 
<H5>  Chapter VI. Supplementary Provisions </H5>
  Article 55. These measures shall be implemented beginning on 
the day of their promulgation, while the "Zhejiang Provincial 
Measures for Administering Urban and Rural Development Land" 
adopted after revision by the ninth meeting of the sixth 
provincial people's congress standing committee on 6 September 
1984 shall be abolished simultaneously. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1672 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_o_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  23 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> East Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Anhui Capital Sets Up Science, Technology Market </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Anhui Capital Sets Up Science, Technology Market </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0304154794 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 2101 
GMT 23 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0304154794 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Guo Qinghua (6753 1987 5478) and correspondent </F>
Zhang Lixin (1728 4539 2450)] 
  [Text] Hefei, 24 Mar (XINHUA) -- Hefei city, which enjoys 
the reputation of "science and technology city," saw another 
addition to its scientific and technology landscape -- the 
recent opening of China's first Chinese and foreign-invested 
science and technology market. 
  The science and technology market was set up by the 
Development Company of the China University of Science and 
Technology to develop scientific and technological resources. 
The company has built a modern, first-class, and advanced Hefei 
Scientific and Technological Square, also called "east China's 
silicon valley," outside the China University of Science and 
Technology. More than 100 Chinese and foreign institutions 
engaged in application and development of high technology have 
rushed to establish branch offices here. 
  The development company took a new measure to develop and 
invigorate the scientific and technological market. It 
established a science and technology market fund, the first such 
fund in the country. In the first stage, it invested 20 million 
yuan in the market to accelerate the commercialization of 
scientific and technological products by giving support to 
projects undertaken by market members that have entered the 
middle stage of experimentation, to scientific research and 
development projects that have practical applications, and 
projects in need of urgent support. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1673 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_o_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> East Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Anhui Province Improves Farming Conditions </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Anhui Province Improves Farming Conditions </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104084694 Beijing XINHUA in English 0812 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104084694 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Hefei, April 1 (XINHUA) -- More input into 
agriculture has helped Anhui Province, one of China's key 
agricultural producers, improve its farming conditions. 
  The province has built more than 4,500 reservoirs and dug a 
network of river courses and ditches since the late 1970s when 
the country began its rural reform. 
  At present, the province has brought 2.63 million hectares 
of 
farmland under irrigation, which may secure a good crop despite 
drought or excessive rain. 
  "Science has played an important role in Anhui's 
agricultural 
development," a provincial official in charge of agriculture 
said. 
  The Anhui Academy of Agricultural Sciences alone has since 
1986 made 189 research achievements. Many of them have been 
applied in production. 
  One survey shows that farmers in Anhui have spent 5.6 
billion 
yuan in purchasing farm machines. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1674 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_o_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> East Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fujian To Produce Electricity With Overseas Funds </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fujian To Produce Electricity With Overseas Funds </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0304135594 Beijing XINHUA in English 1333 GMT 3 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0304135594 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Fuzhou, April 3 (XINHUA) -- The electricity-short 
Chinese province of Fujian will utilize overseas capital to 
build more power stations in the years ahead. 
  In the past, only state or collectively-owned organizations 
were allowed to construct and run power plants. 
  This policy hampered the development of Fujian's power 
resources, which include many rivers with steep drops suitable 
for hydro-electric power stations. 
  While thermal power plants have very limited output due to 
the province's lack of coal, less than 22 percent of the 
hydraulic resources were utilized. As a result, this southeast 
China's coastal province is left with a shortage of several 
hundred millions of kwh of electricity per year. 
  Since the mid-1980s, however, Fujian has used 800 million 
U.S. dollars from overseas investors to build several power 
plants. 
  The provincial authorities recently announced new policies 
to 
encourage foreign investment in construction and management of 
local power stations. Several projects have been set for 
tenders, according to relevant departments. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1675 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_o_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> East Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fujian Becomes No. 1 Blue Jeans Producer </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fujian Becomes No. 1 Blue Jeans Producer </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0304144494 Beijing XINHUA in English 1356 GMT 3 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0304144494 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Xiamen, April 3 (XINHUA) -- The delta of southern 
Fujian has become the largest manufacturing center of blue jeans 
in China. 
  From the streets to garment shops, in the post offices and 
on 
goods trains, blue jeans dot the landscape all year round in the 
Xiamen-Quanzhou-Hangzhou delta. 
  The industry took off after blue jeans gained instant 
popularity when they were introduced to the area from Hong Kong 
and Taiwan in the 1980s. 
  The past decade witnessed garment factories "spring up like 
bamboo shoots after spring rain". No-one can tell the exact 
number of these factories and the amount of their production 
except that truck-load upon truck-load of the clothes are being 
transported to other parts of China daily. 
  Many big producers have set up special counters in 
department 
stores in large cities. Some have even made inroads in other 
countries' markets. 
  In the midst of tough competition, manufacturers are 
upgrading equipment and turning out new designs at an 
increasingly faster rate. 
  As a local factory director puts it: "Only when you lead the 
trend can you survive." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1676 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_o_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> East Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hefei High-Tech Development Zone Makes Progress </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Hefei High-Tech Development Zone Makes Progress </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104102394 Beijing XINHUA in English 1002 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104102394 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Hefei, April 1 (XINHUA) -- The construction of a 
state-level high-tech industrial development zone in this 
capital of Anhui Province, east China, is progressing steadily. 
  At present, the zone is speeding up construction of 
workshops, public facilities and residential quarters with a 
combined floor space of 400,000 sq m, as well as roads, 
telecommunication and power- and water-supply facilities. 
  The city government has opened service offices at the zone 
to 
better serve enterprises and organizations. 
  Located on the outskirts of Hefei, the zone had housed 229 
enterprises and 277 projects with a total investment of 2.13 
billion yuan by the end of February this year. 
  Included were 55 overseas-funded enterprises with a combined 
investment of 184 million U.S. dollars. 
  The projects are involved mainly in the fields of 
micro-electronics, telecommunications, optical fiber 
communications, combinations of machinery and electrical 
appliances, bio-engineering, energy-efficient technology and 
medicine. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1677 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_o_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> East Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Five Criminals Sentenced to Death in Shanghai </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Five Criminals Sentenced to Death in Shanghai </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0304093294 Shanghai People's Radio Network in Mandarin 
2300 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0304093294 </F>
<F P=104>  Shanghai People's Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Mandarin </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Morning News" program] </F>
  [Text] The Shanghai Intermediate Railway Transportation 
Court held a meeting in Nanjing yesterday [1 April] to pronounce 
sentences. It publicly sentenced according to law 17 criminals 
involved in four cases. Criminals Bao Yucai, Zhang Hongxing, 
Chu Zhi, Gao Tongfeng, and Wang Changjiang were sentenced to 
death. They were escorted to the execution ground and executed 
by shooting. The rest were sentenced to death penalty with 
reprieve, life imprisonment, or jail terms. 
  These criminals are all guilty of the most heinous crimes 
they committed on trains, and their acts greatly endangered 
passengers. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1678 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_o_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> East Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   More Shanghai Residents Hold Credit Cards </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    More Shanghai Residents Hold Credit Cards </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104122194 Beijing XINHUA in English 1116 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104122194 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Shanghai, April 1 (XINHUA) -- "Credit card in hand, 
you can travel around China," an outdated commercial slogan, has 
actually become true for more and more residents here. 
  Li Zhong, an employee in a local import and export company, 
recently bought an air conditioner with his master card in a 
department store near his home. 
  He has become used to doing daily shopping and treating his 
clients with a credit card. 
  "We had to carry large amounts of cash in the past," he 
said. 
"Now credit cards make our lives much easier." 
  Credit cards only came into common citizens' lives in the 
past couple of years. 
  Last May, Li's company provided all its employees with 
credit 
cards. Two-thirds of each employee's monthly salary is 
deposited into the card's account. 
  At present, credit cards in use in Shanghai include "Great 
Wall" of the Bank of China, "Peony" of the Bank of Industry and 
Commerce, "Pacific Ocean" of the Bank of Communications, 
"Master" and "VISA" cards of the Bank of Construction, and 
"Jinshui" (Golden Wheat Ears) and "Baiyulan" (White Magnolia) of 
the Bank of Agriculture. 
  At least 200,000 Shanghai residents hold credit cards and 
use 
them in some 2,000 hotels and department stores. 
  In 1993, consumables bought with credit cards in the city 
reached more than 1.4 billion yuan in value. 
  To unite the different credit card systems and facilitate 
card holders, Shanghai started the "Golden Card Project" last 
winter and established the Shanghai Credit Card Network Co., 
Ltd., which mainly administers a credit card network information 
system covering the whole city. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1679 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_o_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> East Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Foreign Exchange Center To Open in Shanghai </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Foreign Exchange Center To Open in Shanghai </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104080494 Beijing XINHUA in English 0739 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104080494 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Shanghai, April 1 (XINHUA) -- The China foreign 
exchange center will officially go into operation in this the 
country's largest economic center April 4. 
  "This will be the first national foreign exchange center 
since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, 
and a key step in the national banking reform this year," an 
official of the center said. 
  "It will pave the way for the country to develop a market 
economy," he noted. 
  Serving as an inter-bank foreign exchange market, the China 
foreign exchange center will adopt a membership system and 
develop into a non-profit and independently accounting 
organization. The membership is believed to include 30 large 
banks of China and 90 other banks involving foreign capital and 
monetary institutions. 
  Already the center has linked itself with foreign exchange 
markets in Beijing, Tianjin and Hangzhou, capital of Zhejiang 
Province, and Shenzhen and Guangzhou in Guangdong Province, 
during the trial operation in March. 
  China succeeded in unifying the dual-track foreign exchange 
rate system with a smooth market operation and a stable foreign 
exchange rate in the first quarter of this year. 
  It will begin an overall reform of its foreign exchange 
system starting today. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1680 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_o_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> East Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Shanghai To Show More Products at World Fairs </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Shanghai To Show More Products at World Fairs </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104022294 Beijing XINHUA in English 0141 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104022294 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Shanghai, April 1 (XINHUA) -- Shanghai will send a 
delegation to the '94 Osaka International Fair in mid-April. 
  The 150-strong delegation consists of manufacturers, 
salesmen, and managers from more than 50 Shanghai companies. 
  In a bid to help more domestic firms enter the world market, 
this year the Shanghai Council for the Promotion of 
International Trade plans to organize 23 delegations to attend 
overseas exhibitions in Australia, France, the Netherlands, 
Germany, Japan, Israel, the United States, South Africa, Russia 
as well as Hong Kong. 
  About 450 companies took part in overseas exhibitions in 
1993. The total business volume transacted at 24 world fairs 
topped 150 million U.S. dollars and a range of cooperation 
projects were signed. 
  Shanghai enterprises received orders of goods worth 572 
million U.S. dollars at the East China Export Commodities Fair 
held earlier this year. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1681 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_t_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  17 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Northwest Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Shaanxi To Use Stocks To Fund Expressway </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Shaanxi To Use Stocks To Fund Expressway </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW1703034294 Beijing XINHUA in English 0324 GMT 17 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW1703034294 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Xian, March 17 (XINHUA) -- Northwest China's Shaanxi 
Province is to adopt the joint stock system for the construction 
of an expressway linking Weinan city with Lintong County, where 
the world-renowned museum of ancient life-sized terracotta 
horses and warriors is located. 
  Due to start in June this year, construction of the 40.7-km 
expressway is to be completed in two years, with an expected 
investment totalling 500 million yuan. 
  This will be the country's fourth expressway and also the 
first one in an inland province to be funded through the joint 
stock system. 
  Opening up more channels for fund-raising compared with the 
former dependence on state allocation of funds alone, the joint 
stock system is sure to streamline the construction of the road, 
according to local officials. 
  A share-issuing limited company is to be set up in June. 
Apart from responsibility for construction and preservation of 
the road, it will undertake the task of managing various service 
facilities along it and tapping the great potentials of real 
estate, tourism, advertising and entertainment in the area. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1682 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_t_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  9 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Northwest Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Xinjiang Region Benefits From Opening Up Policy </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Xinjiang Region Benefits From Opening Up Policy </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0903083994 Beijing XINHUA in English 0802 GMT 9 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0903083994 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Urumqi, March 9 (XINHUA) -- Northwest China's 
Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, which used to conjure up 
visions of remoteness and great hardship, has now become a 
hotbed of trade and a tourist mecca. 
  According to local officials, the autonomous region, with 14 
border outlets to the outside world, completed 910 million U.S. 
dollars-worth of foreign trade last year, 63.3 percent of which 
was done through border trade. 
  Local officials said that the region enjoys rich resources, 
but has long suffered shortages of funds, technology and people 
of expertise. The only railway linking Xinjiang with the 
eastern part of the country has become the bottle neck for the 
region's transport system. 
  When the central government approved a further opening of 
the 
region to the outside world in 1992, the region readjusted its 
development strategies. Local government has decided to push 
the border cities to the international marketplace with the 
backing of the areas along the trunk railway. A number of trade 
fairs have been held and cooperation with in-land regions been 
intensified. 
  In 1993, the region approved the establishment of 363 
foreign- funded enterprises and launched 184 overseas projects. 
  In addition, the autonomous region received 240,000 overseas 
tourists last year, besides a growing number of domestic 
travelers. 
  The officials contributed these successes to the 
implementation of various opening strategies concerning border 
areas, and the building and operation of the second Eurasian 
continental bridge. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1683 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_t_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  20 Feb 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Northwest Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Xinjiang Congress Appoints, Removes Officials </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Xinjiang Congress Appoints, Removes Officials </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0903050294 Urumqi XINJIANG RIBAO in Chinese 20 Feb 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> OW0903050294 </F>
<F P=104>  Urumqi XINJIANG RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Namelist of officials appointed and removed by the Xinjiang </F>
Uygur Autonomous Regional People's Congress Standing Committee 
-- approved on 19 February 1994 by the Seventh Meeting of the 
Eighth Xinjiang Autonomous Regional People's Congress Standing 
Committee] 
  [Text] 1. Appointments: 
  An Jizhi [1344 0679 1807] as director of the Finance and 
Economic Committee of the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Regional 
People's Congress Standing Committee; 
  Abulizi Sideke [7093 0008 0500 1320 0674 4104 0344] as 
deputy 
director of the Finance and Economic Committee of the Xinjiang 
Uygur Autonomous Regional People's Congress Standing Committee; 
  Ayoufu Kuerban [7093 1429 3940 1655 1422 3803] as director 
of 
the Hami Prefectural Work Committee of the Xinjiang Uygur 
Autonomous Regional People's Congress Standing Committee; 
  Li Guangqian [2621 0342 0467] as deputy director of the 
Hotan 
Prefectural Work Committee of the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous 
Regional People's Congress Standing Committee. 
  Removals: 
  Yang Chunhui as deputy director of the Nationalities and 
Overseas Chinese Affairs Committee of the Xinjiang Uygur 
Autonomous Regional People's Congress Standing Committee. 
  Qu Xiaozong as deputy director of the Hotan Prefectural Work 
Committee of the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Regional People's 
Congress Standing Committee. 
2. It Has Been Decided to Appoint: 
  Bahayiding Aiti [1572 0761 5902 0002 5337 2251] as president 
of the Turpan Prefectural Intermediate People's Court of the 
Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region. 
  Appointments: 
  Tuerdi Maimaiti [0685 1422 0966 6314 6314 2251] as judge of 
the Aksu Prefectural Intermediate People's Court and deputy 
director of the No. 1 Criminal Trial Court of the Aksu 
Prefectural Intermediate People's Court, of the Xinjiang Uygur 
Autonomous Region; 
  Tao Yanzhu [7118 3601 3796] (female) as director of the 
Economic Trial Court of the Aksu Prefectural Intermediate 
People's Court; 
  Chang Lixin [1603 4539 2450] as deputy director of the 
Administrative Trial Court of the Aksu Prefectural Intermediate 
People's Court; 
  Bahaerguli Saimaiti [1572 0761 1422 0657 7787 6357 6314 
2251] 
(female) as judge of the Aksu Prefectural Intermediate People's 
Court and deputy director of the No. 2 Criminal Trial Court of 
the Aksu Prefectural Intermediate People's Court; 
  Maihemuti Amuti [6314 0678 2606 2251 7093 2606 2251], Awahan 
Maihesuti [7093 9907 3352 6314 0678 5685 2251] (female), Wu 
Zhenhua [0702 2182 5478], Liu Xiuding [0491 4423 1353], 
Hairinisha Tuohuti [3189 2480 1441 3097 2094 0039 2251] 
(female), Ainiwaer Abula [5337 1441 3907 1422 7093 0008 2139], 
Jiang Chongyun [5592 1504 0061], and Guo Dongqing [6753 2639 
3237] as judges of the Aksu Prefectural Intermediate People's 
Court. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1684 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_a_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> General </F>
<H3> <TI>   Qian Qichen Lauds UN Statement on DPRK Nuclear Plans </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Qian Qichen Lauds UN Statement on DPRK Nuclear Plans </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0304020994 Tokyo KYODO in English 0147 GMT 3 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0304020994 </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo KYODO </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 3 KYODO -- Chinese Foreign Minister 
Qian Qichen on Saturday [2 April] lauded a mildly worded UN 
Security Council statement on the North Korean nuclear standoff, 
saying it helped to ease tension on the Korean peninsula. 
  "The adoption of a presidential statement focusing on 
dialogue has helped to ease tension and gives the countries and 
organizations concerned some time leeway," Qian told a 
delegation of Japan's Social Democratic Party (SDP). The SDP is 
the largest group in Japan's seven-party coalition. 
  After one week of diplomatic bargaining with China, which 
firmly opposed the adoption of any resolution against its 
longtime ally North Korea, the 15-member Security Council on 
Thursday issued a nonbinding presidential statement urging 
Pyongyang to allow the completion of international inspections 
of its nuclear facilities. 
  The statement did not include a threat of sanctions should 
North Korea continue to refuse the inspections, but said 
"further Security Council consideration will take place if 
necessary in order to achieve full implementation" of nuclear 
safeguards Pyongyang signed with the International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA). 
  Noting that the statement has nonbinding character, Qian 
said, however, he hopes "that it can be avoided that such a 
situation occurs." 
  He suggested that the IAEA explain to Pyongyang why 
inspections carried out over two weeks in March are considered 
inadequate to decide whether Pyongyang has diverted nuclear 
material for weapon purposes. 
  Pyongyang, while maintaining that its nuclear program serves 
strictly civilian purposes, contends it fully complied with the 
IAEA inspection demands. 
  The SDP delegation headed by Issei Inoue arrived on Friday 
for talks with Chinese leaders and representatives of the 
Chinese Communist Party (CCP). 
  In a meeting with Li Shuzheng, head of the International 
Liaison Department of the party's Central Committee, on Friday 
both sides agreed to dispatch another SDP delegation to China in 
mid-May to mark the 10th anniversary of relations between their 
parties, SDP officials said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1685 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_a_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> General </F>
<H3> <TI>   Australian FM: PRC Thinks DPRK Has No Nuclear Capability </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Australian FM: PRC Thinks DPRK Has No Nuclear Capability </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0204093794 Melbourne Radio Australia in English 0800 GMT 2 
Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0204093794 </F>
<F P=104>  Melbourne Radio Australia </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Australia's foreign minister, Gareth Evans, says he 
believes that China does not think North Korea has developed the 
capability to build nuclear weapons. Speaking in Beijing after 
meetings with senior Chinese officials, Senator Evans said China 
was very conscious of the stakes involved and very conscious of 
its own interests in keeping nuclear weapons off the Korean 
peninsula. He said Chinese ministers and leaders had a 
relatively relaxed attitude to the issue, leading him to think 
that the Chinese did not believe Pyongyang had yet made 
formidable developments. However, Senator Evans said he 
believed North Korea was certainly far enough advanced to 
justify thorough international inspections. Australia's foreign 
minister said there was great optimism on the Chinese part the 
dialogue would be successful in resolving the Korean crisis. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1686 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_a_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> General </F>
<H3> <TI>   Further on Evans Remarks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Further on Evans Remarks </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD0204101394 Melbourne Radio Australia in English 0900 GMT 2 
Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD0204101394 </F>
<F P=104>  Melbourne Radio Australia </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Australia's foreign minister, Gareth Evans, says 
that after his talks with senior Chinese leaders in Beijing he 
believes there's reason for optimism that China would not block 
any move to impose sanctions on North Korea. While Senator 
Evans says this week's United Nations Security Council statement 
urging North Korea to accept international inspections has taken 
some of the heat out of the issue, sanctions still cannot be 
ruled out. From Beijing (?Ally Moore) reports: 
  [Begin recording] [(?Moore)] In meetings with China's 
Premier 
Li Peng and Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, Gareth Evans says he 
wasn't given any indication China plans to step up its efforts 
to influence North Korea, but he believes China is working to 
resolve the dispute and is very conscious of the stakes 
involved. 
  [Evans] My own instinct at the end of the day is that if 
these dialogue processes were to break down and the next move 
were clearly to be sanctions, that there is every reason for 
some degree of optimism that that course would not be blocked by 
China. [end recording] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1687 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_a_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> General </F>
<H3> <TI>   Trade Official Warns Against Rejection of GATT Bid </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Trade Official Warns Against Rejection of GATT Bid </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0304065694 Hong Kong AFP in English 0619 GMT 3 April 94 </F>
<F P=103> HK0304065694 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 3 (AFP)--China will only go so far 
to ensure its re-entry into GATT and will revive import controls 
should its bid to rejoin the world body be rejected, a senior 
foreign trade ministry official was quoted as warning Sunday [3 
April]. "The bottom line is equal treatment," said the foreign 
trade ministry's deputy director for international relations, Li 
Longzhou, who stressed that China was not so desperate that it 
would pay any price for GATT membership. Li also accused some 
of China's major trading partners -- especially the United 
States -- of using the GATT membership issue to extract 
unreasonable concessions from Beijing. 
  While admitting that a rejection of China's bid would hurt 
the country's trade expansion and slow the pace of reform, Li 
said steps could be taken to ensure China's global 
competitiveness if it were left outside GATT. "A passive return 
to import substitution (a measure to restrict imports) in 
parallel with continued investment incentives may actually 
encourage greater foreign investment (in China) because local 
production would then be favoured over imports," the CHINA DAILY 
BUSINESS WEEKLY quoted Li as saying. "The world trade community 
has a choice between accepting China as an equal trading partner 
by granting it GATT membership, or competing for access to the 
Chinese market on a reciprocal basis," he added. 
  Li also slammed the United States for making the renewal in 
June of China's most favoured nation (MFN) trading status 
conditional on progress in Beijing's human rights record. 
"China hopes to obtain unconditional MFN treatment equivalent 
to that accorded to all other contracting parties by 
participating in GATT," Li said, adding that by attaching human 
rights conditions to MFN, Washington was going against the 
spirit of the world trade body. 
  As a purely economic issue, China's re-entry to GATT "has 
been complicated by non-economic factors and the negotiation has 
been delayed for an unwarranted period," Li said. The United 
States was one of the few member states that did not support 
early Chinese re- entry to GATT at the 16th session of the GATT 
Working Party on China held in Geneva next month, Li noted. A 
founding member of GATT, China withdrew in 1949 after the 
communists came to power. 
  Li also criticised some trading partners for demanding China 
eliminate all non-tariff trade barriers "while they themselves 
maintain quantitative restrictions on thousands of items such as 
textiles and clothing, agricultural products, steel and 
footwear." In the case of increased protection against Chinese 
goods, "China will be forced to reduce imports in order to 
balance its foreign trade," Li stressed. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1688 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_a_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> General </F>
<H3> <TI>   DPRK Rejects UN Security Council Statement </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    DPRK Rejects UN Security Council Statement </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0404033394 Beijing XINHUA in English 0241 GMT 4 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0404033394 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["DPRK Rejects UN Security Council's Statement" -- XINHUA </F>
headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, April 4 (XINHUA) -- The government of 
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) today rejected 
the statement of the United Nations Security Council on nuclear 
inspection. 
  A Foreign Ministry spokesman of the DPRK today said that the 
DPRK's nuclear issue "is not at all an issue to be discussed by 
the Security Council," the official newspaper "NODONG SINMUN" 
reported. 
  The statement is a product of the U.S. policy of being 
hostile to the DPRK and strangling the country, he said, adding 
that the United States has "taken advantage of the UN Security 
council" to bring pressure to bear upon the DPRK. 
  In a statement issued in New York on March 31, President of 
the UN Security Council Jean-Bernard Merimee urged the DPRK to 
allow the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to complete 
its inspection of Pyongyang's nuclear facilities. 
  The spokesman said the statement has seriously violated the 
purposes and principles of the UN Charter because the Security 
Council discussed the DPRK's nuclear issue just after the IAEA 
had made "an improper and biased" conclusion of its inspection. 
  He stressed that since his country is now at the temporary 
stage of not pulling out of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, 
it is "totally unreasonable" for the DPRK to undergo an 
additional inspection. 
  He warned that if the United States continues to break its 
promises and bring pressure to bear upon the DPRK, the country 
will have to resume the "peaceful nuclear activities" which it 
had ceased unilaterally during the DPRK-U.S. talks. 
  The DPRK has been taking the stand of peacefully solving the 
nuclear issue and any pressure exerted on the country will 
surely end in failure, he said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1689 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_a_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> General </F>
<H3> <TI>   ROK, U.S. Fail To Decide on Military Exercise </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    ROK, U.S. Fail To Decide on Military Exercise </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104231694 Beijing XINHUA in English 2250 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104231694 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Washington, April 1 (XINHUA) -- South Korean Foreign 
Minister Han Sung-chu said here today that South Korea and the 
United States have not yet reached a decision on conducting an 
annual Team Spirit joint military exercise. 
  "We are continuing to discuss with the United States 
concerning the Team Spirit `94, and we have not yet reached a 
decision," Han told reporters at a press conference after 
meeting with U.S. Defense Secretary William Perry. 
  Han stressed that "we are prepared to deal with this issue 
through dialogue and by peaceful means." 
  The U.S. administration decided on March 19 to resume the 
joint military exercise with South Korean forces after the talks 
between South Korea and the Democratic People's Republic of 
Korea failed over the issue of nuclear inspections and the 
exchange of envoys. 
  "There is no final decision on when to have it," Han noted, 
"the question on Team Spirit is still be discussed between the 
two governments." 
  Han also said the UN Security Council president's statement 
yesterday "represents a big diplomatic step toward dealing with 
this North Korean nuclear issue." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1690 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_a_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  30 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> General </F>
<H3> <TI>   Representative Urges UNSC To Reflect Members' Wishes </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Representative Urges UNSC To Reflect Members' Wishes </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104133894 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 0757 
GMT 30 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0104133894 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Li Jianxiong (2621 0256 7160)] </F>
  [Text] United Nations, 29 Mar (XINHUA) -- Chen Jian, 
China's deputy permanent representative to the United Nations, 
said here today: The UN Security Council [UNSC] must bear 
responsibility to all member nations when performing its duties, 
and reflect the member nations' collective and common wishes. 
  Chen Jian made the statement at the UN General Assembly's 
[UNGA] working group meeting on "The Issue of Fair Distribution 
of UNSC Seats and Increase of the Number of Members." The 
working group is currently discussing issues concerning 
relations of the UNSC with the UNGA and the vast number of 
member nations, as well as ways for improving the UNSC's work. 
  Chen Jian said: The "UN Charter" stipulates that the UNSC is 
representing member nations in performing its duty of 
safeguarding international peace and security. This is the 
power entrusted by member nations to the UNSC as well as the 
UNSC's commitment to them. 
  He said: The objective to be reached during the working 
group's discussion on the UNSC's work should be one that urges 
the UNSC to faithfully implement the stipulations of the "UN 
Charter." He felt efforts should be put on these four aspects: 
  1. The UNSC must strictly abide by the aim and principle of 
the "UN Charter," particularly the principle of respecting state 
sovereignty, not interfering in domestic affairs, and solving 
international disputes with peaceful means. 
  2. Principal UN organizations such as the UNSC and UNGA 
should first perform their respective duties. Meanwhile, they 
should strengthen cooperation and coordination among themselves 
as well as properly handle relations between various 
organizations so as to jointly fulfill the aim of the Charter. 
  3. The UNSC should increase the transparency of its work, 
realistically strengthen contacts between the vast number of 
member nations, as well as further upgrade the authoritativeness 
of its decisions. The UNSC should listen widely to opinions 
from all sides, particularly opinions of concerned parties, 
countries, and organizations in regions to ensure that its 
decisions are solidly based. 
  4. The UNSC should improve its work methods and efficiency. 
While maintaining efficiency, it is essential for the UNSC to 
adopt realistic and feasible approaches to improve its work 
methods. 
  Chen Jian added: The Chinese delegation hopes the UNSC will, 
based on current discussions, absorb rational and useful 
suggestions forwarded by the vast number of member nations as 
well as further improve its work methods and style, so as to 
bring into play a more constructive and active role in 
safeguarding international peace and security. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1691 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_a_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  16 Feb 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> General </F>
<H3> <TI>   NATO Expansion, `Partnership for Peace' Viewed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    NATO Expansion, `Partnership for Peace' Viewed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0703050694 Beijing JIEFANGJUN BAO in Chinese 16 Feb 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> HK0703050694 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JIEFANGJUN BAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Wei Wei (7279 0251): "NATO Expansion and the </F>
'Partnership for Peace' Program"] 
  [Text] Beginning this month, the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization [NATO] dispatched delegations one after another to 
central and eastern European countries to explain the substance 
of its "partnership for peace" program so that those countries 
would sign the "framework document of partnership for peace" 
more quickly. By 8 February, six central and eastern European 
countries including Romania, Hungary, and Ukraine had signed the 
document with NATO, and thus the promotion of the "partnership 
for peace" program was quickly started. 
  The so-called "partnership for peace" program was initiated 
by the United States and adopted by the NATO summit meeting on 
10 January, with a view to not letting central and eastern 
European counties join NATO immediately, so as to avoid 
irritating Russia, but allowing them to join in stages: First, 
by signing the "treaty of partnership for peace" with NATO, then 
strengthening military and political cooperation, and finally 
join the organization. 
  The issue of NATO expansion has been raised for many years. 
Nevertheless, as central and eastern European countries and 
Russia on the one hand, and NATO states on the other, have their 
own interests and calculations on the issue, NATO has found it 
difficult to pursue expansion. 
  Central and east European countries have an urgent demand to 
join NATO. Since the disintegration of the Warsaw Pact, led by 
the Soviet Union, in 1991, NATO has become the only military 
bloc in Europe. To seek a security guarantee, former Warsaw 
Pact states, such as Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, and 
Slovakia, asked for NATO membership one after another. 
Particularly in recent months, the rise of the Russian 
nationalist forces has caused worry that the development of the 
Moscow situation would pose a threat to them. Therefore, they 
became increasingly eager to join NATO. On 5 January, Polish 
President Lech Walesa openly accused Western countries of taking 
"a passive attitude" toward the demands of such countries as 
Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic to join NATO and 
stressed that this would "cause the East to begin to pursue a 
policy that will not necessarily satisfy the West" and "cause a 
greater and greater threat to security in Europe." 
  One important reason NATO has not boldly entered the East is 
Russia's firm opposition. Russian President Boris Yeltsin 
maintained: NATO expansion to central and eastern European 
countries would make Russia "feel being isolated and 
surrounded." He warned that if countries bordering on Russia 
joined NATO it would lead to military and political instability. 
Russian Defense Minister Pavel Grachev more pointedly said: 
"The process of NATO expanding its membership poses a certain 
threat to Russia." He stated: If NATO expands its sphere of 
influence to areas near Russia's borders, Russia will need to 
reconsider its defense concepts, including reorganization and 
redeployment of its armed forces and changes in operations 
planning. The Russians contend: Eastern Europe's security must 
be "jointly safeguarded" by Russia and NATO. 
  In fact, NATO does not necessarily hope to immediately 
absorb 
the former Warsaw Pact member states for several reasons: 
First, the current social and political situation of Poland, 
Hungary, and the Czech Republic is not stable and national 
conflicts continue to emerge, and NATO is worried that if these 
countries become its members, its member states will surely be 
involved in state-to-state conflicts. Second, NATO is a 
collective organization rather than an organization providing 
aid to other countries. A NATO state will be given membership 
only after having assumed necessary economic responsibility. 
But at present, the central and eastern European countries 
which have asked to join NATO have not been able to rid 
themselves of their economic crises and are still unable to 
shoulder economic responsibility, and none of the 16 NATO member 
states is willing to pay the amount of money required for their 
poor brothers. Third, NATO is a military bloc. Eastern European 
countries are far, far behind NATO states in terms of military 
equipment, logistics, telecommunications, training, and command 
systems. According to specialists' estimates, it will take 10 
years for central and eastern European countries to reach the 
NATO armed forces' levels. It can thus be seen that NATO is not 
well prepared for accepting those countries as new members, both 
militarily and financially. 
  The United States is taking a prudent attitude toward NATO 
expansion. One of the three pillars of U.S. foreign policy is 
expanding the camp of "democratic" countries. Adhering to this 
principle, naturally, it hopes that eastern European countries 
and the former Soviet republics will join NATO. However, it 
worries that this will give Russia a sense of isolation and 
irritate Russia's "ultra-Right forces." In order not to offend 
Russia, and at the same time, not disappoint the central and 
eastern European countries wishing to joint NATO, the United 
States initiated a compromise "partnership for peace" program, 
which opens doors for the former Warsaw Pact states to join NATO 
and at the same time, pointed out that NATO expansion "is a long 
process of gradual advance." 
  Of course, the "partnership for peace" program includes two 
obvious U.S. intentions, namely, continuing to control Europe 
while reducing its own defense responsibility on the continent. 
The developed countries of the world are mostly concentrated in 
Europe. At the present stage and for a considerably long period 
of time to come, Europe is and will still be the center of 
international struggle. Moreover, the United States' allies are 
chiefly in Europe. For the United States to become the leader 
of the West and the world, first of all, it must maintain its 
leading position in Europe. Therefore, after the end of the 
Cold War, the United States still intends to have 100,000 troops 
stationed in Europe. While putting forth the "partnership for 
peace" program, the United States also supports NATO and former 
Warsaw Pact member states in establishing "a multinational task 
force" which is able to maintain peacekeeping operations in the 
European region without U.S. participation. Apparently, this 
program will help lighten the United States' burdens and drop 
the idea of some European countries favoring an armed force 
outside NATO, thus maintaining U.S. influence in Europe. If 
NATO expands to Russia's borders overnight, it will be directly 
exposed to Russia's forward position and the United States will 
thus lose a buffer zone. Moreover, eastern Europe and Russia 
are instable areas. As such, the United States will be easily 
involved in these areas. This is what the United States is 
doing its utmost to avoid. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1692 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_a_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> General </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kozyrev Says Russia To Join NATO Partnership in Apr </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Kozyrev Says Russia To Join NATO Partnership in Apr </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204020594 Beijing XINHUA in English 0144 GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0204020594 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Moscow, April 1 (XINHUA) -- Russian Foreign Minister 
Andrey Kozyrev said here today that Russia will join NATO's 
partnership for peace program in late April. 
  According to an INTERFAX report, Kozyrev made the remarks at 
a press conference after meeting UN Secretary General Butrus 
Butrus-Ghali at the airport. 
  He said the program accords with Russia's demand for 
establishing a partnership with the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO). However he added that by no means will 
Russia join NATO itself. 
  He said that to join the program is an important part of 
Russia's partnership strategy of Europe. 
  Kozyrev said suggestions by President Boris Yeltsin's 
spokesman that it would take Russia six or seven months to join 
the partnership for peace program referred only to the 
implementation of the partnership, not to the signing of the 
agreement itself. 
  Yeltsin's press secretary, Vyacheslav Kostikov, told 
reporters Thursday that it may take Russia six or seven months 
to make a final decision on joining NATO's partnership for peace 
program. 
  So far 14 east European countries have signed up for the 
partnership program, launched at the NATO summit in January in 
order to establish closer military links between the western 
alliance and East European countries. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1693 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_a_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> General </F>
<H3> <TI>   WIPO Chief Views Beijing's Intellectual Property Protection </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    WIPO Chief Views Beijing's Intellectual Property Protection </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0304043694 Beijing XINHUA in English 0252 GMT 3 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0304043694 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 3 (XINHUA) -- Fifteen years ago, 
intellectual property rights protection was virtually 
non-existent in China. 
  But now, China has been turned into one of the "advanced" 
countries in the developing world in this respect, said Arpad 
Bogsch, director-general of the World Intellectual Property 
Organization (WIPO). 
  "The change is from nothing to everything," he said. "The 
whole world admires what China has achieved in a very short 
time." 
  For the past 15 years, Bogsch has been here almost every 
year. He advised China on the drafting and revision of its laws 
on intellectual property rights protection and witnessed nearly 
every progress China has made in this area. 
  This time, Bogsch came to host a WIPO-China sub-regional 
symposium on the role of copyright in cultural and economic 
development, which was held in Kunming, capital of south-west 
China's Yunnan Province. 
  Despite a tight schedule, he gave XINHUA an interview before 
his departure. 
  He recalled that when he first visited China in 1979, there 
was only a "very weak" trade mark law here. In the past 15 
years, China made great strides in the build-up of a legal 
framework for intellectual property, while engaged in the 
development of its economy. 
  In 1983, a revised trade mark law became effective, which 
was 
followed by a patent law two years later. In 1991, the 
copyright law and regulations on the protection of computer 
software were promulgated and implemented. 
  In nine years, the patent system has become a "strong and 
viable system" and patents are getting more and more attention 
as well as protection, he said. 
  Chinese inventors more and more realize that it is in their 
interests and in the interests of their enterprises, 
universities and scientific research institutions to have an 
invention patented, Bogsch noted. 
  Although the copyright law is relatively young, the national 
copyright administration has begun its work effectively, setting 
up various agencies inside the country and organizing royalties 
collection and distribution among authors, he said. 
  In the meantime, China joined the Paris Convention for the 
Protection of Industrial Property, WIPO, the Madrid Agreement 
Concerning the International Registration of Marks, the Berne 
Convention for the Protection of Copyright. From January 1 of 
this year, China has become a member of the Patent Cooperation 
Treaty. 
  Therefore, China has completed the participation in 
international intellectual property agreements, he said. It has 
become a party to the international contacts in the field of 
industrial property and copyright, participating now in the 
formation of the future international relations in this field, 
he added. 
  Bogsch noted that protecting industrial property and 
copyright is to protect inventors' and producers' interests, and 
encourage them to create and produce more and better cultural 
and material goods. 
  "National creativity must be rewarded and encouraged," he 
stressed. 
  In order to effectively protect intellectual property, a 
country must, first of all, have good laws, which will have 
fines or sanctions against non-compliance, he said. 
  In this respect, China is one of "the advanced countries" in 
the developing world, he said. 
  Secondly, the public awareness of the usefulness of 
copyright 
protection must be raised, he said. Yet, to his disappointment, 
people in many countries do not seem to have realized the 
significance of copyright. 
  The presence at the Kunming symposium of over 100 Chinese 
participants from the country's 31 provinces, municipalities and 
autonomous regions shows once more the importance China attaches 
to the improvement of its copyright protection system and to the 
role of copyright in its cultural and economic development, he 
noted. 
  "China will have as good a copyright system as any country 
in 
a few years," he said. 
  Touching on WIPO-China ties in the past 20 years, he said 
the 
cooperation was "excellent" and that WIPO advised China and 
helped it in the training of staff. 
  On future cooperation, Bogsch noted that WIPO will continue 
to give training to more Chinese nationals and give advice, if 
requested, on how to improve and adapt new circumstances in 
industrial and copyright laws. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1694 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_a_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  18 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> General </F>
<H3> <TI>   State Council Removes, Appoints State Personnel </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    State Council Removes, Appoints State Personnel </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0304090594 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 0643 
GMT 18 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0304090594 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 18 Mar (XINHUA) -- The State Council 
removed and appointed some state organ personnel recently. 
  Li Guohua (female) and Liu Shan [0491 1472] were appointed 
as 
vice ministers of the Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation; 
Yin Baozhi [1438 1405 3112] as consul general in Constanta; Shi 
Jicheng as permanent representative to the United Nations' 
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific; Chen 
Dazhen as consul general in Geneva and in Liechtenstein; Xu 
Changcai [6079 2490 6299] as consul general in Barcelona; Liao 
Qiping [1675 0796 1627] as consul general in Sao Paulo; and Lei 
Yin [7191 5593] as consul general in Khabarovsk. 
  Yang Jiachun was removed from the post of consul general in 
Constanta; Li Shichun, from the post of permanent representative 
to the UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the 
Pacific; Xu Youjun, from the post of consul general in Geneva 
and in Liechtenstein; Luo Daoguang, from the post of consul 
general in Barcelona; Xu Shaohai, from the post of consul 
general in Sao Paulo; and Sui Qin, from the post of consul 
general in Khabarovsk. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1695 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_a_94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> General </F>
<H3> <TI>   Beijing Prepares for World Women's Congress </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Beijing Prepares for World Women's Congress </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0304132494 Beijing XINHUA in English 1253 GMT 3 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0304132494 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 3 (XINHUA) -- China is stepping up 
preparations to host the Fourth World Women's Congress (FWWC) 
slated for 1995 in Beijing. 
  Xu Zhijian, deputy secretary-general of the State Council 
and 
vice-chairman of the China Organizing Committee for the FWWC, 
told reporters that the Chinese Government and leaders of the 
Communist Party of China (CPC) regard the preparations for the 
congress as important. 
  Chinese leaders, including Hu Jintao, Chen Xitong, Qian 
Qichen, Chen Muhua and Peng Peiyun, have regularly heard 
progress reports on the preparatory work of the China Organizing 
Committee. 
  Hu Jintao, a member of the Standing Committee of the 
Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee and also a member 
of the Secretariat of the CPC Central Committee, said after 
listening to a progress report that the holding of the FWWC in 
China demonstrates that the world status of China under the 
opening-up drive and reform has been improving. 
  "We must make concerted efforts to make a success of the 
FWWC," he said. 
  Qian Qichen, vice-premier and also minister of foreign 
affairs, said that by holding the congress the country would 
demonstrate to the world that reformed, open China is now 
enjoying social prosperity. 
  Chen Xitong, secretary of the CPC Beijing Municipal 
Committee, said that the city would carry out the preparations 
well to ensure a smooth holding of the FWWC in the capital. 
  Chen Muhua, vice-chairman of the Standing Committee of the 
National People's Congress and also president of the All-China 
Women's Federation (ACWF), urged women all over the country to 
make concerted efforts to make a success of the FWWC. 
  According to Xu, an estimated 20,000 foreign delegates are 
expected to attend the congress. 
  Major conference sites, expected to accommodate tens of 
thousands of people, have been chosen. The drafting of 
important documents or reports has been finalized or completed 
ahead of schedule, and a publicity campaign has been launched. 
  Some 12,000 guest rooms at luxury hotels have been booked to 
accommodate more than 20,000 congress participants. 
  FWWC Secretary-General Gertrude Mongella and her party 
expressed satisfaction with the service facilities after they 
visited Beijing as leaders of a United Nations inspection 
delegation last June. 
  About 30,000 women from 28 provinces, autonomous regions or 
cities, including 1,000 officials, have been trained for the 
congress or for the implementation of the strategies for the 
advancement of women set by the last congress. 
  About 1,500 women delegates representing all nationalities 
across China will participate in meetings associated with the 
FWWC and a non-governmental organizations forum. About 20,000 
people are expected to attend the forum, to be held before and 
during the main congress. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1696 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_s_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Northeast Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Jilin Selects Pilot Cities for Labor Reforms </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Jilin Selects Pilot Cities for Labor Reforms </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   SK0203055394 Changchun Jilin People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 1030 GMT 1 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> SK0203055394 </F>
<F P=104>  Changchun Jilin People's Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Mandarin </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Jilin has made great efforts to promote overall, 
coordinated reform of the labor system for the region. It 
recently designated Siping, Liaoyuan, and Changchun cities and 
Yongji, Huadian, Linjiang, Sanchazi, Hunchun, Qian Gorlos, 
Qianan, Jian, Tonghua, Daan, Zhenlai, and Tongyu counties, 
cities [shi], and districts as the first pilot areas to test 
regional coordinated reform. Major parts of the reform are as 
follows: First, the labor contract system will be applied to 
all staff members and workers of all state-owned, collective, 
foreign-funded, shareholding, and private enterprises in these 
areas. Second, the wages of all the enterprises will be subject 
to overall regulation and control. The total amount of wages 
will be linked to economic performance. Enterprises have the 
decision-making power for their own distribution. Third, 
old-age pension and unemployment insurance will cover all staff 
members and workers of urban state-owned, collective, 
foreign-funded, shareholding, and private enterprises, and a new 
and unified pension distribution method will be implemented. 
Fourth, the labor force exchange markets and their service 
function will be improved so that the markets will fully develop 
their basic role in the development, utilization, and 
distribution of labor forces. Through the reform, enterprises' 
transformation of the operating mechanism will be promoted, and 
their quality and economic efficiency will be raised in an 
all-round manner. The experiment of the first group of pilot 
cities and counties will be completed at the end of this year. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1697 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_s_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Northeast Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Liaoning Lessens Farmers' Financial Burden </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Liaoning Lessens Farmers' Financial Burden </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0403084094 Beijing XINHUA in English 0705 GMT 4 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0403084094 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Shenyang, March 4 (XINHUA) -- Each farmer in 
Liaoning Province, northeast China, can now spend an additional 
40 yuan per year on daily necessities, since the provincial 
government has lessened farmers' financial burdens. 
  The province, with a rural population of 20 million, cut a 
total of 800 million yuan from random charges assessed to 
farmers last year. 
  An average of five percent of a farmer's annual income goes 
into the province's coffers. 
  In light of the documents issued by the State Council to 
lighten farmers' financial burdens, the province lowered the 
ceiling for total fees for farmers in 1993 by some 300 million 
yuan from the previous year's figure. 
  The province gives farmers booklets on which types of 
charges 
and amounts are listed so that farmers may understand their 
rights and responsibilities better. Farmers may refuse to hand 
in any extra charges which are not noted in the booklet. 
  The province also is easing farmers' financial burdens by 
putting an end to random charges demanded by governments at 
grassroots levels, reducing government personnel and tightening 
up regulations against random charges assessed to farmers. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1698 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_s_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Northeast Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Liaoning Farmers Become Enterprise Share-Holders </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Liaoning Farmers Become Enterprise Share-Holders </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0403024994 Beijing XINHUA in English 0120 GMT 4 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0403024994 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Shenyang, March 4 (XINHUA) -- More than 50,000 
farmers in Shenyang, provincial capital of northeast China's 
Liaoning, have become share-holders of local rural enterprises. 
  According to local officials, Shenyang, an old industrial 
center, has got 8,000 rural and township enterprises. Last 
year, these enterprises created 20 billion yuan (about 2.3 
billion U.S. dollars) worth of output, accounting for one third 
of the city's total industrial output value. 
  About 3,000 out of the 8,000 rural enterprises have been 
transformed into joint-stock ones, and funds from shares of 
farmers- turned employees have made up some 500 million yuan. 
  The city began trial transformation of designated rural and 
township enterprises into joint-stock ones in 1985 and gained 
some positive experience. Last year, the city extended the 
transformation to the whole city and saw an emergence of 2,000 
joint-stock firms in the city's rural areas. 
  Rural enterprises run under a joint-stock system not only 
help enhance the sense of responsibility of workers, but also 
help stop up outside interference, said the officials, adding 
that the joint-stock system is an effective way to vitalize 
management and to build a modern enterprise system in rural 
enterprises. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1699 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_s_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Northeast Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Shenyang Agencies Bridge Labor Supply, Demand </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Shenyang Agencies Bridge Labor Supply, Demand </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0103100894 Beijing XINHUA in English 0855 GMT 1 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0103100894 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Shenyang, March 1 (XINHUA) -- Some 1.93 million 
people have found jobs through market competition in this 
capital city of northeast China's Liaoning Province. 
  According to Wang Dezhou, who is in charge of the city's 
labor affairs, Shenyang now has 303 intermediary organizations 
bridging labor supply and demand. 
  Wang said that in recent years job agencies in the city have 
received a total of 2.27 million job applicants. 
  He said the agencies have so far helped find jobs for 
260,000 
jobless people, redeployed 170,000 redundant workers, 
transferred 280,000 technicians and found re-employment for 
690,000 retired workers. 
  This largest industrial center in northeast China has 
granted 
enterprises autonomy in hiring and firing workers. 
  The implementation of the contract system has helped nurture 
a more rationalized employment mechanism that reflects labor 
market supply and demand. Meanwhile, the minimum wage system 
has also been introduced in the city, the official said. 
  He said the mobility of technical workers has eased a 
conflict between the structure of industries and the make-up of 
the work force, as well as unleashed a freer flow of technology. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1700 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_b_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> United States &amp; Canada </F>
<H3> <TI>   World Bank: Costs of MFN Withdrawal `High' for China, U.S. </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    World Bank: Costs of MFN Withdrawal `High' for China, U.S. </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104231294 Beijing XINHUA in English 2237 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104231294 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Washington, April 1 (XINHUA) -- Chinese exporters 
are not the only ones that would lose if the country's most 
favored nation (MFN) status in trading with the U.S. is 
withdrawn, the latest study of the World Bank said today. 
  "U.S. consumers could end up paying as much as 14 billion 
U.S. dollars per year in higher prices resulting from a 
combination of costlier substitutes from alternative supply 
sources," the study said. 
  The study "China: Foreign Trade Reform" said that "it 
appears that the dislocation in trade flows likely to result 
from withdrawal of China's mfn privileges by the U.S. would 
range from the dramatic to the disastrous, with the associated 
costs high for both parties." 
  It should be noted, the study said, that it is possible for 
China to find alternative export markets to make up for these 
losses. China's annual export losses in the U.S. market could be 
on the order of seven to 15.2 billion dollars. 
  This is a decline between 42 and 96 percent for the 15 major 
products China exports to the U.S., whose combined projected 
losses are between 3.7 and 8.5 billion dollars, with about one 
half of this reduction registered in the key clothing and toys 
or games group. 
  Among the 15 major export products of China to U.S. are, in 
line of export value in 1990, toys and indoor games, clothing of 
textile fabric, footwear, travel goods and handbags, radio 
broadcast equipment, fresh or frozen shellfish, made-up textile 
articles, and furniture. 
  "It appears likely that Chinese exports to the U.S. would 
face grave difficulty due to major cost disadvantage associated 
with U.S. general tariffs," which is 42 percent on average for 
the 15 products, as compared with 13.4 percent mfn tariff, the 
study said. 
  "With such a major upward shift in the level of import 
duties, Chinese exports to the U.S. will clearly experience a 
major decline, and in some product groups, may be completely 
eliminated," the study said. 
  MFN applies to all members of General Agreement on Tariffs 
and Trade (GATT). The U.S. provisionally granted mfn status to 
China, a non-GATT member, in 1973. U.S. domestic legislation 
requires the review of China's MFN status on a yearly basis. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1701 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_b_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> United States &amp; Canada </F>
<H3> <TI>   World Bank Report Cited on Losses to U.S. If MFN Not Passed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    World Bank Report Cited on Losses to U.S. If MFN Not Passed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104211594 Beijing XINHUA in English 2048 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104211594 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Washington, April 1 (XINHUA) -- U.S. consumers have 
to pay 14 billion U.S. dollars a year more for costlier 
substitutes if China loses most favored nation (MFN) status in 
trading with the U.S., a World Bank study said today. 
  The 334-page report, compiled by World Bank staff in Beijing 
and Washington, said the loss of MFN trading status will have 
consequences for the U.S. and China ranging "from the dramatic 
to the disastrous." 
  The report said China's exports to the U.S. could be reduced 
by between 42 and 96 percent, depending on how readily Chinese 
exports can be substituted by others. "American consumers will 
be penalized," it said. 
  In 1992, the U.S. imported almost 27 billion dollars worth 
of 
goods from China, making the U.S. China's single largest trading 
partner, the study said. 
  China's top exports to the U.S. include yarn, cotton 
fabrics, 
telecommunications equipment, travel goods, handbags, footwear, 
watches, clocks, toys, sporting goods and clothing. 
  "In actuality, the impact of MFN loss is likely to be closer 
to the lower bound, but even that is a substantial dislocation 
of trade," the bank's senior economist for China Country 
Department, Rajiv Lall, said. 
  The report said time is right for China to significantly 
liberalize its trade with such steps as reducing tariffs, 
replacing import quotas and licenses with simpler taxes, and 
removing remaining export control. 
  The U.S. first granted provisional MFN status to China in 
1973. Domestic legislation in the U.S. requires the review of 
China's MFN status on a yearly basis. The next such review is 
expected in June. 
  The report said that "complete MFN loss would lead to severe 
dislocation of China's exports to the U.S.," at least halving, 
and possibly wiping out, China's export of clothing to the U.S. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1702 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_b_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> United States &amp; Canada </F>
<H3> <TI>   World Bank: China's Trade System More Open Than U.S. </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    World Bank: China's Trade System More Open Than U.S. </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104231794 Beijing XINHUA in English 2248 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104231794 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Washington, April 1 (XINHUA) -- China's trade 
system, in wake of institutional decentralization and more 
foreign direct investment, is now "significantly more open" than 
the U.S. and Japan, the World Bank said today. 
  "Despite a complex array of tariff and nontariff barriers to 
trade, China has become a relatively open economy, with evidence 
of considerable tariff redundancy," the bank said in a recently 
concluded country study report. 
  The study, entitled "China: Foreign Trade Reform", noted 
that 
the people's republic, now the 11th largest exporter in the 
world, has made "dramatic progress" in reforming its trade 
system in recent years. 
  Import penetration in certain sectors in China, the study 
said, is "extremely high", standing at 28 percent of the gross 
value of industrial output of China's machinery and transport 
equipment sector in 1990. 
  "The present is an opportune time for China to embark on a 
substantive program of trade liberalization," the report said, 
stressing that the importance of trade planning in China has 
been "declining". 
  Since 1979, when the world's most populous country began its 
market-oriented reforms, China's exports have increased ninefold 
and imports more than sevenfold. 
  "The promotion of external trade has been central to China's 
efforts to modernize its economy," the study said. China's 
economy, it said, has become "significantly more open than the 
U.S. and Japan." 
  The share of merchandise trade in China's gross domestic 
product went from 10 percent in 1978 to 31 percent in 1991, with 
imports accounting for 15 percent. China "appears to be more 
than twice as open as India and Brazil," it said. 
  In 1978, the study said, trade in China was monopolized by 
12 
foreign trade corporations and there was no foreign direct 
investment. 
  But by 1992, over 3,600 such corporations competed for 
export 
business and over 90,000 foreign direct investment projects had 
been approved with a contracted value of 58.1 billion U.S. 
dollars, the study said. 
  In the 1980s, the study said, China's exports outperformed 
those of most other countries, including such newly 
industrialized economies as Malaysia. China now exports about 
17 percent of the gross value of industrial output of its 
overall manufacturing sector. 
  According to China customs statistics, China's trade surplus 
with the United States, Hong Kong and Germany in 1992 were 
respectively 15.4 billion, 7.8 billion and 1.6 billion dollars. 
  During the same period, China's trade deficits with China's 
Taiwan, Japan, and South Korea stood at 10.4 billion, 5.5 
billion and 1.2 billion dollars respectively. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1703 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_b_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> United States &amp; Canada </F>
<H3> <TI>   Article Says U.S. To Extend MFN to China </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Article Says U.S. To Extend MFN to China </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0304033394 Hong Kong WEN WEI PO in Chinese 2 Apr 94 p a2 </F>
<F P=103> HK0304033394 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong WEN WEI PO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special article" by Feng Ta-fu (7458 1129 1381): "United </F>
States To Extend MFN Status to China"] 
  [Text] A debate on whether or not to extend Most Favored 
Nation [MFN] status to China has been going on in U.S. political 
circles since early this year. 
  U.S. Ambassador to China Stapleton Roy has said he believes 
that "China's human rights condition is gradually being 
improved," and "the most effective way to resolve the dispute 
with China is through in-depth diplomatic dialogue." He 
explicitly advocated "doing away with the practice of linking 
China's trade status to its human rights record," saying that 
"such linkage is abnormal." Winston Lord, assistant secretary 
for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, said that the U.S. 
Government does not want to conduct a debate on renewing China's 
MFN status every year and hopes that this issue will not remain 
the central topic of U.S.-Chinese relations. 
<H5>  None of the Authorities Want To Cancel China's MFN Status </H5>
  Garten [jia teng 0502 3326,] U.S. deputy secretary of 
commerce said: "To my knowledge, none of the officials in the 
Clinton administration hope to cancel China's MFN status. James 
Baker, the White House chief of staff during President Reagan's 
term, said: "There will be tough contention between China and 
the United States, but, in the final analysis, the United States 
will extend MFN status to China." He believed that, should the 
United States fail to extend MFN status to China this year, the 
result would be disastrous. 
  Masters [ma si te 7456 2448 3676,] who was the U.S. 
Ambassador to Indonesia during the Carter administration, 
believed that, should Washington openly put pressure on China 
over the human rights issue, this practice would hardly achieve 
the expected results. They would only be shooting themselves in 
the foot by harming U.S. industrial and commercial interests. 
U.S. Senator Bennett Johnston, Democrat, believes that 
"Sino-U.S. relations are the United States' most important 
bilateral relations." Should Washington cancel MFN status to 
China, that would be "unthinkable." He required President 
Clinton to extend MFN status to China this summer and 
furthermore suggested that he extend it forever or on a 
long-term basis." U.S. Senator Alan Simpson, Republican, 
stated: "The United States has granted MFN status to 160 
countries, including Libya, Iran and Syria; that being the case, 
should such status be refused to China, it would be `absurd.'" 
The U.S. press has maintained that, although the U.S. State 
Department's human rights report states that, last year, China's 
human rights record was "not up to international standards," in 
view of the increasingly louder voices coming from U.S. business 
circles, the U.S. Government should "separately handle" the two 
issues of human rights and MFN status, and Clinton should extend 
MFN status to China. On the issue of permanent or long-term 
extension, the U.S. press has said that the White House has 
quietly and slowly launched a broad offensive to seek support 
for granting MFN status to China, while secretly implementing a 
plan to grant China permanent non-discriminative tariff 
treatment. 
  The U.S. press has reported: "In the U.S. Congress, there is 
extensive support for granting China permanent MFN status." 
  In addition, the U.S. press has most recently reported that, 
although Warren Christopher has repeatedly said that China "has 
failed to make substantial progress" in human rights, he 
expressed that "should Beijing improve its human rights 
condition in the next few months," the United States might be 
willing to consider the practice of extending MFN status to 
China for several years running. 
<H5>  The United States Is Readjusting its Policy Toward China </H5>
  With the continuously growth of China's economic strength 
and 
the continuous elevation of its global standing, China is 
playing an increasingly greater role in international affairs. 
The U.S. Government has come to see that, in the world today, a 
solution to any important international or regional issue would 
be out of the question without China's participation or 
cooperation. That being the case, taking the new start that the 
Seattle Sino-U.S. summit gave Sino-U.S. relations as a turning 
point, the United States has begun to change its policy toward 
China and "pursue a new policy which seeks to strengthen 
economic and political contacts with China" to improve and 
develop Sino-U.S. relations. As ASIAWEEK put it, "more than any 
time before, Clinton believes that placing Sino- U.S. relations 
on a more stable basis falls in line with the greatest interests 
of the two sides." At the same time, some important 
international figures have indicated one after another that the 
condition of Sino-U.S. relations has a great bearing on regional 
and even international affairs and have hoped that relations 
between the two countries would be improved and developed. 
Singapore's senior statesman Lee Kuan Yew said: "The United 
States should regard China as a strategic partner." The 
Japanese Prime Minister Hosokawa believed that "improvement in 
Sino-U.S. relations will be helpful to Asia's stability." In 
addition to approving Lee Kuan Yew's view, Kissinger stated that 
"it would not be logical for the United States to shut itself 
out of China, which is enjoying vigorous economic vitality." 
  Neither Side Gains if Trade Is Suspended 
  That being the case, should the United States cancel China's 
MFN status, which has served as the corner stone of Sino-U.S. 
relations, bilateral relations would not be improved and 
developed; rather, they would be worsened and would retrogress. 
True, canceling China's MFN status would bring certain damage 
to China, but the losses to the United States could be even 
greater. The JIJI Press Agency said, should the United States 
suspend China's MFN status, it would have a great effect on the 
U.S. economy. ASIAWEEK said that, whether or not MFN status is 
extended to China matters a great deal to the United States 
itself. Today, the jobs of approximately 180,000 people are 
directly linked to the $9 billion of U.S. exports to China. 
Furthermore, these two figures might grow rapidly in the new 
few years. The NEW YORK TIMES put it more bluntly: "China's 
economy is the largest one on the rise; Sino-U.S. trade has 
become so economically important to the United States today that 
any threat of suspending such trade would be like the United 
States pointing a gun at its own head while threatening to pull 
the trigger in foreign affairs." 
<H5>  The Tremendous Effects of MFN Status </H5>
  To sum up, the immediate interests of China and the United 
States as well as the imperative of extensive cooperation in 
regional and world affairs call for the continuous improvement 
and development of Sino-U.S. relations. Because MFN status is 
the centerpoint of Sino- U.S. relations, this issue plays a 
decisive role in the success of their bilateral relations. We 
can expect that, although contradictions and differences remain 
between the two countries, as long as there are not any 
accidents, from the viewpoint of the two sides' immediate and 
long-term interests, Sino-U.S. relations will inevitably be 
improved and developed, despite all the ups and downs and 
difficulties ahead. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1704 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_b_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> United States &amp; Canada </F>
<H3> <TI>   Beijing-Affiliated Paper Urges Sino-U.S. Cooperation </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Beijing-Affiliated Paper Urges Sino-U.S. Cooperation </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0304082094 Hong Kong TA KUNG PAO in Chinese 3 Apr 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> HK0304082094 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong TA KUNG PAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Weekly Remarks" column by Kung Yao-wen (7895 5069 2429): </F>
"Strengthen Cooperation, Reduce Trouble"] 
  [Text] The Washington-based World Bank issued a research 
report last Friday [1 April], saying that the U.S. revocation of 
China's MFN status would definitely deal a "disastrous" blow to 
the economies of both countries. The report, providing a list 
of specific figures, pointed out that the U.S. revocation of 
China's MFN status would reduce China's exports to the United 
States by 42- 96 percent. For example, China's garment exports 
to the United States would drop by 50-100 percent. Given the 
fact that the Chinese commodities are relatively cheap, U.S. 
consumers would have to spend $14 billion more on buying more 
expensive substitute commodities each year. The report noted 
that the Chinese economy has become increasingly open due to its 
growing volume of export trade. It can be said that "China is 
much more open than India, Brazil, and even the United States." 
Since the World Bank is the world's most authoritative 
financial institution, its views are believed to be objective 
and pragmatic. 
<H5>  China's Stronger International Position </H5>
  Recently, personalities in all parts of the world, including 
those in the United States, have urged the United States to 
renew China's MFN status, expressing the hope that the United 
States and China will strengthen cooperation and will jointly 
make efforts to safeguard the security of the Asia-Pacific 
Region. Thanks to its growing economic strength and stronger 
international position, China is playing a more and more 
important role in the world. Take, for example, the recent 
nuclear crisis on the Korean peninsula, which has now become the 
focus of international attention. Many countries are hoping 
that China will play a positive role in defusing this crisis. 
As a matter of fact, the statement issued by the UN Security 
Council chairman on 31 March, urging the DPRK to cooperate on 
the nuclear inspections issue, has embodied China's policy on 
the issue, this being the result of China's positive efforts in 
this connection. 
<H5>  Wide-Ranging Sino-U.S. Cooperation </H5>
  China and the United States can no doubt broadly cooperate 
with one another economically and through trade. Reports over 
the last few days have fully attested to this point. Last 
Thursday, official U.S. trade representatives declared: U.S. 
exports to China in 1993 increased by $1.3 billion over the 
previous year, reaching $8.8 billion. In a national trade 
appraisal report submitted to the government, they acknowledged 
that China has already taken "significant steps" in fulfilling 
"most of its obligations" stipulated in the Sino-U.S. trade 
agreement. The report noted that China has also increased the 
transparency of its import examination and approval procedures 
by a large margin. The day before yesterday, the U.S. 
Government announced its decision to lift the ban on the U.S. 
companies exporting computer and telecommunications equipment to 
China in an effort to obstruct Europe, Japan, and other 
countries from acquiring a larger share of the China market. 
The decision will probably help to secure contracts worth tens 
of billions of U.S. dollars for the United States. Yesterday, 
it was reported that the Chinese and U.S. scientists have made a 
new breakthrough in medical research cooperation: They have 
jointly discovered and developed a liver cancer vaccine, thereby 
finding a new cure for this "incurable disease." China and the 
United States can indeed cooperate with each other in many 
fields. 
<H5>  Opposition to Attaching Strings to MFN Status </H5>
  The above facts have demonstrated that those who have tried 
to engineer the revocation of China's MFN status on the pretext 
of human rights and thus undermine the normal relations between 
China and the United States are indeed absurd and ridiculous! 
It is a pity that such people still exist. In the past, they 
tried in every way to obstruct China from obtaining MFN status 
or tried to attach strings to China's MFN status. Seeing their 
position losing popular support with every passing day, they are 
now trying to employ new tactics. They have recently proposed 
so-called sanctions against China's "state-run enterprises," 
which constitute nothing but a refurbished version of their 
original position. China has already made it clear that MFN 
status should be a mutual and unconditional status in bilateral 
trade and that China will not accept any strings attached to its 
MFN status. We can rest assured that those who advocate 
revoking China's MFN status are will find it difficult to 
fulfill their goal. U.S. Undersecretary of Commerce Garten [jia 
teng 0502 3326] once stated: "As far as I know, no official in 
the Clinton administration wants to see China's MFN status 
revoked." There is no denying the fact that contradictions and 
differences exist between China and the United States. 
Nevertheless, shared interests make it imperative for the two 
countries to cooperate and develop relations with one another. 
The governments of the two countries are duty-bound to make 
every possible effort to expand cooperation and reduce trouble 
between the two countries. I hope that events capable of 
dealing a "disastrous" blow to the economies of the two 
countries will never take place. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1705 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_b_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> United States &amp; Canada </F>
<H3> <TI>   Economic, Trade Delegation To Visit U.S. 11-20 Apr </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Economic, Trade Delegation To Visit U.S. 11-20 Apr </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0404082394 Beijing XINHUA in English 0807 GMT 4 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0404082394 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 4 (XINHUA) -- A Chinese Government 
economic and trade delegation is to visit the United States from 
April 11 to 20, at the invitation of U.S. Secretary of Commerce 
Ronald H. Brown. 
  The delegation, headed by Wu Yi, minister of foreign trade 
and economic cooperation, and Ye Qing, vice-minister of the 
State Planning Commission, will attend the eighth meeting of the 
Sino-U.S. Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade (JCCT). 
  At the meeting, the two sides will discuss the development 
of 
Sino-U.S. economic and trade relations and consult on relevant 
issues. 
  According to an official who will be in the delegation, at 
present, the development of Sino-U.S. commercial and trade 
cooperation is brisk and business people of both countries are 
eager to expand bilateral economic and trade cooperation. 
  To further such cooperation, the official said that the 
delegation is to hold business seminars in Los Angeles and New 
York during its stay. 
  Business representatives from 25 Chinese provinces and 
cities 
will bring a number of cooperative projects to the two cities 
for negotiation involving machinery, petrochemicals, iron and 
steel, metallurgy, agriculture, animal husbandry, power 
stations, airports and docks. 
  Representatives from seven Chinese ministries and 
commissions 
will also attend the business seminars. 
  In addition, some Chinese foreign trade corporations will 
purchase industrial technology and equipment, as well as 
traditional commodities. The purchase value is expected to 
reach hundreds of millions of U.S. dollars. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1706 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_b_94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> United States &amp; Canada </F>
<H3> <TI>   Trade Council Chairman Urges Clinton To Renew MFN </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Trade Council Chairman Urges Clinton To Renew MFN </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0404104594 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 0632 
GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0404104594 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Xu Changyin (1776 7022 6892)] </F>
  [Text] Washington, 31 Mar (XINHUA) -- Robert Copper [name 
as published], new chairman of the National Council for 
U.S.-China Trade, said on 31 March that the Clinton 
Administration should continue to grant the 
Most-Favored-National [MFN] status in trade to China this year 
because further development of U.S.-China trade will benefit 
both sides. 
  He made the above remark in a speech at a seminar "Sanctions 
and Trade Control," sponsored by the U.S. Council for Foreign 
Affairs. He said: The National Council for U.S.-China Trade 
hopes very much, and will be happy to see more trade and other 
exchanges between the United States and China. Disruption of 
trade relations between the two countries will incur heavy 
losses to both sides. 
  According to him, Washington should not hassle over China's 
MFN status every year. He called for solving this problem once 
for all this year by granting permanent MFN status to China. On 
the human right issue, he said the United States has its own 
standards of human rights, but should not force China to comply. 
  He added that the National Council for U.S.-China trade, as 
a 
nongovernmental organization, will continue to exert efforts to 
urge the Congress and Clinton Administration to grant MFN trade 
status to China. 
  Jane Shilaka, representative of the U.S. Boeing Aircraft 
Company, also spoke at the seminar. She repeatedly stated that 
Boeing "entirely supports MFN for China every year." She added 
that if the annual debate over the MFN status is cancelled, "it 
will be much better for the American people." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1707 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_q_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Southwest Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Guizhou Secretary Visits Broadcasting, Press Centers </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Guizhou Secretary Visits Broadcasting, Press Centers </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK2603070394 Guiyang Guizhou People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 2300 GMT 11 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK2603070394 </F>
<F P=104>  Guiyang Guizhou People's Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Mandarin </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Yesterday morning [11 March], on the eve of a 
provincial ideological and propaganda work conference, 
provincial party committee Secretary Liu Fangren visited the 
Guizhou Radio Station and the Guizhou Television Station, where 
he urged all the comrades on the radio and television front to 
take Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics as the fundamental guide; adhere to the 
party's basic line; continually emancipate their minds; 
constantly seek truth from facts; stick to a correct public 
opinion orientation; conduct fruitful propaganda work; and make 
propaganda work contribute to Guizhou's drive for reform, 
opening up, and modernization. 
  Comrade Liu Fangren also met with persons in charge of the 
Guizhou Provincial Radio and Television Department, the Guizhou 
Radio Station, and the Guizhou Television Station; inspected the 
operation rooms of Guizhou radio and television stations; and 
made an on-site speech in which he said: In 1993, Guizhou 
comprehensively fulfilled the national economic growth quotas, 
and also enjoyed political stability, economic prosperity, and 
nationality solidarity, thanks to concerted efforts on the part 
of the people of the whole province, including the diligent 
comrades on the province's radio and television front. This 
year, as China's reform is entering a crucial stage, propaganda 
work should unswervingly serve the overall interests. What are 
the overall interests? Grasping opportunities, deepening 
reform, expanding opening up, promoting development, and 
maintaining stability undoubtedly represent the overall 
interests of the whole party and the propaganda work in 1994. 
This year, China is to implement a series of major reform 
measures. In view of this new situation, we should actively 
conduct propaganda and news reporting work in a timely manner 
and in an assured way, with an eye to pushing ahead with the 
reforms. 
  Comrade Liu Fangren stated: Radio and television work 
constitutes an important part of the overall propaganda work 
because of their extensive coverage. Thus we should make 
redoubled efforts to improve the quality of radio and television 
programs, and try to make them more interesting and absorbing. 
The radio and television front should strive to build a strong 
contingent of competent personnel; encourage those engaged in 
the radio and television work to go deep among the masses and 
into reality, as well as to the forefront of the reform, opening 
up, and modernization drive; and conduct more interviews with, 
and file more reports on advanced models capable of displaying a 
history-making spirit of selfless devotion. 
  Those accompanying Secretary Liu Fangren on his visit to the 
Guizhou radio and television stations included Huang Yao, member 
of the provincial party committee standing committee and 
director of the propaganda department; Gu Zhijie, secretary 
general of the provincial party committee; and others. 
  Secretary Liu Fangren and his entourage also visited the 
headquarters of GUIZHOU RIBAO and the Guizhou branch of XINHUA, 
and met with news workers there. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1708 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_q_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  17 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Southwest Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Guizhou Secretary Inspects Work in Liupanshui </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Guizhou Secretary Inspects Work in Liupanshui </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK3003024794 Guiyang Guizhou People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 2300 GMT 17 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK3003024794 </F>
<F P=104>  Guiyang Guizhou People's Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Mandarin </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Provincial Party Committee Secretary Liu Fangren 
recently inspected Liupanshui City where he emphatically called 
for further emancipating the mind, bracing up, and vigorously 
speeding up economic growth. 
  On 14-16 March, Liu Fangren and his entourage inspected 
Shuicheng Iron and Steel Company, Shuicheng County's Waga 
Village, Liupanshui City's Zhongshan Development Zone, Liuzhi 
Special Economic Zone's township and town enterprises, 
Zhenjiazhai Cement Factory, as well as some other units where he 
listened to reports given by the Liupanshui City leaders. He 
fully affirmed the Liupanshui City's achievements over the past 
few years, saying: In 1993, Liupanshui City successfully 
increased gross national product by over 13 percent, higher than 
the province's average, and increased financial revenue by more 
than 50 percent, giving it the province's highest rate of 
increase. 
  On behalf of the provincial people's government, Secretary 
Liu Fangren expressed appreciation and thanks to the broad 
masses of cadres and people in Liupanshui City. While 
inspecting Liupanshui City, Liu pointed out: At the moment, we 
should make continued efforts to emancipate the mind and brace 
ourselves. Only by furthering ideological emancipation will it 
be possible to deepen reform. Ideological emancipation is the 
precursor of economic development. Without ideological 
emancipation, it would be impossible to quicken the pace of 
reform, opening up, and economic development and seize 
opportunities. We should make both vertical and horizontal 
comparisons to find shortcomings, update concepts, and speed up 
economic growth. 
  Secretary Li Fangren stressed: Now that the CPC Central 
Committee and the Guizhou Provincial CPC Committee have 
formulated a clear-cut train of thought and a series of feasible 
measures, we should waste no time in carrying out this train of 
thought as well as the relevant measures and work in a creative 
manner. 
  Secretary Liu Fangren also called on cadres at all levels 
across the province to transform work style in a down-to-earth 
manner, go to the grassroots level to carry out investigation 
and study, adhere to the principle of firmly grasping two key 
aspects of work simultaneously, and make a success of all types 
of work. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1709 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_q_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  30 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Southwest Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Farmers in Poor Areas of Guizhou Move To New Houses </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Farmers in Poor Areas of Guizhou Move To New Houses </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW3003024194 Beijing XINHUA in English 0210 GMT 30 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW3003024194 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Guiyang, March 30 (XINHUA) -- More than 20,000 
families in poverty-stricken areas in southwest China's Guizhou 
Province recently moved to new houses thanks to a 
government-aided housing program. 
  Of the population of 37 million in the mountainous province, 
10 million are ethnic minority people. According to a survey in 
1986, some 40,000 families lived in shabby houses, most of whom 
were ethnic minority people in remote mountains. 
  Since 1984, the central government has allocated three 
million yuan to Guizhou every year to build houses for the 
farmers in poverty-stricken areas. 
  From 1986 to 1993, the province allocated 24 million yuan 
for 
housing construction for 24,994 households with 93,052 people. 
  Local officials said that the provincial government will 
continue the housing program by allocating special funds in the 
next few years. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1710 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_q_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  25 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Southwest Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Religious Leaders in Sichuan Assume Leading Positions </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Religious Leaders in Sichuan Assume Leading Positions </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK2503135694 Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in English 0945 GMT 
25 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK2503135694 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Chengdu, March 25 (CNS) -- According to Sichuan's 
Bureau of Religious Affairs, 98 percent of property rightfully 
belonging to the religious sector has been returned and hundreds 
of unjust, false and erroneous cases involving people within 
this sector have been redressed. More than 1,000 religious 
leaders in the province have been elected deputies to the 
People's Congress or members of the People's Political 
Consultative Conference at various levels in the province. 
  Sichuan has various nationalities and a number of religions, 
but for historic reasons there have been many disputes over 
property and other things involving the various religions. Now 
after more than ten years of implementation of policies 
regarding religion, the province has handed back more than one 
million sq. metres of property to the religious sector including 
many monasteries. Some RMB 9.8 million from removal and 
reconstruction of such property as well as rents have also been 
paid back. 
  The province has made redress of 675 unjust, false and 
erroneous cases and reinstated more than 1,000 religious 
figures, electing them to such bodies as the People's Congress 
and the People's Political Consultative Conference at various 
levels in the province. Eleven religious leaders were appointed 
vice-prefectural or county heads or vice-chairmen of prefecture 
or county-level People's Congresses or the PPCC. 
  The province has now set up 150 religious patriotic bodies 
and opened 1,370 religious sites. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1711 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_q_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Southwest Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tibet Police Corps Holds Party Committee Plenum </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Tibet Police Corps Holds Party Committee Plenum </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW3003055294 Lhasa XIZANG RIBAO in Chinese 1 Mar 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> OW3003055294 </F>
<F P=104>  Lhasa XIZANG RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The CPC Committee of the Tibet Armed Police Corps 
held an expanded meeting in Lhasa on the morning of 28 February. 
Those attending the meeting included Zi Cheng, member of the 
Tibet Autonomous Regional CPC Committee Standing Committee, and 
Zhou Qishun, vice chairman of the Tibet Regional Committee of 
the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference [CPPCC]. 
  In his opening address, Major General Zhang Zhu, political 
commissar of the Tibet Armed Police Corps, said: The guiding 
ideology and main tasks of this meeting are, using Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics as guidance and based on a series of General 
Secretary Jiang Zemin's important instructions on building up 
the armed police force, to diligently study and carry out the 
guidelines of the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee, the expanded meeting of the CPC Committee of the 
Armed Police Corps, the Fifth Expanded Plenary Meeting of the 
Fourth Tibet Regional CPC Committee, the Tibet Regional Meeting 
on Public Security and Judicial Work, and the meeting of 
directors of public security departments (bureaus); to sum up 
the Tibet Armed Police Corps' work of 1993; to lay down a plan 
for its work for 1994; and to mobilize all officers and men to 
study the situation and to work in a down-to-earth manner, in 
order to accomplish all tasks entrusted by the higher 
authorities, to strive to raise the Corps' troop building to a 
new level, and to make greater contributions to preserving the 
motherland's unification and to maintaining Tibet's stability. 
  Zhang Zhu pointed out: In the new situation, the 
responsibilities of the armed police are even more arduous. 
This year is a crucial one in which the country will deepen 
reform and develop a socialist market economic system. In this 
year, Tibet also will launch some major reform measures. These 
measures will inevitably result in the adjustment of interests 
and relationships between various sectors, and some new 
destabilizing factors will emerge in the course of reform. 
Therefore, maintaining stability is very important -- without a 
stable social environment, Tibet's economic construction cannot 
be carried out smoothly. The developing situation urgently 
requires that we quicken the pace of construction, improve our 
performance, and raise our work to a new level in the new year. 
  Those attending the meeting included members of the CPC 
Committee of the Tibet Armed Police Corps; officials in charge 
of military and political affairs of all detachments; leaders of 
logistics, frontier affairs, and other sections of all 
detachments; major leaders of units directly under the corps and 
of all frontier checking stations; and leaders of the corps' 
offices and other departments, totalling 110 persons. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1712 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_q_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  23 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Southwest Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Yunnan Builds Satellite Ground Reception Stations </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Yunnan Builds Satellite Ground Reception Stations </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK2803111194 Kunming Yunnan People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 1000 GMT 23 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK2803111194 </F>
<F P=104>  Kunming Yunnan People's Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Mandarin </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] According to a provincial experience summing-up 
meeting, up to now, our province has completed 8,000 
administrative village-level satellite ground reception 
stations, bringing the total up to more than 10,000 in the whole 
province. This has enabled our province to increase its 
broadcast coverage rate to 72 percent, and its television 
coverage to 77 percent in terms of population. These stations 
have played an important role in propagating the party line, 
guidelines, and policies, educating and encouraging the masses, 
and enriching their cultural life. 
  The meeting pointed out that the main reason our province 
could built more than 10,000 satellite ground reception 
stations, which account for one fourth of the total number of 
satellite ground reception stations in the whole country, within 
a short period of three years was that the provincial CPC 
committees and government attached great importance to it, in 
addition to enthusiastic support by CPC committees and 
governments at all levels. Workers and staff members on the 
radio and television front throughout the province also worked 
hard for this project. 
  The meeting stressed that the future focus of radio and 
television development projects in our province will be placed 
on impoverished counties which are supported by the provincial 
government, densely populated areas, and areas where the 
broadcast and television coverage rate is still comparatively 
low. To ensure safe and high-quality operations of the 
above-mentioned more than 10,000 satellite ground reception 
stations, the specific requirements for their administration in 
the future are: First, strengthening training and education for 
administrative personnel. Every year, the provincial radio and 
television department, and the relevant departments in 
prefectures, autonomous prefectures, and counties must provide 
their junior, middle-ranking, and senior management personnel 
with several training sessions. Second, each and every county 
will set up a maintenance and service department which has one 
or two full-time maintenance personnel in charge of maintenance 
work. Third, enterprises manufacturing radio and television 
equipment must provide satellite ground reception stations with 
high-quality products and service. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1713 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_q_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Southwest Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Yunnan Said Successful in Drug Control </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Yunnan Said Successful in Drug Control </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0104050094 Beijing CHINA DAILY in English 1 Apr 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> HK0104050094 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing CHINA DAILY </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Ma Chenguang: "Squeeze Put on Drug Addiction in Yunnan"] </F>
  [Text] Southwest China's Yunnan province has made marked 
achievements in its narcotics control and rehabilitation of drug 
addicts. 
  One of the prominent accomplishments is the reduced number 
of 
drug addicts, a news release from the Public Security Ministry 
said yesterday. 
  Yunnan, which borders the notorious drug-trafficking "golden 
triangle" and has been used as a passageway by drug traffickers, 
previously had a large drug-addict population. 
  However, due to the province's expanded rehabilitation 
efforts, the number of addicts was reduced to 40,000 by the end 
of last year -- a drop of 30 percent from 1990. 
  And the ranks of new addicts have been kept to 2,000 during 
each of the past three years. But before 1990, about five times 
as many new addicts became hooked each year. 
  Yunnan's drug addicts account for 16 percent of the total 
addict population in China. 
  Presently, more than 700 counties in 17 provinces, 
autonomous 
regions and municipalities have a problem with drug addiction. 
Growing numbers of addicts are particularly noted in Sichuan, 
Guizhou, Gansu, Shanxi and Shaanxi provinces, statistics from 
the Public Health Ministry show. 
  To curb this increasing crime, China reorganized its 
high-level National Narcotics Control Commission last July to 
guide the overall effort. 
  The news release attributed Yunnan's achievements to the 
province's increased investment in its battle against drug 
offences and in law enforcement. 
  The province began to tighten its narcotics control in 1990. 
In the past two years, the State government and Yunnan 
provincial government have poured 16 million yuan (1.8 million) 
into renovating and setting up 28 rehabilitation centres. 
  More than 20,000 drug users receive treatment at these 
correction centres each year. The approach consists of medical 
treatment combined with tough social supervision. 
  As a result, 10 percent of treated addicts have completely 
overcome their addiction. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1714 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_p_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Central-South Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Henan Governor Discusses Development Needs </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Henan Governor Discusses Development Needs </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK2903151494 Zhengzhou Henan People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 2300 GMT 14 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK2903151494 </F>
<F P=104>  Zhengzhou Henan People's Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Mandarin </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The main theme of Premier Li Peng's government work 
report submitted to the Second Session of the Eighth National 
People's Congress [NPC] is: Grasping opportunities, deepening 
reform, expanding opening up, promoting development, and 
maintaining stability. This main theme is where the overall 
interests of the whole party and the whole country lie. 
  With such a theme in mind, this reporter yesterday 
interviewed provincial Governor Ma Zhongchen, who is also a 
Henan deputy to the on-going Second Session of the Eighth NPC in 
Beijing, on how to successfully press ahead with Henan's 
economic work and quicken Henan's development pace in the years 
ahead. 
  Ma Zhongchen said: Since reform and opening up, Henan has 
rapidly developed the economy as well as exploited and utilized 
superior local resources. In 1993, Henan's gross national 
product reached almost 160 billion yuan, representing a 10-fold 
increase over 1978. Nevertheless, due to the limitations of 
Henan's traditional planned economic structure, including the 
traditional regional economic setup, the shortage of funds and 
technology, and so on, Henan has remained to date as a principal 
producer and exporter of farm and sideline products, energy, raw 
and processed materials, as well as other key primary products. 
In view of this fact, Henan has yet to fully develop superior 
resources and raise resource exploitation efficiency. 
  Ma Zhongchen emphatically noted: The general train of 
thought regarding Henan's economic growth in the years to come 
should be: Quickening the pace of turning the province's 
national economy into a market economy, comprehensively 
implementing a strategy of building strong industry, improving 
agriculture, making urban economic development push ahead with 
rural economic development, effecting omnidirectional opening 
up, and attaining higher development goals, and take the road of 
development of carrying out intensive processing, exploiting 
superior resources according to international and domestic 
market demands, and turning resource superiority into economic 
superiority. This train of thought regarding Henan's economic 
growth was mapped out in a serious manner and in light of the 
realities in Henan. 
  Mao Zhongchen emphatically noted: In order to implement to 
the letter the aforementioned train of thought regarding Henan's 
development, we should first and foremost try to enhance a sense 
of a market economy, undergo four ideological transformations, 
and focus on three key aspects. 
  Ma Zhongchen noted: The four ideological transformations are 
as follows: 1. To build projects in light of market demands 
instead of available resources. 2. To develop an intensive 
processing industry capable of speeding up superior local 
resources exploitation rather than step up superior resources 
exploitation aimed at building an intensive processing industry. 
3. To exploit resources in light of the international and 
domestic market demands rather than domestic market demands 
alone. At present, we should vigorously develop export-oriented 
industries, enterprises, and products. 4. To make full use of 
both overseas and domestic resources rather than local resources 
alone. To this end, we should make more use of overseas 
resources, including overseas funds, technology, qualified 
personnel, and information, and turn them into a supplement to 
such local resources as land, farm and sideline products, 
mineral products, and labor. 
  The three key aspects are as follows: 1. To vigorously step 
up intensive processing of superior mineral resources so as to 
further develop coal energy industry, coal chemical industry, 
petrochemical industry, aluminium industry, and building 
material industry. 2. To successfully carry out intensive 
processing of farm and sideline products. 3. To bring local 
geographical superiority into full play and step up local human 
resources exploitation. 
  Ma Zhongchen pointed out: In order to really turn resource 
superiority into economic superiority, we should adopt practical 
and feasible measures and carry out work in a down-to-earth 
manner by devoting more energies to the following five things: 
1. To deepen reform, adhere to the public ownership system as 
the basis, vigorously develop various economic factors, fully 
mobilize the enthusiasm of various parties concerned, and push 
ahead with Henan's overall economic growth. 2. To further 
expand opening up and make more use of foreign capital, 
technology, and qualified personnel. 3. To promote scientific 
and technological progress with an eye to raising technological 
levels and output of Henan's national economy. 4. To raise 
construction funds through more channels and in more forms and 
successfully build each and every key project. 5. To establish 
more lateral economic associations and invite coastal and 
hinterland provinces to invest in Henan and take part in Henan's 
resources exploitation. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1715 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_p_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  30 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Central-South Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Henan Grows Spring Crops on More Land </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Henan Grows Spring Crops on More Land </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW3003115594 Beijing XINHUA in English 1054 GMT 30 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW3003115594 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Zhengzhou, March 30 (XINHUA) -- Farmers in central 
China's Henan Province have grown spring crops on 2.013 million 
hectares, an increase of 126,000 hectares compared with last 
year. 
  According to local officials, the area sown in cash crops in 
the province experienced an increase of 11.4 percent compared 
with that of last year, while local farmers have also been urged 
to maintain a stable grain growing area. 
  Among the cash crops sown, the growing area of cotton now 
reaches 778,800 hectares, 157,700 hectares more than last year's 
level, said the officials. 
  To ensure the success of this year's spring farming, the 
provincial government held a working meeting early this year to 
work out detailed plans for spring farming. 
  At the same time, the province also held a provincial-level 
briefing sending forth information concerning agriculture and 
helped to analyze market trends in connection with farm produce, 
as well as announcing to local farmers preferential policies 
from the central government regarding grain and cotton 
production. 
  The endeavor has effectively aroused the initiative of 
farmers in growing grain and other cash crops. 
  Local agricultural banks, supply and marketing cooperatives 
and departments of means of agricultural production have also 
moved in and managed to provide local farmers with necessary 
funds and means of agricultural production, such as chemical 
fertilizers, pesticides, plastic sheeting and seeds. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1716 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_p_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  25 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Central-South Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hunan Implements New Foreign Exchange System </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Hunan Implements New Foreign Exchange System </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK3003035094 Changsha Hunan People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 2300 GMT 25 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK3003035094 </F>
<F P=104>  Changsha Hunan People's Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Mandarin </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Hunan has scored initial results in operating the 
new foreign exchange administrative system. For a quarter of 
trial operations, the province basically realized the merger of 
foreign exchange rates, and initially shaped an operational 
mechanism characterized by a controlled floating rate based on 
market demand and supply, which participants at yesterday's 
provincial work conference on foreign exchange control fully 
affirmed. 
  Since the implementation of the new foreign exchange 
administrative system effective 1 January this year, great 
changes have taken place in the content and work focus of 
foreign exchange control. For this reason, the provincial 
foreign exchange administration has propagated and implemented 
the foreign exchange restructuring plan through various 
channels. The convergence and stable transition of the new and 
old foreign exchange administrative systems has effectively 
promoted the development of the province's undertakings in 
foreign economic relations and trade. 
  In the first two months of this year, the province's imports 
were on par with the same period last year. The province 
brought in $260 million worth of hard currency through exports, 
up 33 percent on the same period last year, with exchange 
settlements of $220 million, up 69 percent on the same period 
last year. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1717 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_p_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Feb 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Central-South Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Editorial on Importance of Social Stability </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Editorial on Importance of Social Stability </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0703104694 Changsha HUNAN RIBAO in Chinese 13 Feb 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> HK0703104694 </F>
<F P=104>  Changsha HUNAN RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Stability Is a Condition for Speeding Up </F>
Reform and Development"] 
  [Text] In the course of establishing our socialist market 
economy system, there always exists the problem of correctly 
understanding and handling well the relationship among reform, 
development, and stability. Development is an aim, reform a 
motive force, and stability a condition; none of them is 
dispensable. 
  Our country now has entered a new historical period of 
development. The entire party and people throughout the country 
are implementing the "Decision" of the Third Plenary Session of 
the 14th CPC Central Committee, and are struggling hard for the 
establishment of the socialist market economy system. The whole 
country is experiencing political stability, economic 
development, nationality solidarity, and social progress. Just 
like various parts in the whole country, the situation in Hunan 
is also gratifying. However, we must realize soberly that 
factors of instability still exist in society. Internationally 
speaking, peace and development are the main theme and trend of 
the contemporary world, and this is beneficial to us. However, 
owing to the fact that the imperialists have not given up their 
designs for the subjugation of our country, and that they hate 
to see the rise of powerful China, they always have treated 
economic invasion, cultural infiltration, and political 
subversion as fixed policies against our country. They have 
tried to compel us to submit. A handful of hostile elements at 
home and a tiny number of sabotaging elements within society 
coordinate with reactionary forces abroad in an attempt to 
create trouble. In society, local ruffians, despots, and 
criminal elements are swollen with arrogance. Various kinds of 
criminal activities are rampant, and the number of gang crimes 
has increased. In some areas, the ugly phenomena of 
prostitution and the patronizing of prostitutes cannot be 
eliminated, despite repeated bans. Drug taking and drug 
trafficking also are spreading. As far as potential trouble is 
concerned, at present state-owned enterprises are suffering from 
severe losses, and the number of enterprises in a state of 
suspended or partially suspended production is rising, while the 
prices of goods are increasing by a fairly large margin. Some 
workers and staff members are encountering difficulties in their 
daily lives. Last year, our province suffered from the severe 
calamities of floods and waterlogging. In spite of the fact 
that various localities have taken active measures, and have 
done a solid job in providing disaster relief, and that the 
situation in those affected areas is good as a whole, many 
people there still have difficulties in their livelihood. In 
addition, we also face the historical problems of migration in 
the reservoir area, and of making proper arrangements for the 
placement of demobilized servicemen. If we fail to solve these 
problems well, they too might become factors for instability. 
For this reason, we must on no account treat them lightly. On 
the contrary, we must be prepared for danger in times of peace, 
and must attach importance to these factors of instability. In 
the meantime, we must take powerful measures to eliminate these 
factors so as to ensure the smooth progress of reform and 
development. 
  Some comrades ask: Since our present central task is to 
grasp reform and develop the economy, how can we spend time and 
effort on reform? This kind of understanding is incorrect. 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping has stressed repeatedly that the 
overriding issue in China is to maintain stability. It is, of 
course, correct to grasp reform and development wholeheartedly. 
Leaders at all levels must concentrate their efforts on reform, 
and must grasp economic construction. However, this does not 
mean that it is unnecessary for us to grasp stability. 
Stability, reform and development complement each other. Only 
by seizing on the fine opportunity, deepening reform, and 
speeding up development can we consolidate the political 
situation of stability and unity. Only by safeguarding social 
stability can we guarantee the smooth progress of reform and 
development. It is a completely wrong view to set stability 
against reform and development. 
  The feelings of the masses are the key to social and 
political stability. This is what we call "popular feelings," 
or "people's will." At present, the problem of public order is 
a factor that affects the feelings of the masses. With regard 
to the problem of public order, public security departments, of 
course, must grasp it. CPC Committees and governments at all 
levels, and the number-one men of the party and government in 
particular, must treat the work of stabilizing public order as 
their own responsibility. If a place is always in a mess, if 
something happens here today and there tomorrow, if the masses 
are devoid of a sense of security, and if foreign businessmen do 
not dare to come, can the economy of the place develop? Can the 
reform there be deepened? If the secretary and county 
magistrate of the place are always busy dealing with these 
issues, can they concentrate their energy on economic 
construction, reform, and opening up? Therefore, it is 
imperative to grasp public order well, and to maintain social 
stability. Ensuring safety in each place should be regarded as a 
target for the term of office of our party and government 
leading cadres. This target should be linked directly with the 
assessment of their achievements in work, and their promotions 
and awards. Leaders at all levels must adopt forceful measures 
to grasp public order well, and to remove various kinds of 
instability factors and hidden dangers. They must make greater 
efforts to severely and strictly crack down on criminal, 
economic, and other offenders in accordance with the law. On no 
account should they be soft on them. 
  This year, nine major reform measures are to be promulgated 
in our province. They are unprecedented in terms of scope, 
depth, dynamics, and degree of difficulty. They definitely will 
touch on people's ideological concepts, and on the vital 
interests of the masses and cadres as well. Those who have a 
lower tolerance may be disgruntled in this way or that. This 
requires us to do the work of getting their thinking 
straightened out. For example, while carrying out housing 
reform, a number of people may have no money to buy their own 
houses for a period of time; they will complain about this. 
With regard to the reform of the medical system, some people 
who see doctors frequently must pay part of the medical 
expenses. Those cadres and masses who currently enjoy free 
medical care may feel more inconvenienced now than the past. 
They will have complaints about this. With regard to the 
masses who were affected by fairly serious natural disasters 
last year, and have encountered difficulties in their life, they 
will be disgruntled if we fail to help them solve these 
difficulties promptly. In particular, the problem of commodity 
prices can directly affect the "food baskets" and "grain bags" 
of the masses. Currently this is a hot topic for conversation 
among the masses. In addition, public transport is also a 
problem that can affect the feelings of the masses. If we fail 
to take expeditious and decisive measures to curb price hikes 
and straighten out transport order, stability and unity will be 
affected. If we do our work well in this regard, it will play a 
very great role in maintaining stability. If we fail to handle 
this matter well, it will encourage the growth of those factors 
of instability. Therefore, leaders at all levels not only must 
set their sights on the development of reform, but also must pay 
attention to and make efforts to grasp social stability. They 
must go deep among the masses, listen to their voice, and 
understand their demands. They must be truly concerned about 
the weal and woe of the people, and must promptly help them 
solve difficulties arising in production, work, study, and 
livelihood. If their difficulties cannot be solved for a period 
of time, it is necessary to explain this to them. The masses 
are reasonable; as long as we keep them in our hearts, always 
think of them, and do our work for them in their households so 
that it strikes a chord in their hearts, the broad masses of 
people will conscientiously safeguard stability and unity. If 
the people's minds are at rest, and they unite as one to advance 
courageously, stability and unity can be ensured. There is no 
doubt that it will be beneficial to speeding up reform and 
accelerating development. 
  Today's situation of stability has not come about easily. 
All of society must conscientiously value and safeguard it. 
People's organizations and various circles in society must give 
play to their own strong points so as to help the party and 
government do mass work well, and make contributions to 
maintaining stability. As long as several hundreds of thousands 
of cadres, tens of thousands of party members, and millions upon 
millions of the masses can conscientiously safeguard stability 
and unity, social stability definitely can be consolidated day 
by day, and there will be fine conditions for reform and 
development. In this way, we can concentrate our efforts on 
promoting the economy, make a new leap forward, and advance to a 
new height by the end of this century. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1718 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_p_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Central-South Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Guangdong Police Open Fire on Rioting Villagers </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Guangdong Police Open Fire on Rioting Villagers </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0204062094 Hong Kong TA KUNG PAO in Chinese 2 Apr 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> HK0204062094 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong TA KUNG PAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report: "Civilians Clash With Police in Huiyang County"] </F>
  [Text] Several hundred civilians from Boguang Village, 
Xiayong Town, Huiyang County charged a police substation 
yesterday morning; consequently, the outer part of the 
substation was damaged and it became imperative to call for 
reinforcements. The higher authorities sent an anti-riot squad 
but it was not until guns were fired that the civilians were 
dispersed. In the incident, it was reported that quite a number 
of villagers were apprehended and two of them were wounded. 
  According to an on-the-spot report, at 0500 yesterday 
morning, four public security men from Xiayong Town entered the 
village to apprehend two brothers, surnamed Chen, but but were 
impeded. It was only when the public security men fired two 
shots that the mob was dispersed and the two wanted men were 
taken to Xiayong Police Substation. 
  It has been learned that some villagers believed that the 
village cadres had attempted to impede the provincial 
government's investigation into the case of the village selling 
land for profit, gained the initiative by striking first, and 
relied on the public security forces to hold the major witnesses 
in custody. 
  At 0800 yesterday, several hundred villagers from Boquang 
Village marched on foot toward Xiayong Police Substation, 
demanding the release of the two men. However, this failed and 
eventually it turned into a case of charging the police 
substation. The outer fabric of the police substation and some 
window panes were damaged. The public security men urgently 
called for reinforcements and, in the end, an anti-riot squad 
was sent. It was not until guns were fired that the civilians 
were dispersed. In due course, four villagers were apprehended 
and two villagers were wounded by stray bullets. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1719 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_p_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Central-South Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Further on Clash in Guangdong </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Further on Clash in Guangdong </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0204062694 Hong Kong HONGKONG STANDARD in English 2 Apr 94 
p 1 </F>

<F P=103> HK0204062694 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong HONGKONG STANDARD </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Amy Liu] </F>
  [Text] A farmer from Guangdong province was shot in the 
leg yesterday after scores of angry villagers clashed with 
Public Security Bureau officers over land compensation. The 
man, one of the protesters, attempted to stop the officers from 
arresting villagers for setting up an anti-corruption group 
following a row about land compensation. Villagers set up the 
anti-corruption group last year after complaints of official 
corruption in land compensation. 
  During the incident, a public security officer fired two 
warning shots over the heads of the protesters, one of the 
bullets ricocheted and hit the victim in the leg. The shooting 
occurred at about 5 am, when officers raided the homes of 
several residents of Xia Yong town, in Huiyang county, Guangdong 
province. No one was arrested then, but seven people were 
detained at 10 am when they went to the town's Public Security 
Bureau to demand the release of fellow villagers. 
  Witnesses said the protesters had surrounded the bureau's 
offices in a bid to bargain for fair compensation. Some of the 
farmers, armed with weapons, broke windows. Local police 
deployed a large number of officers at the scene. No fresh 
incidents of violence have been reported. 
  Huiyang is an area of Guangdong which has attracted a lot of 
overseas funds to develop high-rise residential properties. 
There has been a property boom in some parts of China in recent 
years. 
  Local authorities, in cooperation with overseas investors, 
have turned real estate development into a lucrative business, 
but disputes have arisen over compensation for people whose land 
is sold to developers. In some cities, such as Shanghai, the 
cost of resettlement rose by up to 40 percent last year. This 
had led to a tightening of regulations governing land sales. 
  In a move to cool the overheated property market, the 
Chinese 
government early this year announced a land-appreciation tax of 
between 53 and 73 percent of the improved value of a developed 
plot of land. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1720 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_p_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Central-South Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Villagers Storm Police Office in Guangdong </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Villagers Storm Police Office in Guangdong </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0404064994 Hong Kong TA KUNG PAO in Chinese 4 Apr 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> HK0404064994 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong TA KUNG PAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Dispatch": "Guangdong Public Security Authorities Explain </F>
the Causes of the Police Office Storming Incident in Huiyang"; 
all names as published] 
  [Text] Guangzhou, 3 Apr (TA KUNG PAO)--When being 
interviewed by TA KUNG PAO today, a responsible official with 
the Guangdong Provincial Public Security Department said: 
Recently, the police station [pai chu suo 3175 0427 2076] in 
Xiayong Town of Huizhou City's Daya Bay Administrative District 
was stormed by some people, and innocent policemen there were 
beaten up. It was a serious incident stirred up by a small 
number of lawbreakers. 
  He stressed: The lawbreakers instigated some villagers who 
were unaware of the true facts to attack the policemen in order 
to prevent the public security personnel from arresting criminal 
offenders. When the policemen found that they could not perform 
their duties, and their lives and safety were threatened, they 
were forced to take the necessary emergency measures. 
  According to the responsible official of the Public Security 
Department of Guangdong Province, on the early morning of 1 
April, between 0500 and 0600, the Xiayong Town police office 
subordinate to the Daya Bay Public Security Sub-bureau 
dispatched 10 policemen to arrest two criminals, Chen Ren-X and 
Chen X-hui, in Bogang Village. According to information and 
evidence held by the police, the two suspected criminals were 
involved in four blackmail cases last July and August and 
extorted more than 13,000 yuan from their victims. They 
seriously threatened law and order in the local community. 
Through careful investigation, the public security organ decided 
to send policemen to arrest the two people. The policemen acted 
in two groups, and they caught the two suspected criminals in a 
short time. Chen X-hui was brought back to the police station 
first. 
  When the policemen were going to take Chen Ren-X away from 
the village, he suddenly cried "help!" His younger brothers and 
sisters-in-law took clubs and stones and chased the policemen. 
The attackers beat up the policemen -- who had displayed their 
certificates and the arrest warrant -- and even beat a policeman 
unconscious. When finding that their warnings were ineffective, 
another policeman was forced to pull out his pistol and shoot at 
the leg of club-wielding Chen X-chao, elder brother of Chen 
Ren-X. This shocked the besiegers and stopped their attack. 
  At 0900 that morning, the police station inspector led 
several police officers to Bogang Village to explain their 
actions. On the way to the village, they encountered a number 
of armed villages who were planning to attack the police 
station. Persuaded by the police officers, some villagers 
returned home, but more than 100 people still rushed to the 
police station as encouraged by Chen X-shan. They demanded the 
release of criminal Chen X-hui. Leaders of the Xiayong Town 
Office and police officers of the police station patiently 
explained what had happened, but the villagers ignored the 
warnings and continued to storm the police station. Zhang 
Xinde, chief of the Daya Bay Public Security Bureau, then led a 
group of police officers to the area and took resolute action to 
arrest Chen X-shan, Chen X-wen, Chen X-hua, Chen X-jun, and Chen 
X-ling who took the lead in stirring up trouble, and thus calmed 
down the incident. 
  The official said that this case of instigating villagers to 
stir up trouble was very serious. At present, the Daya Bay 
Public Security Bureau is intensively investigating the case. 
Those who took the lead in impeding police officers from 
carrying out their tasks, instigating villagers to storm the 
police station, and attacking and injuring public security 
personnel will be punished severely according to the law. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1721 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_p_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Central-South Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Truck Accident in Guangdong Dumps Arsenic in River </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Truck Accident in Guangdong Dumps Arsenic in River </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0404055794 Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 1235 GMT 
3 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK0404055794 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By correspondent Yang Hua (2799 5478): "A Major Accident </F>
Occurs in Yangshan County, Guangdong, in Which a Truck Carrying 
Arsenic Sinks Into a River"] 
  [Text] Guangzhou, 3 Apr (ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE)--On the 
morning of 30 March, a truck carrying poisonous arsenic suddenly 
fell into Chengjia River in Yangshan County, causing a major 
accident in which two metric tons of arsenic were submerged in 
the river. So far it has not caused severe pollution. 
  The truck was owned by a company from Lianxian County. At 
about 0900 on that day, the truck, which had loaded 6.2 metric 
tons of arsenic in Jiangxi, headed for Lianxian County, but it 
suddenly fell into the river while going through Yangshan 
County. The two drivers were rescued from the river, but 
approximately two metric tons of arsenic sank in the river and 
disappeared. 
  The local government and departments concerned quickly took 
resolute measures to promptly deal with the aftermath of the 
accident. The public security bureaus of Yangshan County and 
Qingyuan City immediately informed the departments concerned in 
various localities along the river to prevent people and animals 
from directly drinking water from the river. After receiving a 
message from the Qingyuan City environmental protection 
department, the provincial environmental protection 
administration immediately informed its subordinate departments 
in localities along the Lian Jiang and the Bei Jiang, including 
the four cities of Qingyuan, Zhaoqing, Foshan, and Guangzhou, 
urging them to more intensively monitor water quality in the two 
rivers. On 1 April, experts sent by the administration were 
driven to the scene and helped the local authorities deal with 
the aftermath of the accident. Sanitation and disease control 
departments in Yangshan, Yingde, Sanshui, Foshan, and Guangzhou 
were immediately asked to more intensively measure the arsenic 
content in the source of the water supplying waterworks and tap 
water in various localities. Moreover, medical units in the 
above-mentioned localities were asked to prepare the appropriate 
antidotes. 
  Yesterday, almost 100 personnel salvaged the two metric tons 
of arsenic for more than six hours straight, but nothing was 
found. The arsenic was packed in a waterproof covering 
consisting of an inner layer of plastic film and an outer layer 
of a plastic mesh bag. According to experts in this field, the 
type of arsenic that sank in the river does not easily dissolve 
in water and hence would not cause severe pollution. The work 
of salvaging the arsenic is still in progress. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1722 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_p_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Central-South Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Guangxi Secretary Addresses Propaganda Meeting </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Guangxi Secretary Addresses Propaganda Meeting </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK1903074794 Nanning Guangxi People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 1130 GMT 4 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK1903074794 </F>
<F P=104>  Nanning Guangxi People's Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Mandarin </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpts] A regional propaganda and ideological work 
meeting solemnly opened in Nanning Theater on the morning of 4 
March. The opening ceremony of the meeting was presided over by 
Cheng Kejie, regional party deputy secretary and regional vice 
chairman. He said: This is an important meeting held by the 
regional CPC Committee to implement the spirit of the national 
meeting on propaganda and ideological work, and also the largest 
meeting held by propaganda sectors in our region since reform 
and opening up. 
  Regional leaders Zhao Fulin, Cheng Kejie, Ding Tingmo, Chen 
Huiguang, Li Zhenqian, Peng Guikang, Yuan Zhengzhong, Ma 
Qingsheng, Yang Jichang, Du Jingyi, and others attended the 
meeting. 
  Regional CPC Secrtary Zhao Fulin made an important speech at 
the meeting entitled "Strengthening the Party Leadership, and 
Sticking to the Fundamental Guideline to Raise Propaganda and 
Ideological Work in Our Region to a New Level." Zhao Fulin 
said: This propaganda and ideological work meeting of the 
regional CPC Committee is a very important one which has an 
impact on the overall situation. The main tasks of the meeting 
are: In accordance with Comrade Deng Xiaoping's guiding 
principle of doing two types of work simultaneously, and 
attaching equal importance to both, we should study, comprehend 
and implement the spirit of the national propaganda and 
ideological work meeting to emancipate our minds, seek truth 
from facts, formulate measures in light of local conditions, and 
conscientiously carry out various tasks set by the national 
propaganda and ideological work meeting to raise our region's 
propaganda and ideological work to a new level. 
  In his speech, Zhao Fulin advanced the following three 
opinions: 
  1. It is necessary to conscientiously study and profoundly 
comprehend the spirit of the national propaganda and ideological 
work meeting to completely fulfill the tasks set by the meeting. 
  2. It is necessary to give prominence to focal points to 
carry out the main tasks of the present propaganda and 
ideological work. 
  3. It is necessary to strengthen and improve party 
leadership over propaganda and ideological work. [passage 
omitted] 
  With regard to the first opinion, Zhao Fulin stressed: The 
recently held national propaganda and ideological work meeting 
was an important meeting convened by the CPC Central Committee, 
which had an impact on the overall situation during the crucial 
period of establishing the socialist market economic system and 
promoting socialist modernizations. This meeting was not only 
one which assigned the tasks for our propaganda and ideological 
front, but also an essential meeting in which the central 
authorities implemented Comrade Deng Xiaoping's instruction of 
doing two types of work simultaneously and attaching equal 
importance to both, and mobilized the entire party to strengthen 
and improve propaganda and ideological work to provide an 
effective ideological guarantee and a fine environment in terms 
of public opinion in a still better way for reform, development 
and stability. [passage omitted] 
  Zhao Fulin urged CPC Committees at all levels to show 
concern 
for comrades working on the propaganda and ideological front 
politically and ideologically. They must also show concern for 
their work and life to build well their contingent. 
  With regard to the second opinion, Zhao Fulin pointed out: A 
fundamental guideline, and four key work points put forth by 
Comrade Jiang Zeming at the national propaganda and ideological 
work meeting are overall arrangements and strategic ideas aimed 
at doing propaganda and ideological work well in the process of 
speeding up establishment of the socialist market economic 
system. In accordance with the spirit of the national 
propaganda and ideological work meeting in light of practical 
realities in our region, Zhao Fulin called on the whole region 
to do the following work well: 
  First, do a good job in studying theory and unifying our 
thinking. In other words, we must persist in arming the entire 
party with Comrade Deng Xiaoping theory on building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics, put study of theory in the first 
place, and grasp it as a systematic project. We must take the 
study and propagation of volume three of Deng Xiaoping's 
Selected Works as the most important task in our propaganda and 
ideological work and grasp it persistently and profoundly. It 
should be combined with the study of the spirit of the Third 
Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee to 
comprehensively implement the decision of the central 
authorities. 
  Second, persist in a correct guidance for public opinion to 
create a fine environment in this regard. Zhao Fulin said: 
With regard to our future public opinion and propaganda work, 
we must comprehensively and accurately publicize the party line, 
guiding principles, and policies, and insist on the guideline of 
promoting unity and stability, arousing the drive of the people, 
and mainly conducting propaganda by positive measures. We must 
uphold materialist dialectics, and avoid onesidedness. [passage 
omitted] 
  Third, we must grasp ideological education well, and train 
new people who have ideals and morality, acquire education, and 
observe discipline. At present, we must grasp well the work of 
giving publicity to advanced figures and learning from typical 
examples. We must further carry out the activities of 
profoundly learning from Comrade Li Zhenghai. We must give 
prominence to ideological education for workers and staff 
members of the state-owned medium and large enterprises. We 
must also give prominence to ideological education for rural 
party members and peasants. We must truly grasp well 
ideological and moral education for young people and students in 
schools in particular. 
  Fourth, we must grasp well creation of outstanding 
literature 
and art works to bring about a prosperous socialist cultural 
undertaking. CPC committees and governments at all levels must 
use a certain amount of manpower and material and financial 
resources to ensure the production of excellent mental products 
which reflect the main trends of society. Propaganda and 
cultural departments at all levels must make efforts, work out 
plans, and organize production of excellent works which reflect 
the main trends of society. 
  Fifth, we must grasp foreign-related propaganda, and serve 
opening up to the outside world well. 
  While dwelling on the issue of strengthening and improving 
party leadership over propaganda and ideological work, Zhao 
Fulin emphasized: Strengthening and improving party leadership 
is a key to doing propaganda and ideological work well during 
the new period. CPC committees at all levels must truly 
undertake their leadship responsibility. They must attach 
importance to and truly hold themselves responsible for 
emancipating their minds, seeking truth from facts, and taking 
the road of reform. They must establish and improve their own 
systems and truly ascertain leaders' responsibility. It is 
necessary to vigorously strengthen the building of the 
propaganda and ideological contingent, and to solve practical 
problems in a planned way to create still better conditions for 
propaganda and ideological work. [passage omitted] 
  Zhao Fulin hoped that leaders at all levels in the whole 
region, and comrades on the propaganda and ideological front in 
particular, will get a clear understanding of the situation, be 
clear about their tasks, actively make exploration, explore 
their way forward, work in a down-to-earth manner, and start the 
strenuous undertaking to raise their propaganda and ideological 
work to a new level and make new and still greater contributions 
to the building of the two civilizations in our region. 
[passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1723 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_c_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  31 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Central Eurasia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Preview of Russian Prime Minister's Visit to China </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Preview of Russian Prime Minister's Visit to China </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0104140994 Hong Kong LIEN HO PAO in Chinese 31 Mar 94 p 10 </F>
<F P=103> HK0104140994 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong LIEN HO PAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporters Kuo Hung-chih (6753 1347 3112) and Hsu </F>
Tung-hai (1776 2639 3189): "Russian Prime Minister Will Discuss 
Economic Relations, Trade, and Illegal Immigration During 
Forthcoming Visit to Beijing; Jiang Zemin Will Visit Russia and 
Meet With Yeltsin"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 30 Mar (LIEN HO PAO) -- The Chinese 
mainland's military, diplomatic, and economic cooperative 
relations with Russia have become closer and closer. Russian 
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin is soon to visit Beijing, and 
mainland president Jiang Zemin will also visit Moscow and meet 
with Russian President Yeltsin in the second half of this year. 
  It has been many years since any Soviet Union or Russian 
prime minister visited the Chinese mainland. Both sides, 
therefore, value this visit very much. It is learned that on 
his forthcoming visit to Beijing, Chernomyrdin will mainly 
discuss with the Chinese mainland economic and trade issues as 
well as the problem of illegal immigration. 
  Last year, trade volume between the Chinese mainland and 
Russia reached a record high of $7 billion. At the moment, the 
Chinese mainland is Russia's second biggest trade partner, after 
Germany. But there are so many trade obstacles between the two 
sides that demand immediate removal. The most serious problems 
are to do with settlement of exchange and transportation. 
  Though the Chinese mainland declared last year that it 
acknowledges free exchange between the ruble and the renminbi, 
the two sides have not yet worked out a specific way to conduct 
settlement through banks. Businessmen from the two sides often 
have to carry sacks of banknotes with them to make purchases in 
the other country. Besides, despite the dramatic expansion of 
Sino-Russian border trade, inadequate transportation capacity in 
border areas has brought great difficulty to the cross-border 
barter trade. 
  In recent years, large numbers of Chinese mainland residents 
have illegally settled in Russia. According to one estimate, 
there are at least 100,000 Chinese people in greater Moscow. A 
Russian official survey indicates that the population of illegal 
immigrants from the Chinese mainland in Moscow proper is 50,000. 
As a Russian diplomat put it, one can hear Chinese spoken any 
time at underground railway stations and on sidewalks. Illegal 
immigration has brought many security problems to Russia, 
causing a headache for the country. On his forthcoming visit to 
Beijing, Chernomyrdin will discuss with Beijing authorities ways 
to block illegal immigration. 
  Military cooperation between the Chinese mainland and Russia 
has caused much concern among the international community. 
Though it is still unknown whether or not it will be among the 
topics of the prime minister's meetings, there is nevertheless 
information indicating that Beijing is carrying on a number of 
military technical cooperation projects with Russia, and 
negotiations on weapon purchase are still underway. 
  Last year, on his visit to Moscow, Liu Huaqing, vice 
chairman 
of the CPC Central Military Commission, gave Russia a long 
shopping list of weapons, including Sukov-27K fighter planes, 
missiles, tanks, and submarines. Negotiations on this 
purchasing plan are still continuing. In addition, the two 
sides are also continuing to implement plans for reciprocal 
military personnel training and technical transfers. 
  A high-level Russian diplomat put it straightforwardly that 
military cooperation is an important part of Russia's relations 
with the Chinese mainland, which is conducive to the Russian 
economy. He said: Russia's defense industry is facing enormous 
difficulties. To find a way out, the defense industry must try 
to open up the international market. 
  This official pointed out: Standardization was lacking in 
the past when Russia sold weapons to the Chinese mainland, and 
ordnance companies could export weapons on their own. But now 
the Russian Government has set up a "Weaponry and Equipment 
Corporation," through which the center could keep centralized 
control on the export of weapons. He said: Russia's arms sale 
policy toward the Chinese mainland is no different than that 
toward any other country, as regional balance will be taken into 
consideration and Beijing will not be privileged. Commenting on 
the rumor that Russia may export aircraft carriers to the 
mainland, this official said: "It does not have much ground." 
  It is learned that though Russia badly needs to make money 
by 
exporting weapons, it is unlikely that it will export to the 
Chinese mainland such weapons as aircraft carriers that may pose 
a threat to Russia itself. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1724 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_c_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Central Eurasia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Russian Opposition Groups on 1993 October Incident </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Russian Opposition Groups on 1993 October Incident </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0304041594 Beijing XINHUA in English 0155 GMT 3 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0304041594 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Russian Opposition Groups Demonstrate To Honor 1993 </F>
October Incident" -- XINHUA headline] 
  [Text] Moscow, April 2 (XINHUA) -- About 5,000 people 
today demonstrated outside the White House, the former 
parliamentary building, to commemorate the victims of the 
political incident six months ago. 
  The list of the dead was read aloud at the rally which was 
organized by the Labor Russia Movement and other opposition 
parties, the INTERFAX NEWS AGENCY said. 
  The demonstrators carried red banners and Soviet flags, and 
laid wreaths at a symbolic grave near the White House. 
  At least 140 people were killed during the October 3-4 
confrontation between government forces backing President Boris 
Yeltsin and defenders of the old Parliament -- the Supreme 
Soviet. 
  After Yeltsin dissolved Parliament on September 21, the 
opposition leaders holed up in the White House and announced 
they would form another government. 
  A battle started on October 3 as armed supporters of 
Parliament launched attacks upon the mayor's office and the 
television headquarters. The next day, Yeltsin sent tanks and 
troops to force Parliament leaders to surrender. 
  The Parliament building, which was damaged in the battle, 
has 
been repaired and is now headquarters for the Russian Government. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1725 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_c_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Central Eurasia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Zhirinovskiy Nominated Candidate for President </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Zhirinovskiy Nominated Candidate for President </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0304041794 Beijing XINHUA in English 0124 GMT 3 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0304041794 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Moscow, April 2 (XINHUA) -- Vladimir Zhirinovskiy, 
leader of the ultra-nationalist Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), 
today was chosen as the party's candidate to race for the next 
Russian president. 
  The fifth LDP national congress beginning here today also 
decided that Zhirinovskiy holds its current position until 2004. 
  The party, founded in March 1990, unexpectedly took the lead 
in the December 12 parliamentary elections and colleted 63 seats 
in the State Duma (lower house). 
  The LDP congress was held when all political forces in 
Russia 
set out to make preparations for the presidential elections 
scheduled for 1996. 
  Yegor Gaydar, leader of the "Russia's Choice" parliamentary 
group, Deputy Prime Minister Anatoliy Chubays, and Sergey 
Filatov, director of the presidential office, announced on 
Thursday that they will found a "Russia's Choice" party. 
  Gaydar said on Friday after a meeting with President Boris 
Yeltsin that the president supports in principle the idea of 
founding the "Russia's Choice" party. 
  He said that they have agreed not to found any other 
president's party. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1726 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_c_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  31 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Central Eurasia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Liaoning Establishes Friendship Ties With Russia's Irkutsk </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Liaoning Establishes Friendship Ties With Russia's Irkutsk </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   SK0104063594 Shenyang Liaoning People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 1000 GMT 31 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> SK0104063594 </F>
<F P=104>  Shenyang Liaoning People's Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Mandarin </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] On 30 March, Yue Qifeng, governor of the Liaoning 
Provincial government, and (Youamoerk), vice governor of the 
Irkutsk Oblast government, who was invited to visit Liaoning, 
signed a protocol establishing friendship ties between Liaoning 
Province of the PRC and Irkutsk Oblast of the Russian Federation. 
  Present at the signing ceremony were Gao Guozhu, vice 
governor of the provincial government; responsible persons of 
the relevant departments under the provincial government; and 
members of the Irkutsk Oblast amity delegation. Before the 
signing ceremony, the two sides held talks to highly assess the 
achievements in the friendly and cooperation contacts in various 
spheres between the province and the oblast. They unanimously 
agreed to further promote the friendly and cooperation ties; to 
positively promote economic cooperation and trade contacts 
between the province and the oblast; to make efforts to keep the 
contacts in the scientific and technological, cultural, sports, 
and public health spheres; and to jointly make new contributions 
to rejuvenating the economy of the province and the oblast and 
to strengthening the friendship between the Chinese people and 
the Russian people. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1727 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_d_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Northeast Asia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Qian Qichen Meets Japanese Politician </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Qian Qichen Meets Japanese Politician </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204134794 Beijing XINHUA in English 1240 GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0204134794 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 2 (XINHUA) -- Chinese Vice-Premier 
and Foreign Minister Qian Qichen met here this afternoon with 
Inoue Issei, vice-chairman of the Social Democratic Party of 
Japan and director of the International Affairs Bureau of the 
party. 
  They exchanged views on issues of common concern in a 
friendly atmosphere. 
  Both expressed their pleasure at the smooth development of 
Sino- Japanese relations since the normalization of bilateral 
relations 22 years ago, and the new stage for the overall 
development of such relations. 
  Qian praised the Japanese party for its contribution to 
accelerating the normalization of Sino-Japanese relations and 
promoting bilateral friendly relations. 
  This morning, Wu Xueqian, vice-chairman of the National 
Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative 
Conference, also met with Inoue and his party. 
  The Japanese guests arrived here on Friday at the invitation 
of the International Liaison Department of the Central Committee 
of the Communist Party of China (CPC). 
  Yesterday afternoon, Li Shuzheng, head of the International 
Liaison Department of CPC Central Committee, held talks with 
Inoue on relations between the two parties and other issues of 
common concern. After the meeting, Li hosted a banquet for the 
Japanese guests. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1728 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_d_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Northeast Asia </F>
<H3> <TI>   Beijing Radio Reports Spokesman's Comments on DPRK Issue </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Beijing Radio Reports Spokesman's Comments on DPRK Issue </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204012394 Beijing China Radio International in English to 
Western North America 0400 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0204012394 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing China Radio International </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Current Affairs" program] </F>
  [Text] The Chinese Foreign Ministry says China favors a 
moderately worded statement to be worked out by the UN Security 
Council president to solve the nuclear issue on the Korean 
Peninsula. Ministry spokesman Wu Jianmin made the statement 
Thursday in Beijing at his weekly press conference. Li Peichuan 
was there. 
  [Begin recording] [Li Peichuan] Foreign Ministry spokesman 
Wu Jianmin said a mild statement should be made in the name of 
the president of the UN Security Council. He said the statement 
should be designed to facilitate resumption of dialogue which is 
the only correct way to settle the nuclear issue. Though Wu 
Jianmin did not say whether China will veto a tough UN 
resolution which will impose pressure on DPRK, he said China 
does not accept such a resolution. He said exerting pressure 
will only worsen the situation. When asked whether China has 
common interests towards DPRK, the spokesman said yes. Earlier 
the Chinese Foreign Ministry said the status of bilateral ties 
should be judged by how many common interests two countries have. 
  [Wu Jianmin in Mandarin fading into English translation] We 
have common interests toward both the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea because all of us... 
  [Li Peichuan] Wu Jianmin said regional peace and stability 
are common concern of both China and two Koreas. The spokesman 
said maintaining peace and stability are preconditions for 
improving the living standards in all these countries and 
assists the further development of economic and trade links 
between them. Commenting on the upcoming visit to China by 
French Prime Minister Edouard Balladur next week, Wu Jianmin 
said it is of political significance, it will help improve ties 
between Beijing and Paris. He said maintaining a good political 
relationship is a solid foundation for developing economic and 
trade ties. On another topic, the Foreign Ministry spokesman 
repeated China's continued support for the peace process in 
South Africa. Violence has increased recently in some part of 
the country as the first all-race elections are approaching. Wu 
Jianmin said China hopes all parties concerned will overcome 
their differences through negotiations so as to ensure a smooth 
general election which is scheduled for late April. For China 
Radio International, I am Li Peichuan. [end recording] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1729 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_e_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Southeast Asia &amp; Pacific </F>
<H3> <TI>   Reportage on Australian Foreign Minister's Talks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Reportage on Australian Foreign Minister's Talks </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Discusses Human Rights </H4>

<F P=102> OW0204084494 Beijing XINHUA in English 0828 GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0204084494 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 2 (XINHUA) -- Premier Li Peng told 
visiting Australian Foreign Minister Gareth Evans that China and 
Australia, bound by extensive common interests, should work to 
further their friendly and cooperative relations. 
  In a meeting with Evans today, Li noted that there is no 
conflict of fundamental interests between the two countries, 
which actually share interests in upholding peace and stability 
in the Asia-Pacific region, promoting regional cooperation and 
developing their own economies. 
  He continued that in the current international relations, 
the 
economic factor plays an increasingly important role. 
  The China-Australia cooperation in iron and steel, energy, 
transportation and communications has a sound foundation and 
holds great potentials for expansion, Li said. 
  Evans told Li that Australia is also pleased to see the big 
momentum of its trade and economic cooperation with China. 
  Discussing the human rights issue, both Li and Evans voiced 
support to the Vienna declaration and program of action, with Li 
adding that China made big efforts in drafting the declaration. 
  Li continued that the declaration has reflected the 
developing countries' basic position and demands, namely the 
right to development is an inalienable part of the basic human 
rights. 
  The declaration, while affirming the universality of human 
rights, says that people should not neglect the actual 
conditions of different countries and regions such as history, 
culture and religion or confine human rights to only one mold, 
Li noted. 
  He stressed that the right to development is an undeprivable 
human right, because the declaration states that poverty and 
debt are big obstacles to human rights. 
  Li Peng further stated that the latest resolution adopted at 
the recent U.N. Commission on Human Rights shows that it would 
not do to impose one country's views on human rights onto others. 
  The only correct way is to conduct friendly discussions on 
the basis of mutual respect and seeking common ground while 
reserving differences, Li added. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1730 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_e_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Southeast Asia &amp; Pacific </F>
<H3> <TI>   Reportage on Australian Foreign Minister's Talks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Reportage on Australian Foreign Minister's Talks </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Further on Human Rights </H4>

<F P=102> OW0204113594 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 0845 
GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0204113594 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Zhang Yijun (1728 4135 0193)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 2 Apr (XINHUA) -- In a meeting with 
Australian Foreign Minister Gareth Evans today, Premier Li Peng 
said there is no conflict of fundamental interests between China 
and Australia; the two countries, bound by extensive common 
interests, should work to further their friendly and cooperative 
relations. 
  Li Peng said: Through the two countries' joint efforts, 
Sino- Australian relations are developing with a strong 
momentum. China hopes the two countries continue to develop 
friendly and cooperative relations in all fields.' 
  He noted that China and Australia share extensive common 
interests in upholding peace and security in the Asia-Pacific 
region, promoting regional economic cooperation, and developing 
their own economies. 
  He continued: In the current international relations, the 
economic factor plays an increasingly important role. Sino- 
Australian cooperation in iron and steel, energy, 
transportation, and communications has a sound foundation and 
holds great potentials for expansion. 
  Evans said he agreed with Li Peng on this. He said: 
Cooperation between the two countries has expanded in both size 
and substance. Australia is pleased to see the big momentum of 
its trade and economic cooperation with China. 
  Li and Evans exchanged views on the human rights issue. 
Evans said Australia supports the "Vienna Declaration" adopted 
at last year's world human rights congress. Li Peng added that 
China also supports the declaration and made big efforts in its 
drafting. 
  Li stressed: The declaration has written into it the 
numerous developing countries' basic viewpoints and demands on 
the human rights issue. It specifically states that the right 
to development is an inalienable part of the basic human rights. 
The declaration, while affirming the universality of human 
rights, says "the characteristics of each country and region and 
the importance of their historical, cultural, and religious 
background cannot be ignored." In other words, people should 
not neglect the conditions of different countries or confine 
human rights to only one mold. 
  He said: The declaration states that poverty and foreign 
debt are big obstacles to human rights. Therefore, the right to 
development is an undeprivable human right. 
  Li Peng stated: The latest resolution adopted at the recent 
UN Commission on Human Rights shows that it would not do [shi 
xing bu tong di 5887 0008 6639 4104] to impose one country's 
views on human rights onto others. The only correct way is to 
conduct friendly discussions on an equal footing [ping deng you 
hao di jin xing tao lun 1627 4583 0645 1170 0966 6651 5887 6062 
6158] on the basis of mutual respect and seeking common ground 
while reserving differences. 
  Wu Yi, minister of foreign trade and economic cooperation, 
exchanged views with Evans in the morning on developing Sino- 
Australian trade and economic relations. 
  Foreign Minister Evans held a news conference in Beijing at 
noon. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1731 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_e_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Southeast Asia &amp; Pacific </F>
<H3> <TI>   Reportage on Australian Foreign Minister's Talks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Reportage on Australian Foreign Minister's Talks </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Says Li Peng `Relaxed' on Hong Kong </H4>

<F P=102> HK0304074994 Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA SUNDAY MORNING POST in 
English 3 Apr 94 p 6 </F>

<F P=103> HK0304074994 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA SUNDAY MORNING POST </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Geoff Crothall in Beijing] </F>
  [Text] China appears to be taking a more "relaxed" 
approach to Hong Kong's proposed political reforms but is still 
refusing to enter into meaningful dialogue on its own human 
rights record, Australian Foreign Minister Senator Gareth Evans 
said after talks with Chinese leaders yesterday. Unlike 
previous meetings, Premier Li Peng did not attack Governor Chris 
Patten's proposals for political reform but instead emphasised 
the need to maintain Hong Kong's capitalist economy after 1997. 
  Mr Li added Beijing was not against political change in Hong 
Kong as long as it was consistent with the Basic Law and the 
Joint Declaration. "The attitude does seem very much more 
relaxed than it was until comparatively recently," Mr Evans 
said. "The (Hong Kong) issue was treated in a much lower key way 
than has been the case in the past." Mr Evans said China's more 
relaxed attitude probably reflected a desire, following last 
year's disputes, to get on with business as usual and let events 
take their natural course. 
  On human rights, however, China showed no sign of backing 
down from its hard line of recent months. Mr Evans raised 
several specific concerns, including the detention on Friday of 
dissident Wei Jingsheng, the reported sentencing of Ming Pao 
journalist Xi Yang and the detention in Shenzhen of Australian 
businessman James Peng. But he got no response. 
  Both Mr Li and Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen were 
unaware of the specific cases and suggested they were not an 
appropriate subject of discussion for visiting government 
officials. "The premier's reaction was not forthcoming on the 
subject of Wei Jingsheng. It is not a subject Chinese 
government authorities care to talk about (not in very polite 
terms anyway)," Mr Evans said. "The view was that it was a 
matter better left un-raised by me or anyone else, and that it 
was an internal affair of China." 
  Mr Evans received an equally blunt response to his request 
for China to send a human rights delegation to Australia to 
maintain a human rights dialogue between the two countries. He 
was told the "conditions" for such a visit were"not appropriate" 
following the establishment of the Tibet Information Office (the 
Dalai Lama's unofficial embassy) in Australia, and recent 
statements on China's human rights record by Australian 
officials at the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in 
Geneva. 
  Despite the rebuff, Mr Evans vowed to continue raising the 
issue of human rights with China, stating human rights were 
"everybody's business" and that China could not avoid 
international dialogue on the issue. He stressed, however, 
Australia would not engage in "grandstanding or drum beating" on 
the issue but would engage China in a persistent, comprehensive 
and systematic manner. Taking a more aggressive approach 
towards human rights as the United States has done could 
"generate a negative response", he said, arguing a quieter, less 
confrontational approach could lead to better results. 
  On North Korea, one of the main topics of discussion during 
his two days of talks in Beijing, Mr Evans said he was confident 
China was playing an active role in defusing the tension over 
North Korea's nuclear programme. He also said he personally 
thought China would not necessarily oppose sanctions if dialogue 
on the issue broke down completely. Officially, the Chinese 
position remained that they had only a limited role in the 
dispute, he added. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1732 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_e_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Southeast Asia &amp; Pacific </F>
<H3> <TI>   Reportage on Australian Foreign Minister's Talks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Reportage on Australian Foreign Minister's Talks </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Discusses Hong Kong Reforms </H4>

<F P=102> BK0304084694 Melbourne Radio Australia in English 0500 GMT 3 
Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> BK0304084694 </F>
<F P=104>  Melbourne Radio Australia </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Australia's Foreign Minister Gareth Evans, who is 
visiting Beijing, says China's attitude towards political reform 
in Hong Kong is much more relaxed than in the past. Senator 
Evans, a strong supporter of Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten's 
plan to broaden democracy, was speaking after meeting Chinese 
leaders. Eli Moore reports. 
  [Begin recording] [Moore] Senator Evans has been a target of 
sharp criticisms from China over his very vocal support for 
political reforms in Hong Kong -- reforms which China has vowed 
to overturn when it takes over the territory in 1997. But 
Gareth Evans says that in talks with Chinese leaders over the 
past two days in Beijing the reaction was softer than it has 
been in the past. 
  [Evans ] Sure, what I'd make here is that this attitude does 
seem every much more relaxed and then of course until 
comparatively recently on this issue. 
  [Moore] Senator Evans said Premier Li peng was at pain to 
point out that preserving Hong Kong's status, especially its 
capitalist system, was in China's own interest. [end recording] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1733 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_e_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Southeast Asia &amp; Pacific </F>
<H3> <TI>   Reportage on Australian Foreign Minister's Talks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Reportage on Australian Foreign Minister's Talks </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Discusses Detention of Citizen </H4>

<F P=102> BK0204131094 Melbourne Radio Australia in English 1100 GMT 2 
Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> BK0204131094 </F>
<F P=104>  Melbourne Radio Australia </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The Australian foreign minister, Gareth Evans, has 
told China's leaders his country strongly objects to the 
detention, in the south of the country, of an Australian 
citizen, James Peng, who has been jailed for more than five 
months. The Chinese born Australian, James Peng, is involved in 
a business dispute with the local authorities in the southern 
Chinese city of Shenzen but he's still not been charged with any 
offense and has been denied any contact with his family. In 
talks with China's Foreign Minister Qian Qichen and Premier Li 
Peng in Beijing, Senator Evans said there were serious grounds 
for concern over James Peng's detention. 
  [Begin Evans recording, in progress] ... I made it every 
clear that whatever the legitimacy might be that China taking, 
probably formulated criminal action against him [words 
indistinct] some matter proceeding to late charges and trial 
[words indistinct] Australia could have no objection to that 
process being followed; we certainly had a strong objection to 
Australian citizens, or anyone else for that matter, being 
detained without due process in this way. [end recording] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1734 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_e_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Southeast Asia &amp; Pacific </F>
<H3> <TI>   Reportage on Australian Foreign Minister's Talks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Reportage on Australian Foreign Minister's Talks </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Meets With Qian Qichen </H4>

<F P=102> OW0104142594 Beijing XINHUA in English 1359 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104142594 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 1 (XINHUA) -- Chinese Vice-Premier 
and Foreign Minister Qian Qichen today urged Australia to relax 
conditions for its technology transfer to China and encourage 
more businessmen to invest in China. 
  During the two-hour-odd talks with visiting Australian 
Foreign Minister Graeth Evans, Qian noted that the volume of 
Sino-Australian trade reached three billion U.S. dollars last 
year, registering a 28 percent increase over that of 1992 and 
hitting the all-time high in history. 
  He said China's economy is developing in a sustained and 
healthy way and there exists a great potential for furthering 
bilateral cooperation in the fields of energy and communications. 
  Qian said it is his hope that Australia will soften its 
terms 
for transferring technology to China, encourage more Australian 
businessmen to invest in China so as to further push forward 
bilateral economic and technological cooperation in the 
high-tech field. 
  He said that both China and Australia are in the Asian and 
Pacific region, sharing common interests and responsibility in 
safeguarding the peace and stability in the region and promoting 
the economic cooperation there. 
  "Maintaining bilateral friendly cooperation will be a factor 
for the stability in the region," he said. 
  The Chinese foreign minister said over the past few years, 
the Sino-Australian ties have grown rapidly, adding that the 
exchanges between leaders of the two countries have increased 
and economic cooperation and trade expanded. 
  "The Chinese side is satisfied with the development of its 
relations with Australia," he said. 
  Evans said that Australia-China relations have been 
developing rapidly and yielded fruitful results. 
  The Australian people, he said, are pleased to follow the 
vigorous development of China's economy and they have come to 
realize that in China there is a very good opportunity for 
cooperation. Australian enterprises are willing to strengthen 
cooperation with China, he said. 
  Evans said the Australian Government wants to explore with 
China new ways to further bilateral cooperation. 
  He reaffirmed that Australia has always supported the 
restoration of China's status as a signatory party to the 
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and hopes that 
this will be realized before the establishment of the World 
Trade Organization. 
  Evans said that his country will continue to stick to the 
"one- China" policy. 
  During the talks, the two foreign ministers also exchanged 
views on other issues related to bilateral ties and 
international issues of common concern. 
  After the talks Qian gave a dinner in honor of Evans and his 
party. 
  The Australian foreign minister arrived here as Qian's guest 
earlier today. 
  Before coming here, Evans and his party visited Guilin. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1735 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_e_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Southeast Asia &amp; Pacific </F>
<H3> <TI>   Foreign Trade Minister Meets Australian Counterpart </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Foreign Trade Minister Meets Australian Counterpart </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204033394 Beijing XINHUA in English 0318 GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0204033394 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 2 (XINHUA) -- Chinese Minister of 
Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation Wu Yi met here this 
morning with visiting Australian Foreign Minister Gareth Evans 
and his party, and they exchanged views on bilateral economic 
and trade relations and other issues of common interest. 
  Wu said that Sino-Australian economic and trade relations 
have been developing rapidly and well, quoting statistics from 
China's customs that bilateral trade volume last year reached 
three billion U.S. dollars, up 29 percent over the record figure 
of 1992. 
  China had a 800 million U.S. dollars trade deficit with 
Australia last year with import at 1.9 billion U.S. dollars and 
export, 1.1 billion U.S. dollars. Wu said that China hopes to 
have a balanced trade by increasing trade. 
  The Australian foreign minister arrived here yesterday as 
guest of his Chinese counterpart Qian Qichen. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1736 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_e_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Southeast Asia &amp; Pacific </F>
<H3> <TI>   Malaysian Firms To Join Entertainment Industry </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Malaysian Firms To Join Entertainment Industry </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104171894 Beijing XINHUA in English 1654 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104171894 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Kuala Lumpur, April 1 (XINHUA) -- Several Malaysian 
companies together with their multi-national partners have 
decided to join China's entertainment and film industry. 
  This was proved by the signing of several agreements here 
today, which was witnessed by Malaysian Minister of Trade and 
Industry Rafidah Aziz. 
  The agreements worth a total of 60 million U.S. dollars are 
principally for the establishment of integrated entertainment 
centers, comprising multiplexes and dynamic motion simulators in 
Shanghai and other cities of China, Ramli Kushairi, chairman of 
South Malaysia Industries (SMIB) told newsmen here today. 
  SMIB is a big shareholder in the proposed projects. The 
venture partners are United Cinemas International owned by 
Paramount Pictures and Universal MCA, and China Venturetechno 
International and Shanghai Paradise, a leading Chinese 
entertainment company listed on Shanghai's stock market. 
  The international standard multiplexes to show the latest 
films "will meet the needs of the more affluent and discerning 
Chinese consumers", Ramli said. 
  The first multiplex would be opened in Shanghai in January 
1995, he said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1737 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_e_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Southeast Asia &amp; Pacific </F>
<H3> <TI>   Sihanouk To Visit DPRK 4 Apr; `Nearly Completely Recovered' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Sihanouk To Visit DPRK 4 Apr; `Nearly Completely Recovered' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204121894 Tokyo KYODO in English 1143 GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0204121894 </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo KYODO </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 2 KYODO -- Cambodian King Norodom 
Sihanouk will visit North Korea from Monday [4 April], officials 
at the Cambodian Embassy in Beijing confirmed Saturday. 
  The king is expected to visit Kim Il-song in connection with 
Kim's 82-year birthday on April 15, an embassy spokesman said. 
  The king will probably also go over the results of his 
recent 
six-month treatment for cancer, he said. 
  It was not immediately clear if Sihanouk would attempt to 
exert any influence over North Korea to allow full inspections 
of its suspected nuclear sites by the International Atomic 
Energy Agency (IAEA). 
  Interference in IAEA inspections in March led to a U.N. 
Security Council statement urging North Korea to accept further 
inspections and continue dialogue on the issue. 
  Sihanouk is expected to travel in his own royal airplane and 
will leave Pyongyang and return to Cambodia next Friday by way 
of Beijing, the spokesman said. 
  The king resumed his official duties Thursday when he met 
with a Chinese leader, his first official meeting since 
undergoing cancer treatment in Beijing last October. Sihanouk 
met with Australian Foreign Minister Gareth Evans on Friday. 
  The spokesman said Sihanouk has "nearly completely 
recovered." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1738 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_e_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Southeast Asia &amp; Pacific </F>
<H3> <TI>   Cambodia's Foreign Minister Meets Guangdong Delegation </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Cambodia's Foreign Minister Meets Guangdong Delegation </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0304141994 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 0837 
GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0304141994 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporters Yan Ming (2518 2494) and Li Chaobi (2621 6389 </F>
4310)] 
  [Text] Phnom Penh, 2 Apr (XINHUA) -- Norodom Sirivut, 
deputy prime minister and minister of foreign affairs and 
international cooperation of the Kingdom of Cambodia, received 
Liu Weiming, vice governor of Guangdong Province, and his 
entourage on the evening of 1 April. He told the visitors that 
the Kingdom of Cambodia welcomes investment from Guangdong 
Province to help the country develop its economy. 
  Sirivut said: "Cambodia is working on creating a good 
environment. We welcome foreign investment to help Cambodia 
rebuild itself. Recently, I had the good fortune to accompany 
the two prime ministers to visit Guangdong Province. I was very 
impressed by its fast economic growth. It is very close to our 
country. The two sides can carry out cooperation in many 
economic fields." He said: "Economic development is of the 
priority of the Cambodian Government and people." 
  Liu Weiming said: "Guangdong Province is very interested in 
cooperation with Cambodia in industry, agriculture, commerce, 
and so forth. This cooperation will be carried out on the basis 
of equality and mutual benefits. Guangdong will send economic 
delegations to further study the conditions in Cambodia." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1739 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_e_94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Southeast Asia &amp; Pacific </F>
<H3> <TI>   Cambodia's Ranariddh, Hun Sen Meet Guangdong Delegation </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Cambodia's Ranariddh, Hun Sen Meet Guangdong Delegation </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0304142194 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 1324 
GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0304142194 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporters Yan Ming (2518 2494)] </F>
  [Text] Phnom Penh, 2 Apr (XINHUA) -- Cambodia's First Prime 
Minister Ranariddh and Second Prime Minister Hun Sen separately 
received a delegation from China's Guangdong Province today and 
yesterday. They expressed welcome for China to invest in 
Cambodia. 
  During the meeting, Ranariddh said that Chinese investment 
in 
Cambodia is very welcome. He said: "Many provinces of Cambodia 
are good for developing crop farming, cash crops in particular. 
There are also great potentials for developing aquaculture for 
market at home and abroad." 
  During the meeting, Hun Sen said: "There are immense 
possibilities for joint development of agriculture between 
Cambodia and China. Guangdong Province has technology and 
Cambodia has resources. Both sides will benefit from joint 
development. He pointed out that the prospects of commercial 
cooperation between the two sides are very bright. 
  Liu Weiming, head of the Guangdong provincial delegation, 
said that Guangdong is interested in cooperation with Cambodia 
in industry, agriculture, construction, and other sectors. 
  The Guangdong provincial delegation arrived in Cambodia on 
27 
March for a goodwill visit. It left Phnom Penh for home this 
afternoon. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1740 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_e_94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Southeast Asia &amp; Pacific </F>
<H3> <TI>   Air China Opens Jakarta-Shenzhen Service </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Air China Opens Jakarta-Shenzhen Service </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204142094 Beijing XINHUA in English 1246 GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0204142094 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Jakarta, April 2 (XINHUA) -- Air China started the 
maiden voyage of Jakarta-Shenzhen-Beijing air service here today. 
  The scheduled flight in Boeing-767 will be regularly on 
every 
Saturday. 
  The opening of the new air service is expected to benefit 
exchanges between peoples of the two countries. 
  Air China Jakarta office manager Guo Liangkuan told XINHUA 
that this step will make things convenient for customers to 
travel to China through Shenzhen, and at the same time provide 
another way for those to Hong Kong on business or holiday. 
  Since June 18, 1991, Air China's first flight between 
Beijing- Xiamen-Jakarta, Air China served 4,000 customers in 
1992 and 6,000 in 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1741 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_e_94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Southeast Asia &amp; Pacific </F>
<H3> <TI>   Burmese Government To Supervise Gem Trade on Border </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Burmese Government To Supervise Gem Trade on Border </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0304042294 Beijing XINHUA in English 0334 GMT 3 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0304042294 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Yangon [Rangoon], April 3 (XINHUA) -- A Myanmar 
[Burmese] mission will be sent to Muse, a town on Myanmar-China 
border, to supervise legal and free gem trade from May 1, 1994. 
  An official report here said that Minister for Mines Lt-Gen 
Kyaw Min inspected certain towns along Myanmar-China border on 
April 1. 
  He found there is gem smuggling in those towns, so measures 
are to be taken to prevent it, while allowing legal and free gem 
trade. 
  As for the supervision commission, the minister said it will 
help negotiate deals between local merchants and foreign traders. 
  Out of the proceeds, he said, 15 percent will be taxed and 
current accounts for the remaining 85 percent will be opened at 
the Myanmar Foreign Trade Bank. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1742 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_e_94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Southeast Asia &amp; Pacific </F>
<H3> <TI>   XINHUA Notes SRV Prime Minister's Cambodia Visit </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    XINHUA Notes SRV Prime Minister's Cambodia Visit </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204083094 Beijing XINHUA in English 0736 GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0204083094 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Phnom Penh, April 2 (XINHUA) -- Vietnamese Prime 
Minister Vo Van Kiet arrived here today on a two-day official 
visit aimed at boosting friendly relations and cooperation 
between the two countries. 
  A high-ranking Cambodian official said that Vo Van Kiet will 
also discuss how to solve border and immigration issues with the 
Cambodian leaders. 
  The Cambodian national radio reported today that the 
Vietnamese side will make an emergency demand to the Cambodian 
side that some 30,000 Vietnamese emigrants should be repatriated 
to Cambodia. The Vietnamese emigrants fled to Vietnam from 
Cambodia in March, 1993 and are currently gathering in two 
countries' border areas. 
  As to the Cambodian-Vietnamese border issue, the Cambodian 
Constitution provides that any solution should be based on the 
Cambodian domain before the year of 1969. 
  Vo Van Kiet is visiting at the invitation of Norodom 
Ranariddh and Hun Sen, co-prime ministers of the Royal Cambodian 
Government which was formed in November last year. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1743 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_h_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> West Europe </F>
<H3> <TI>   Chen Muhua Meets Icelandic Visitors </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Chen Muhua Meets Icelandic Visitors </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104134594 Beijing XINHUA in English 1258 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104134594 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 1 (XINHUA) -- Chen Muhua, 
vice-chairwoman of the Standing Committee of the National 
People's Congress (NPC) of China, met with an Icelandic women's 
delegation here today. 
  Chen, also president of the All-China Women's Federation, 
had 
a cordial talk with the group, led by S. Petursdottir, 
president of the Federation of Icelandic Women's Societies. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1744 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_h_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> West Europe </F>
<H3> <TI>   Institute President Meets French Visitors </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Institute President Meets French Visitors </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0304120794 Beijing XINHUA in English 1156 GMT 3 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0304120794 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 3 (XINHUA) -- Liu Shuqing, president 
of the Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs (CPIFA), 
met with and hosted a banquet for Jacques Attali, former special 
advisor to the French president, and his party here this evening. 
  Attali and his party arrived here this morning as guests of 
the CPIFA. In addition to Beijing, they are also scheduled to 
visit the cities of Shanghai and Suzhou. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1745 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_h_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  17 Feb 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> West Europe </F>
<H3> <TI>   UK Businesses `Eager' for Improved Relations </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    UK Businesses `Eager' for Improved Relations </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK2502144394 Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 0959 
GMT 17 Feb 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK2502144394 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special article" by reporter He Chong (6320 3095): "UK </F>
Business Community Eager To See Improved PRC Ties"] 
  [Text] Hong Kong, 17 February (ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE)-- 
According to reports published by London newspapers, UK 
industrial and commercial circles have recently and repeatedly 
warned John Major's government that Hong Kong Governor Chris 
Patten's hostile stance and behavior toward China on the 
question of Hong Kong's political reform is bound to adversely 
affect Sino-British relations and jeopardize Sino-British 
economic and trade cooperation. Some personages within 
Britain's industrial, commercial, and political circles have 
even publicly demanded that the "Hong Kong governor be replaced" 
and maintain that only by doing so will Britain's and Hong 
Kong's long-term interests be safeguarded. 
  On 7 February, given deteriorating Anglo-Chinese relations, 
the "Anglo-Chinese Trade Group 48" announced its decision to 
cancel a scheduled visit to China by a heavyweight British trade 
delegation led by British Trade and Industry Secretary Michael 
Heseltine this coming fall in a bid to avoid embarrassment. It 
was reported that the "Anglo-Chinese Trade Group 48" had 
originally decided to send a total of 24 economic and trade 
delegations to China this year with the aforementioned 
high-level delegation comprising the chief executives of some 
100 major British firms being the most important. The delegation 
was originally scheduled to visit China in late September of 
this year to promote the sale of UK-made technology and 
equipment to China and was scheduled to visit Beijing, Shanghai, 
the Three Gorges of the Chang Jiang, Tianjin, Wuhan, Guangzhou, 
and Shenzhen, as well as some other places in China. As Hong 
Kong Governor Chris Patten has submitted the first part and 
plans to submit the second and last part of his political reform 
package to the Legislative Council in early March [as received] 
and have them ratified for official enforcement this coming 
July, the Chinese side is expected to react strongly to the 
governor's decision. Thus, it would be inappropriate for 
British business leaders to visit China under such an 
"atmosphere." 
  Not long before, Bailiren [4101 4409 0088], president of the 
"Anglo-Chinese Trade Group 48," had publicly accused John 
Major's government of ignoring the views and jeopardizing the 
interests of the UK business community, saying that the way in 
which the government had handled the Hong Kong question had 
undermined Anglo- Chinese trade relations, that the government 
had failed to see the adverse effects of Chris Patten's 
political reform package, and that it is not worthwhile for the 
government to risk everything on Chris Patten's political reform 
package. He also made it clear that the UK business community 
would not give its support to Chris Patten, stating: "We want 
to see him removed from office; the sooner, the better." 
  In the meantime, many of Britain's industrial associations 
and chambers of commerce have also started demanding that John 
Major's government take measures to remove the obstacles 
hampering Anglo- Chinese relations and to explore ways to enter 
the China market. At an annual meeting of the Birmingham 
Chamber of Commerce held on 28 January, 1994, Mr. Carter, 
chairman of the Birmingham Chamber of Commerce, told British 
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd, one of his distinguished guests 
at the occasion, that diplomats should make redoubled efforts to 
promote foreign trade and support businessmen in expanding 
exports to China. As the British Government's position on the 
question of Hong Kong has already undermined Anglo-Chinese 
relations, he added, some of the Anglo-Chinese economic 
cooperation projects previously agreed upon by the two sides 
were now in danger of being frozen or scrapped. Moreover, he 
said, the UK business community will inevitably lose business 
opportunities in China. Mr. Carter stressed that China is now 
the biggest market in the world. [sentence as received] It 
would be terribly wrong for Britain to shoot itself in the foot 
and undercut its own competitiveness at this moment. Therefore, 
he noted, the British Government should reexamine its policies. 
  At a large exhibition, entitled "Hong Kong's Achievements," 
which was held two months ago, John Major was asked by more than 
300 influential businessmen from all over the world how he 
would, in his capacity as prime minister, try to protect the 
interests of the British business community in Hong Kong and 
China, as well as in Asia as a whole. 
  What merits attention is that China has repeatedly expressed 
welcome to British businessmen and has invited them to invest in 
and discuss trade. In fact, the total volume of Sino-British 
trade reached $3.59 billion in 1993, up 86 percent over the 
previous year, only slightly lower than the increases registered 
in Sino-German trade and in the volume of trade between China 
and some West European countries. Nonetheless, since Britain 
has adopted an unfriendly and noncooperative attitude toward 
China on the question of Hong Kong, Sino-British economic and 
trade relations are bound to be adversely affected in the long 
run. Beijing officials have already stated that the Chinese 
side is unwilling to see this and should not be held responsible 
for such a scenario. 
  UK officials and the business community concede that China 
has thus far shown no signs of discriminating against the UK 
business community. However, any country or region will try to 
select firms from a friendly country as its business partners so 
long as it can offer prices which are not higher and possesses 
technology which is not inferior to those offered by firms from 
other countries in the bidding process. Some UK newspapers, 
including "THE OBSERVER," "THE DAILY TELEGRAPH," and "THE SUN," 
have published commentaries, saying that Britain has 
underestimated the indignation of China's local governments on 
the question of Hong Kong, and the majority of China's imports, 
worth about $700 billion in all, will be purchased by local 
governments over the next seven years. Should Britain try to 
encroach upon Chinese sovereignty and violate agreements reached 
with China in the past on the question of Hong Kong, they asked, 
how could Britain expect the Chinese to be friendly to it? They 
argued that as Germany has entered the China market and France 
has stopped arms sales to Taiwan in an attempt to restore 
friendly relations with China and increase exports to China, 
there is no reason for Britain not to do the same. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1746 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_j_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  27 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Latin America &amp; Caribbean </F>
<H3> <TI>   Defense Minister Leaves To Visit Latin American Countries </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Defense Minister Leaves To Visit Latin American Countries </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW2703033294 Beijing XINHUA in English 0245 GMT 27 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW2703033294 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 27 (XINHUA) -- General Chi Haotian, 
Chinese State Councillor and defense minister, and his party 
left here today on an official goodwill visit to Brazil, Uruguay 
and Chile. 
  Among those seeing them off at the airport were General 
Zhang 
Wannian, chief of the General Staff of the Chinese People's 
Liberation Army, and diplomatic envoys of the three countries in 
Beijing. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1747 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_j_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  30 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Latin America &amp; Caribbean </F>
<H3> <TI>   NPC Chairman Qiao Shi Meets Colombian Jurists </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    NPC Chairman Qiao Shi Meets Colombian Jurists </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW3003134094 Beijing XINHUA in English 1259 GMT 30 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW3003134094 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 30 (XINHUA) -- Qiao Shi, chairman of 
China's National People's Congress (NPC) Standing Committee, met 
here today with Hernando Herrera Vergas, president of the 
Colombian Constitutional Court, and his party. 
  Qiao said that he believed that Herrera's current visit to 
China would promote exchanges and cooperation between Chinese 
and Colombian judiciaries. 
  Herrera said that his visit to China was to set up friendly 
relations and cooperation with China's judicial bodies. 
  Adores Gonzale Diaz, minister of justice, who is 
accompanying 
Herrera on the visit, said that his country was willing to 
cooperate with other countries, especially China, on the 
anti-drug issue. 
  Qiao said that China stands firm in anti-drug matters and 
wishes to cooperate with Colombia and other nations on this 
aspect. 
  Ren Jianxing, president of the Supreme People's Court of 
China, took part in the meeting. 
  Herrera and his party arrived here on Sunday for a visit as 
guests of the Supreme People's Court. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1748 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_j_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  28 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Latin America &amp; Caribbean </F>
<H3> <TI>   Supreme Court Head Fetes Jurists </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Supreme Court Head Fetes Jurists </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW2803130094 Beijing XINHUA in English 1238 GMT 28 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW2803130094 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 28 (XINHUA) -- Ren Jianxin, the 
president of China's Supreme People's Court, hosted a banquet 
here this evening in honor of a judicial delegation from 
Colombia. 
  The 16-member delegation, headed by Hernando Herrera Vergas, 
president of the Colombian Constitutional Court, arrived here on 
Sunday at the invitation of China's Supreme People's Court. 
They are also scheduled to visit Xian and Shanghai. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1749 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_j_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Latin America &amp; Caribbean </F>
<H3> <TI>   China, Cuba Reach Agreements on Trade Cooperation </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    China, Cuba Reach Agreements on Trade Cooperation </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204035394 Beijing XINHUA in English 0324 GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0204035394 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Havana, April 1 (XINHUA) -- China and Cuba signed 
four agreements on trade cooperation here today to further 
promote their economic and trade ties. 
  The four agreements include the minutes of the negotiation 
session, a protocol on bilateral trade for 1994, an accord on 
loans granted by China to Cuba and notes on the pricing of raw 
sugar. 
  The signing came at the conclusion of the sixth session of 
the mixed commission for economic and commercial relationship 
between China and Cuba. 
  Heads of the two countries' trade delegations, visiting Vice 
Minister Hao Jianxiu in charge of China's State Planning 
Commission and Cuban Minister of Foreign Trade Ricardo Cabrisas 
Ruiz signed the documents. 
  During the week-long visit ending Friday, the Chinese 
economic and trade delegation held a meeting with Cuban 
President Fidel Castro. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1750 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Beijing Citizens Rush To Buy Treasury Bonds </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Beijing Citizens Rush To Buy Treasury Bonds </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104113694 Beijing XINHUA in English 1102 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104113694 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 1 (XINHUA) -- This year's national 
treasury bonds turned out to be a big hit in Beijing. 
  By 8:30 early in the morning at the Andingmennei street 
deposit outlet of the Industrial and Commercial Bank, more than 
60 people had queued up to buy the treasury bonds, which were 
first issued today. 
  That was seen at almost all outlets in Beijing selling the 
bonds. Just a few days ago, many Beijing residents queued up at 
the same outlets to buy stocks issued by four large companies. 
  "My wife came here even at 6:30 in the morning, and I have 
come to take her place so that she could have her breakfast," 
said an old worker in the line at Andingmennei street. 
  A salesman at the bank who was making preparations for bond 
sales said that people have kept asking about the new bonds. 
One person had turned in more than one million yuan worth of 
bonds issued before in exchange for the new ones early in the 
morning. 
  The "old in exchange for the new" business -- returning old 
bonds for new with higher interest rates -- seems to be the 
favorite. 
  Within two hours, some 3.50 million yuan worth of bonds had 
sold out at the Dongsi outlet of the Beijing branch of the 
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China. And most bonds were 
sold via the new business. 
  Officials said that the bank deposits of urban and rural 
residents have risen steadily since the beginning of this year, 
topping 62.3 billion yuan by the end of February. 
  However, they said that the three-year-term bonds were not 
selling as well as the two-year-term bonds. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1751 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  24 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Beijing To Offer Shares in Four State Companies </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Beijing To Offer Shares in Four State Companies </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK2403102094 Beijing CHINA DAILY in English 24 Mar 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> HK2403102094 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing CHINA DAILY </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Liu Weiling: "Beijing Set for Massive </F>
Share Issue"] 
  [Text] Beijing plans to publicly issue 175 million shares 
of four State companies starting this Sunday. 
  The move, which is to take place over three days, is the 
first such offering by the capital. 
  Li Junhua, Director of the Beijing Municipal Commission for 
Economic Restructuring, said the listing is an important step in 
improving management and the shareholding system at State-owned 
enterprises. 
  It is expected to raise more than 1 billion yuan ($114 
million) for the Beijing Department Store (Group) Company 
Limited, the Beiren Printing Machinery Company Limited, the 
Beijing Light Bus Company Limited and the Beijing Town County 
Trade Centre Company Limited. 
  The four companies are expected to be listed on the Shanghai 
Stock Exchange. But the date of the listing has not yet been 
announced. 
  Those who want to buy shares must deposit money for 
half-year 
terms in banks in Beijing. 
  The receipts they receive will then be entered in a lottery 
to decide who can buy shares. 
  The Beiren company, China's biggest printing machinery 
producer, plans to float 35 million shares. 
  Money collected from the issuance will be invested in buying 
advanced technology, developing new products and building new 
plants, company representatives said. 
  Beiren earned 133.56 million yuan ($15.35 million) in 
profits 
last year and floated 100 million shares on the Hong Kong Stock 
Exchange last July. 
  The Beijing Light Bus Company Limited, which is expected to 
issue 40 million shares, is one of China's top auto-makers. 
  It registered a profit of 22.32 million yuan ($2.57 million) 
last year and makes 17 percent of the country's light buses. 
And it expects to make 37.5 million yuan ($4.31 million) in 
profits this year. 
  Funds raised through the issuance are set for technical 
renovation, buildlng a branch factory and importing foreign 
technology. 
  The Beijing Department Store, built in 1955 and the second 
largest retailer in the capital, chalked up a sales volume of 
1.11 billion yuan ($127.59 million) last year. It is ready to 
float 50 million shares. 
  Beijing Town and County Trade Centre, a rising star in the 
capital's commercial industry made 52 million yuan ($5.9 
million) in profits last year. It plans to issue 50 million 
shares. 
  Li said the time is ripe for Beijing to issue shares since 
the city has made substantial achievements in recent years. As 
of March 10, Beijing had 204 shareholding companies. 
  The number of securities companies has also grown rapidly. 
By the end of last year, 34 financial institutions in the city 
opened securities businesses and 114 securities trading outlets 
opened, Li said. 
  Moreover, more than 40,000 Beijing residents own stocks, he 
said. 
  Meanwhile, rising bank savings have helped with listing 
shares, Li said. 
  By February, the city's individual savings deposits had 
reached 63.2 billion yuan ($7.26 billion). 
  In addition, he said the country's efforts at drafting laws 
and regulations in the securities industry have improved the 
environment for listing shares. 
  Beijing has two companies listed on the Shanghai Stock 
Exchange. But Tianlong and Tianqiao, a waste recycling company 
and a retailer, did not follow standard practice and float their 
shares first. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1752 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  17 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Beijing Bank President on Social Security System </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Beijing Bank President on Social Security System </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   SK2503144694 Beijing BEIJING RIBAO in Chinese 17 Mar 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> SK2503144694 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing BEIJING RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Reporters Sun Yushan (1327 3768 1472) and Chen Weiguang </F>
(7115 4850 0342): "Shao Yunjie, President of the Industrial and 
Commercial Bank of Beijing Municipality, Talks About the Issue 
of Positively Carrying Out the Social Security System"] 
  [Text] Enlivening state-owned large- and medium-sized 
enterprises is a topic of conversation that the economists and 
entrepreneurs were most concerned with at the people's 
congresses held over the past years. At the place where the 
Beijing delegation stayed, Shao Yunjie, president of the 
municipal industrial and commercial bank and deputy of the 
municipality, set forth with the view of a banker that we should 
positively carry out the social security system, lighten the 
burden of enterprises, and create conditions for enterprises to 
equally join the market competition. 
  Shao Yunjie said: Just as what Premier Li set forth in his 
report, enterprises bear heavy financial burdens in supporting 
social undertakings and there are many historical burdens. 
Taking Beijing as an example, 1,030,000 staff members and 
workers of the industrial enterprises should support 400,000 
retired staff members and workers. How can they support such a 
large number of retired staff members and workers? So, we 
should set up, as soon as possible, a social security system so 
that enterprises will not bear this burden any longer. 
Enterprises hand over a portion of money to society. 
Simultaneously, enterprises have also to deliver to society 
portions of money from various kinds of earnings. Besides, 
staff members and workers themselves should also pay a portion 
of money and the state has to allocate a portion of money. So, 
the living expenses of retired staff members and workers will be 
provided under the social insurance system. The enterprises 
that are hopeless for halting deficits should declare 
bankruptcy. We can use the social insurance mechanism to 
arrange the staff members and workers of the bankrupt 
enterprises or to have the enterprises shift their lines of 
operation in a step-by-step manner. 
  Shao Yunjie said: The higher levels must never define any 
speed targets for large- and medium-sized enterprises. Defining 
speed targets will bring damages to these enterprises. The 
products without benefits and the products that nobody wants 
must not be produced any more. Enterprises would rather suspend 
production than seek high output value. Using coal, 
electricity, water, and raw materials to produce unmarketable 
products is big waste. Enterprises should readjust the product 
mix according to market demands, grasp product quality, and 
produce their own products with competitiveness. Only by so 
doing will they be able to stand their ground on the market. 
Shao Yunjie said: Enterprises and banks have relations of 
loans. This does not mean that only enterprises seek banks' 
help. In reality, banks also have to seek enterprises' help. 
Only when enterprises have good economic results will banks be 
able to live a good life. In a sense, banks and large- and 
medium-sized enterprises share the same fate. According to the 
State Council's decision on the financial system reform, the 
industrial and commercial banks should turn themselves into 
commercial banks. Seeking profits is the highest target of 
commercial banks. So, the commercial banks have to make 
self-management and self-development, run risks by themselves, 
and restrict themselves. Some enterprises worry that they will 
not be able to use loans under such a situation. In fact they 
must not worry about this. Banks still give priorities to 
large- and medium-sized enterprises because these enterprises 
are the foundation stone of the socialist economy. Meanwhile, 
enterprises themselves should have a sense of urgency, enhance 
their internal potential, and increase economic results so that 
banks will rest assured to give loans. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1753 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  27 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Service Industry Earning Statistics Listed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Service Industry Earning Statistics Listed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW2703023394 Beijing XINHUA in English 0148 GMT 27 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW2703023394 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 27 (XINHUA) -- Profits created by 
Beijing's service industry have by now accounted for 46.4 
percent of the city's total, topping all cities in the country, 
according to the Statistics Bureau of the Beijing Municipal 
Government. 
  Last year, the output value of the capital's service sector 
increased by 39.5 billion yuan, with a growth rate of 12.9 
percent over the previous year, stated a bureau spokesman. 
  Burgeoning of the sector can be largely accredited to 
persistent efforts and preferential policies of the municipal 
government during the past several years. 
  Large scale restructuring has been carried out according to 
the city's overall development strategy and many industrial 
enterprises incurring losses or causing pollution in downtown 
areas have been moved to the suburbs to make room for commercial 
activities. 
  The Beijing Municipal Government has stepped up utilization 
of foreign investment in infrastructural fields like 
transportation and telecommunications, creating better 
conditions for the booming of service businesses. 
  Taking full advantage of its wealth of science and 
technology, Beijing has put a great number of scientific 
inventions and achievements into production and gained much 
commercial success. 
  Increase rates for its finance, insurance, international 
tourism, foreign trade and public utilities all topped the 11 
percent mark last year. 
  An official in the Beijing Municipal Government said, the 
output value of Beijing's service industry is expected to occupy 
60 percent of the city's total by the end of the century, 
further consolidating its position as China's political and 
cultural center. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1754 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  26 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Beijing City Sees Boom in High-Tech Activity </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Beijing City Sees Boom in High-Tech Activity </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW2603014794 Beijing XINHUA in English 0124 GMT 26 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW2603014794 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 26 (XINHUA) -- The Beijing Municipal 
Government's persistent efforts in boosting the high-tech 
industry has proved rewarding with a large number of high-tech 
giants mushrooming all over the ancient capital city. 
  Statistics show that high-tech enterprises in Beijing 
totalled 4,443 last year, including 980 joint ventures, creating 
profits worth more than 11.3 billion yuan. 
  Among them, 15 boast revenues exceeding 100 million yuan 
each 
and another 130 have made profits topping the 10 million yuan 
mark. 
  The Beijing Municipal Government has attached great 
importance to the exploitation of new and high technology during 
recent years as part of the efforts to boost overall prosperity. 
  In order to open more channels for fund-raising and to 
better 
adapt the management and operating mechanism to international 
standards, the local government has encouraged various high-tech 
enterprises to introduce the joint-stock system. 
  Stone Corporation and the Beijing Legend Computer Group 
Company, the country's two leading high-tech enterprises, have 
both been listed on stock exchanges and raised more funds for 
further development. 
  Beijing has the country's largest number of scientific 
institutes, universities, all kinds of talents and China's first 
technology-intensive scientific zone -- Zhongguancun in Haidian 
District -- providing a firm foundation for the burgeoning of 
the high-tech sector. 
  Success of the Beijing University Founder Group Company, 
which has quickly built a good reputation in the past several 
years, is based on the scientific and technological strength of 
the country's top school of higher learning. 
  Color laser photocomposition developed by the company has 
ushered in a new era in China's industry in printing Chinese 
characters, the world's most complicated written characters. 
  The founder company created record profits worth 900 million 
yuan in 1993 (more than 100 million U.S. dollars according to 
the current exchange rate) and is confidently heading toward the 
vast domestic market of high-tech electrical telecommunications 
products. 
  Praised as the "dark horse" by its counterparts, Lantong 
Electronics Co., Ltd in the Beijing high-tech experimental 
development zone has miraculously occupied 60 percent of the 
domestic display screen market almost overnight. Aggregate 
sales of the company also soared to 100 million yuan from the 
initial 16 million yuan last year. 
  Collective or individual high-tech enterprises founded by 
state scientific research institutes and universities have also 
shown great vitality. 
  The Huasheng Computer Co., Ltd., under a department of the 
Ministry of Electronics Industry, has become a big profit earner 
with a yearly income of 300 million yuan. 
  The Violight Group Company of Qinghua University, the 
country's number one school in natural sciences, has put 
100-plus of its latest inventions and technological achievements 
into production and produced great social and economic benefits. 
  According to reliable sources, the Beijing Municipal 
Government plans to promote new high-tech zones that have 
gradually taken shape including a land information center in 
Haidian District and two science and technology zones in 
Changping and Fengtai Districts. 
  A technology development zone in Qinghua University and a 
biological garden in Beijing University are also to be set up in 
the near future. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1755 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  20 Feb 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Beijing Mayor Speaks at Family Planning Meeting </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Beijing Mayor Speaks at Family Planning Meeting </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   SK1103084994 Beijing BEIJING RIBAO in Chinese 20 Feb 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> SK1103084994 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing BEIJING RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Reporter Sun Ying (1327 3841) and Correspondent Yang </F>
Xianping (2799 7359 1627): "Population Growth Should Be 
Controlled To Achieve a Fairly Comfortable Life Ahead of 
Schedule"] 
  [Excerpts] The Beijing Municipal Population and Family 
Planning Leading Group held its first meeting following 
reshuffles on 19 February. Mayor Li Qiyan serves as the leader, 
and Vice Mayors He Luli and Duan Qiang deputy leaders. In his 
speech, Li Qiyan emphasized the need to have a full 
understanding of the important significance of family planning, 
a basic national policy, and the need for the entire party and 
entire society to make concerted efforts to strengthen overall 
management and win greater achievements. 
  In carrying out the family planning work in 1993, Beijing 
made persistent efforts to emancipate the mind, seek truth from 
facts, and pioneer the way forward and fulfilled the annual 
population plan and family planning tasks fairly successfully. 
Compared with 1992, improvement was achieved in leading 
persons' efforts to attach importance to family planning, in all 
the family planning cadres' quality and law-enforcement level, 
and in the masses' awareness in practicing family planning; and 
propaganda and education, grass- roots management, management 
according to law, and comprehensive improvement were 
strengthened. According to the 1993 statistics of various 
districts and counties, among Beijing's permanent residents, the 
birth rate declined by 3.43 percent from 1992, and the multiple 
birth rate declined by 8.2 percent; and their family planning 
rate was 99.76 percent, one-child rate 94.24 percent, and late 
childbirth rate 90.42 percent, up 0.01, 0.84, and 0.18 
percentage points, respectively. 
  Li Qiyan pointed out in his speech that Beijing's hard-won 
great achievements in family planning last year should be 
attributed to the great support provided by central organs and 
the army units stationed in Beijing, the great efforts of all 
levels and all departments in the municipality, and the hard 
work of the comrades in charge of family planning. He said: 
Comrade Jiang Zemin pointed out that practicing family planning 
will help develop socialist productive forces, enhance overall 
national strength, and improve living standards. We should 
fully understand the important significance of population growth 
control in accelerating socialist modernization and achieving a 
fairly comfortable life ahead of schedule. While developing the 
economy, we should bring population growth under strict control. 
Otherwise, the endeavor of achieving a fairly comfortable life 
ahead of schedule will be affected. Leaders and the masses have 
gained an ever-deeper understanding of this, but they 
nevertheless should enhance understanding. Judging from the 
current situation, family planning work is still difficult, and 
some people still have confused and erroneous ideas. Top party 
and government leaders should regard family planning, a basic 
national policy, as a major task, intensify investigation and 
study, strengthen propaganda, conduct ideological education to 
counter problems, clarify confused ideas, and remove the 
ideological obstacles to family planning. [passage omitted] 
  Li Qiyan emphasized the need to achieve success in managing 
the family planning of transients and the people with permanent 
residence registered in Beijing who work in other localities. 
He pointed out: This work is the weak link. We should 
strengthen management and never turn Beijing into the base area 
for "multiple birth guerrilla forces." He urged: All family 
planning departments should report family planning work and 
problems to major party and government leaders on a regular 
basis. The municipal family planning commission should 
summarize the situation continuously and give reports to the 
municipal party committee and government. All departments 
should conscientiously implement the responsibility system and 
make sure that arrangements for family planning are made, work 
is divided and inspected, rewards and punishments are meted out, 
and criticisms and commendation conducted. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1756 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Beijing Combats Worst Drought of Century </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Beijing Combats Worst Drought of Century </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204020494 Beijing XINHUA in English 0135 GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0204020494 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 2 (XINHUA) -- The Beijing Municipal 
Government has recently adjusted its water conservancy 
construction program in a bid to fight more efficiently against 
the worst drought in a century. 
  In the worst-hit of the farming areas administered by 
Beijing 
municipality, some people have to go as far as 10 kilometers to 
fetch water for villagers and livestock. 
  Local officials said that changes have been made in 
irrigation projects now under construction so as to concentrate 
more funds and manpower on those for the purpose of fighting 
against drought. 
  The government also decided that residents will temporarily 
be moved out of a few villages where the water situation has 
come to the worst. 
  Since the beginning of the year, Beijing had only 2.1 mm of 
rain, while the total rainfall in 1993 was only one third of 
that in a normal year. 
  Due to the sustained drought, the water stored in the 
Guanting and Miyun reservoirs, the capital's major water 
sources, dropped by 560 million cubic m compared with the same 
period last year, the 12 medium-sized reservoirs by 45 million 
cubic m, while most of the small reservoirs and pools have 
nearly dried up. 
  Some 100,000 ha of the city's 160,000 ha of wheat farmland 
is 
now threatened by the drought. 
  Nearly 100,000 people and 10,000 head of livestock are 
facing 
water shortages. Some 10,000 people have to fetch water from 
three km away, and some even from 10 km away. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1757 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  25 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fewer Beijing Students Go Abroad To Study </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fewer Beijing Students Go Abroad To Study </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK2603024794 Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in English 1128 GMT 
25 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK2603024794 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 25 (CNS) -- According to the Beijing 
Municipal Higher learning Bureau, the fervour of studying abroad 
by young people in the capital is cooling down year by year 
while foreign students studying in the municipality are sharply 
increasing. 
  Last year the city approved 2,800 people with a higher 
education record, to study overseas, 1063 less than in 1992 and 
2031 less than in 1991 while the 44 higher learning institutions 
in the capital last year registered 11,000 foreign students to 
study in the capital 3,000 more than in 1992 and 7,000 more than 
in 1991. 
  Relevant personnel held that the above two sets of figures 
indicated the speeding up of reform and opening to the outside 
world as well as economic development in the country where an 
environment favourable for putting to good use intellectual 
talents is now forming. Young people no longer need to go 
abroad to study as there are many ways for them to gain training 
and with the stability of society and rapid development of 
education, the country has attracted a large number of foreign 
students to study there with Beijing alone having 11 000 such 
students from 127 countries and regions, 1,199 of them being 
non-paying students on scholarships and the rest self-supporting. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1758 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hebei's Achievements in Fighting Corruption Noted </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Hebei's Achievements in Fighting Corruption Noted </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   SK0803023694 Shijiazhuang Hebei People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 2300 GMT 5 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> SK0803023694 </F>
<F P=104>  Shijiazhuang Hebei People's Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Mandarin </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Anticorruption is an extremely important issue with 
which the CPC Central Committee, the State Council, the 
provincial party committee, and the provincial government are 
much concerned. At the same time, it is an issue to the common 
concern of the broad masses of the people. 
  Since last September, Hebei Province has launched an 
extensive campaign to oppose corruption. The scale and the 
achievements of this campaign have been never seen in recent 
years. Yang Yuzhong, deputy secretary of the provincial 
discipline inspection commission and head of the anticorruption 
office under the provincial party committee, said to reporters a 
few days ago: From October to November last year, more than 
21,000 leading cadres at or above the county or section level of 
party and government organs throughout the province took an 
active part in the activities of being honest, clean, and 
self-disciplined and examined themselves and corrected mistakes 
in line with the 10 prohibitions set forth by the provincial 
party committee. From the self-examination, a total of 11,000 
cadres were found violating the five stipulations of the central 
authorities and the 10 prohibitions of the provincial party 
committee. Of these cadres, 786 were of the prefectural and 
department levels, involving 4.82 million yuan in illicit money. 
At the same time, discipline inspection and supervisory 
departments also concentrated on investigating and dealing with 
a number of cases of violating laws and disciplines. From 
September to December last year, a total of 3,857 discipline 
violation cases committed by party members and cadres were put 
on file for investigation and prosecution. Of these cases, 392 
involved more than 10,000 yuan in illicit money each and 
involved leading cadres of the level of deputy county or section 
head, including the case committed by (Liu Qingfang), secretary 
of the Lingshou County Party Committee, and some other major 
typical cases that have produced certain influence throughout 
the province. 
  Yang Yuzhong pointed out: Through the anticorruption 
campaign, the wanton collections of fees, fines, and 
apportionments, on which the masses expressed strong comments, 
have been effectively checked. The province as a whole has 
stopped collecting a total of 5,050 unreasonable items of 
charges, and ferreted out 110 million yuan of money collected in 
violation of discipline, of which, 8.44 million yuan has already 
been returned. The evil trend that party and government 
organizations abuse powers to do business and earn profits has 
been checked basically. A total of 1,547 cadres were found 
using public funds to go abroad for tourism, more than 1.36 
million yuan of illegal money have been confiscated according to 
stipulations, and 88,000 yuan have been taken over from 10 units 
that organized overseas tours. 
  With regard to this year's anticorruption work, Yang Yuzhong 
pointed out: Although Hebei Province has achieved marked 
results in the recent anticorruption work, it still lags far 
behind the goal set by the CPC Central Committee and the State 
Council for the present stage and behind the expectations of the 
masses. When viewed from the efficiency of work, the 
anticorruption work has been uneven in different localities and 
different departments; some problems concerning leading cadres' 
administrative honesty and self-discipline, that have aroused 
much comments among the masses, such as party and government 
organizations vying with one another in purchasing luxurious 
cars, indulging in extravagant wining and dining with public 
funds, and holding extravagant weddings and funerals, need to be 
resolved conscientiously; some anticorruption measures have not 
been carried out truly and practically; and some achievements 
are not remarkable. 
  This year, in line with the three tasks set forth by the 
party Central Committee and the State Council and with the 
guiding ideology of achieving results at the present stage, we 
should continue to grasp the anticorruption campaign, further 
resolve various kinds of negative and corrupt phenomena, ensure 
the political and social stability, and promote the province's 
reform, opening up, and economic development. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1759 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  27 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hebei Province Suffering From Severe Drought </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Hebei Province Suffering From Severe Drought </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW2703022694 Beijing XINHUA in English 0129 GMT 27 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW2703022694 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Shijiazhuang, March 27 (XINHUA) -- North China's 
Hebei Province has been hit by the worst drought since the 
1980s, an official from the provincial water conservancy 
department said here today. 
  Li Zhiqiang, director of the department, said the severe 
drought since last December has threatened 1.53 million ha of 
wheat fields and made spring seeding difficult for 2.53 million 
ha of farmland. 
  And the situation is worsening, Li said. 
  The director said there have been only two poor drizzles 
over 
the past three months, dropping a scant three to four mm of rain. 
  In 1993, the province received 474 mm in precipitation, 
which 
is 12 percent less than in normal years, the director said. 
  According to Li, the province's big reservoirs now contain 
1.2 million cubic m of water, of which only half is actually 
available, while small reservoirs in the western area had dried 
up even before winter came. 
  Even Baiyangdian, the biggest lake in North China, is now 
only 45 cm away from totally drying up, as it was before 1988, 
the director said. 
  The director noted that the sustained drought has had a 
critical impact on the supply of underground water. 
  He said the water table in northern and central Hebei has 
dropped one m from that of the same period last year. In a few 
places, it has dropped more than three m [meters]. 
  Li said water shortage has always been a great adverse 
factor 
in economic development of the province. Some industrial 
projects have been made impossible, rich resources can not be 
developed, and the biological environment is worsening. 
  Li said seven million people in the province are drinking 
high-fluorine water and two million people are suffering from 
fluorine poisoning. 600,000 people in the mountainous western 
area face water shortages. 
  Li said the central and provincial governments are taking 
emergency measures to fight against the drought, which has 
caused more outcries for the diversion of Chang Jiang River 
water to North China. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1760 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  23 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hebei Seeks To Protect Lake From Pollution </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Hebei Seeks To Protect Lake From Pollution </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW2303143694 Beijing XINHUA in English 1411 GMT 23 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW2303143694 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Shijiazhuang, March 23 (XINHUA) -- Baiyangdian, the 
biggest inland lake in north China, will shine brighter as the 
local government has stepped up its effort to protect the `Pearl 
of North China' from pollution. 
  Oxygen-consuming waste water discharged into the lake has 
dropped by some 40 percent in the past year, according to 
environmental protection officials from Baoding city, a dozen km 
from the lake in Hebei Province. 
  A working group set up in 1992 and headed by the mayor of 
the 
city is now responsible for controlling the flow of pollutants 
into the lake. 
  A sewage treatment plant that can use coal dust from a 
thermal power plant to recycle 50,000 tons of waste water 
discharged by a paper mill has recently been put into operation 
by the lakeside. The five-million-yuan plant is a model project 
supervised by the State Environmental Protection Agency. 
  Another two waste water treatment plants financed by the 
central and local governments and through a Finnish Government 
loan are now under construction. Each will be able to treat 
80,000 tons of waste water a day. 
  In 1992, a paper mill and a chemical plant were closed down 
by the city government to reduce waste discharges into the lake. 
  Since 1990, factories in the area have had to pass 
environmental assessments by the government before being allowed 
to discharge waste into the lake. So far 45 factories have been 
licensed, according to the officials. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1761 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Inner Mongolia Secretary Visits Hohhot City </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Inner Mongolia Secretary Visits Hohhot City </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   SK1603115294 Hohhot NEIMENGGU RIBAO in Chinese 4 Mar 94 pp 
1, 4 </F>

<F P=103> SK1603115294 </F>
<F P=104>  Hohhot NEIMENGGU RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Reporter An Tiejun (1344 6993 6511) and Correspondent </F>
Zhong He (6988 7729): "To Accelerate Reform, We Should Rely on 
the Brave Practice of the Masses"] 
  [Text] To accelerate reform of the economic structure, 
leaders at all levels should further emancipate their minds, 
trust and rely on the masses, and have the courage to practice 
and advance. This is the key to whether reform can be deepened 
and whether it can succeed. The above-mentioned opinion was 
given by Comrade Wang Qun during his investigation and study 
activities in Hohhot city. 
  Wang Qun, secretary of the autonomous regional party 
committee and chairman of the regional people's congress 
standing committee, and Zhou Weide, vice chairman of the 
autonomous region, led the responsible comrades of relevant 
departments and committees to conduct investigation and study in 
Hohhot city on the morning of 3 March. After hearing reports by 
the city leading comrades on Hohhot's implementation of the "10 
billion yuan project" and transformation of the enterprise 
operating mechanism, Comrade Wang Qun said happily: After 
putting forward the target of increasing the industrial output 
value to 10 billion yuan this year, Hohhot city has done a great 
amount of painstaking and meticulous work. Its development rate 
exceeded 47 percent in January and February this year, which 
marked a good beginning. This was an extraordinary high-speed 
development, which has laid a good foundation for accomplishing 
the "10 billion yuan project" this year. This achievement was 
attributed to the efforts of the Hohhot city party committee and 
government to implement the guidelines of the third plenary 
session of the 14th party congress and to seize the opportunity 
to carry out reform and opening up. Hohhot's experiences have 
given us many enlightenments, of which the most prominent one is 
to emancipate the mind, rely on the masses, and have the courage 
in practice. He pointed out: Inner Mongolia has a weak 
foundation and low base figure for economic development, but it 
has great potential. In line with this reality, it not only 
should but also can accelerate economic development. The key 
lies in the degree of our emancipation of the mind. With ideas 
unchanged, and the mind not emancipated, we will have difficulty 
in finding the method and the way out. 
  Speaking on how to deepen reform, Comrade Wang Qun 
emphasized: The current nationwide and regionwide climate for 
reform is very good, and we should not miss this opportunity. 
Leading organs and leading bodies at all levels should take the 
lead in reform, have the courage in practice, and exert earnest 
efforts to carry out practical work. This year will be one when 
the largest number of reform policies will be implemented. Our 
reform has entered the new stage for promoting package reform 
while making breakthroughs in key areas. The opportunity is 
very good, and the situation is spurring us on. Leaders at all 
levels should have a clear understanding of the situation and 
have the awareness of opportunity and sense of urgency. Party 
and government leaders should take the lead in conducting 
investigation and study, conscientiously organize personnel to 
give specific guidance to enterprises one by one, and be 
determined to address all the knotty problems we encounter in 
reform. As has been proven in practice, the mindset of party 
and government leaders is very important to the promotion of 
reform. 
  Comrade Wang Qun said: Reform is a revolution and the 
cause of the masses, not the behavior of a few people. Without 
the full understanding and active participation of the masses, 
reform will have difficulty to go on. In conducting reform, 
therefore, we should always adhere to the mass line and trust 
and rely on the masses in doing everything. We should have the 
ability to look for ideas and methods and gain courage and 
confidence from the masses. Propaganda and education should be 
conducted successfully on the issues which the masses do not 
understand. We should fully develop the spirit of staff members 
and workers as masters and boost their enthusiasm and initiative 
in participating in reform. We should also show concern for the 
masses and help them resolve some specific difficulties to rid 
them of their misgivings. With the understanding, 
participation, and support of the masses, we will be able to 
surmount all difficulties. 
  Comrade Wang Qun emphasized: As the major principles for 
reform have been defined and the road of reform has become 
increasingly clearer, the key is to proceed from reality and 
have the courage in practice. We should bravely conduct 
experiment, blaze new trails, and carry out work. With a 
wait-and-see attitude and hesitation, we will miss the 
opportunity. Leaders at all levels should face up to 
difficulties and have the courage to hold responsibility, to 
make decisions, and to experiment with the work that can help 
promote productive forces. Only in this way, can they gain more 
initiative. 
  Comrade Wang Qun pointed out: We have encountered some 
difficulties and problems in the current process of deepening 
reform. How to treat and understand these problems is an 
extremely important matter to cadres and the masses. The 
correct attitude toward the problems is to despise them 
strategically and to take them seriously tactically. We should 
first note that the difficulties and problems are temporary ones 
emerging in the process of advancement, which can be resolved. 
In the process of addressing them, however, we should be 
prudent. We should conduct in-depth and meticulous 
investigation and study on all problems, such as those on 
historical burdens, distribution, benefits to retired personnel, 
and placement of redundant personnel, and solve them one by one. 
If we fail to address specific problems, the enthusiasm of the 
masses, the progress of reform, and even the overall situation 
of an enterprise or a locality, will be affected. 
  Comrade Wang Qun pointed out: In the current process of 
deepening reform, we should closely coordinate reform with the 
endeavors of opening up, imports, and cooperation and the 
current production. Based on their specific conditions, all 
localities should formulate a package of policies compatible 
with their specific local conditions and the needs of the market 
economy system and lead the reform to develop continuously 
through the policies. The "three advantages" should be the 
criterion for formulating the policies. According to our 
practice, importing and transplanting enterprises with the funds 
and technology from abroad, cooperation, and merge are very 
effective methods. They yield quick results and are very 
applicable to the area like Inner Mongolia. All localities 
should actively popularize this experience to accelerate the 
process of deepening reform. 
  In conclusion, Comrade Wang Qun also gave opinions on the 
current shortages of funds. 
  Zhou Weide, vice chairman of the autonomous region, also 
delivered a speech. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1762 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  19 Feb 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Inner Mongolia Agricultural Conference Held </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Inner Mongolia Agricultural Conference Held </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   SK1103123294 Hohhot NEIMENGGU RIBAO in Chinese 19 Feb 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> SK1103123294 </F>
<F P=104>  Hohhot NEIMENGGU RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Chen Yongping (7115 3057 1627) and Liu Hongxing </F>
(0491 4767 2502): "Work Hard To Win Six Battles, and Strive for 
a Comprehensive Bumper Harvest"] 
  [Text] Spring has come early this year! Amid the wave of 
spring, the regional agricultural and animal husbandry work 
conference ceremoniously opened in Hohhot on the morning of 18 
February. 
  Attending the conference were heads and secretaries general 
in charge of agricultural and animal husbandry work of various 
leagues and cities; responsible persons of pertinent 
departments; and responsible comrades of various agricultural 
departments and bureaus as well as pertinent commissions, 
offices, departments, and bureaus, more than 300 persons in all. 
  Bai Enpei, deputy secretary of the regional party committee, 
presided over the conference. Zhang Tingwu, vice chairman of 
the region, made a report entitled "Press Package Reform 
Forward, Make Breakthroughs in Major Aspects, and Create a New 
Situation in Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, and the Economic 
Work of Rural and Pastoral Areas." 
  In his report, Zhang Tingwu said: This year, major tasks for 
economic development of the region's rural and pastoral areas 
are: to reach 21 billion yuan in total output value of 
agriculture and animal husbandry; to ensure gross grain output 
at 10 billion kg, or reach 11.5 billion kg; to ensure total 
number of animals at 56.5 million head, or reach 57 million 
head, of which, the number of pigs should reach 10 million head; 
to ensure afforested land at 5 million mu, or reach 5.5 million 
mu; to ensure total output value of township and town 
enterprises at 28 billion yuan, or reach 30 billion yuan; and to 
make the per capita net income of peasants and herdsmen 100 yuan 
more than last year's figure of 829 yuan. 
  Zhang Tingwu said: This year, the region's agricultural and 
animal husbandry fronts should concentrate efforts on winning 
the following six tough battles: 
  The tough battle of deepening reform: On the basis of 
stabilizing the household output-related contract responsibility 
system and perfecting the double-tier management system, this 
year we should lay emphasis on building the collectivized 
service system by building, as quickly as possible, a 
multi-tier, multi-form, multi-composition, and multi-function 
service network, with the village and gacha cooperative economic 
organizations as the foundation; with township, town, and sumu 
service organizations as the link, with leading enterprises 
(corporations) of banners, counties, townships, towns, and sumus 
as the core, and with the service organizations run by peasants 
and herdsmen individually or jointly as the supplement. 
Construction of markets in rural and pastoral areas should be 
accelerated. Through the government efforts in cultivating 
markets, we should make markets guide production, orient 
production to market demands, promote the development of the 
socialist market economy, and link the scattered small-scale 
production with the collectivized large market. 
  The tough battle of capital construction: This year, the 
region plans to newly add 1.25 million mu of irrigated areas, 
newly add 6,000 small enclosed pastures around water pools, 
build 20 million mu of grassland, and build 5 million mu of land 
whose water is conserved. We should energetically build capital 
construction of farmland, grassland, and pastoral land, with 
water conservation facilities as the central link, and further 
enhance the comprehensive agricultural and animal husbandry 
production capacity. Basic agricultural and animal husbandry 
projects should be managed, built, and developed in a 
comprehensive manner by using as reference the experiences 
gained from the construction and management of industrial 
projects. This year is the last year of the second-stage 
comprehensive agricultural development of the region. We must 
complete the building of development projects in good quality in 
order to ensure that the region's comprehensive agricultural 
development will be carried on stage by stage and to constantly 
win more projects and more investment from the state. 
  The tough battle of optimizing structure: We should grasp 
the readjustment of the internal structures of agriculture, 
animal husbandry, and forestry; the readjustment of the internal 
structure of general agriculture, and the readjustment of the 
production structure of all rural and pastoral areas. The 
readjustment should be focused on combining agriculture with 
animal husbandry, drawing animal husbandry into agriculture, 
drawing grass-growing into animal husbandry, and effecting a 
simultaneous development of agriculture, animal husbandry, and 
grass-growing by using advantages to make up each other's 
deficiencies. This year, the region should grow 8 million mu of 
grass, sow 1 million mu of forage grass by plane, grow 3 million 
mu of forage crops, and produce 2 billion kg of silage. This 
year, the region should raise a total of 15 million pigs, make 
each peasant or herdsman share one pig on an average, and make 
the pigs in stock reach 10 million head. The region should breed 
200,000 beef cattle and 4 million mutton sheep, of which, 2 
million should be lambs. The success in these aspects will 
contribute to promoting overall development. 
  The tough battle of township and town enterprises: Efforts 
should be made to push reform to a new height, expand the scale 
of operation, improve the grade of products, and enhance the 
level of management. This year, we should comprehensively 
popularize the shareholding system and the shareholing 
cooperative system and vigorously develop the nonpublicly owned 
economy. We should make great efforts to expand the scale of 
township and town enterprise groups and to develop the products 
that are high in starting point, apply high science and 
technology, have high added value, and earn lots of foreign 
exchange. By strengthening management, we should effect a 
marked improvement in all targets of enterprise efficiency. This 
year, we should launch across the region the emulation drive of 
vying with one another in becoming "100 million-yuan townships 
and towns," "10 million-yuan villages," and "5 million-yuan 
enterprises" and should choose, through appraisal, and commend 
the banners, counties, townships, towns, and enterprises 
outstanding in developing township and town enterprises. 
  The tough battle of scientific and technological progress: 
In 
agriculture, we should implement across the region the project 
of organizing 10,000 agriculture-oriented scientific and 
technological cadres and technicians who are peasants or 
herdsmen, establish 100 centers experimenting with and 
demonstrating the high-yielding, high-quality, and 
high-efficient agriculture, give scientific and technological 
training to 2 million people, and apply applicable and 
output-increasing technologies on 20 million mu of fields sown 
with major crops. In animal husbandry, we should improve the 
breed of 13 million draft and small animals. In forestry, we 
should expand the biological economic sphere and the ecological 
economic sphere and popularize the technology of growing grain 
and cash crops in forests. In water conservation, we should 
emphatically apply the water-saving irrigation technology. We 
should adopt the form of "four fixed targets and three linkings" 
to mobilize the enthusiasm of scientific and technological 
personnel. The plan of "green certificates" should be carried 
out throughout the region. 
  The tough battle of supporting the poor by resolving most 
difficult problems: As of 1992, 600,000 households and 3 million 
people in the region were still in a poor state. This year is 
the first year of the state implementation of the "eighth 
seven-year" plan for supporting the poor by resolving the most 
difficult problems. The region as a whole should emphatically 
support 150,000 poor households, of which, 100,000 households 
should have enough food and clothes. We should persist in the 
principle of supporting the poor by developing production and 
managing the poor in a comprehensive way. We should define the 
major battlefield of the support of the poor. State support 
should be extended to counties and the region's support should 
be extended to sumus. We should be determined to change the 
outlook of the poor through the methods of designating the areas 
that receive support, supporting the poor by initiating 
projects, supporting the poor through scientific and 
technological means, organizing economic coordination in poor 
areas, transferring cadres to poor areas, and making rich areas 
help the poor. Zhang Tingwu stressed: The key to winning the 
above-mentioned six battles lies in further strengthening 
leadership, changing the style of work, and grasping 
implementation. The current conference is precisely a 
mobilization to grasp and promote implementation. He called on 
leaders at all levels to consciously put agriculture and animal 
husbandry in the most important position of economic work, 
concentrate their major energy on "giving guidance, support, 
protection, and control," actually carry out the policy of 
protecting agriculture, and strive to yield results by changing 
government functions and improving the art of leadership. 
  In conclusion, Zhang Tingwu called on all localities to 
launch the emulation drive of "vying with one another in 
pioneering undertakings" and to emulate with each other in doing 
practical work, scoring achievements, and yielding practical 
results in order to reap new bumper harvests in agriculture and 
animal husbandry in 1994 and create a new situation in 
agriculture, animal husbandry, and the economic work of rural 
and pastoral areas. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1763 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Inner Mongolia Elects Chairman of Democratic League </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Inner Mongolia Elects Chairman of Democratic League </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   SK1103131194 Hohhot NEIMENGGU RIBAO in Chinese 2 Mar 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> SK1103131194 </F>
<F P=104>  Hohhot NEIMENGGU RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The third Inner Mongolia autonomous regional 
committee of China Democratic League held its third plenum on 27 
February. 
  During the plenum, the participating members summarized the 
work done by the regional league committee in 1993. It was 
contended at the plenum that over the past year the regional 
league committee had suggested ways and means for the region's 
program of two civilizations in line with the spirit of a series 
of decisions and directives issued by the CPC Central Committee 
and the Central Committee of China Democratic League and by 
bearing the region's reality in its mind and actively 
participating in and discussing the political affairs. Various 
organizations under the regional league committee have 
extensively carried out investigation and study. The 53 motions 
raised by the league-member deputies of the regional people's 
congress and the league-member members of the regional Chinese 
People's Political Consultative Conference committee has drawn 
the great attention of relevant departments. Most of these 
motions have been accepted. Members of the regional league 
committee have actively joined in the discussion on formulating 
the economic development plan for the golden triangle formed by 
Hohhot, Baotou, and Ih Ju League. They have also submitted 
several papers on feasible measures for the plan. The regional 
league committee also dispatched its personnel to join in the 
supervisory group for the struggle against corruption, who went 
to leagues and cities to inspect the struggle progress and 
played a role of conducting supervision and participating in or 
discussing the political affairs. In addition, the regional 
league committee has actively rendered social services by 
regarding the economic construction as a center and scored 
certain achievements in the fields of science and technology, 
education, trade exchanges, fund introduction, and business 
invitation. 
  At the third plenum of the third regional league committee, 
the participating members elected Xu Bonian [6079 2672 1628] 
chairman of the committee. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1764 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Inner Mongolia's Erenhot Cracks Down on Crime </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Inner Mongolia's Erenhot Cracks Down on Crime </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   SK1103111694 Hohhot NEIMENGGU RIBAO in Chinese 1 Mar 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> SK1103111694 </F>
<F P=104>  Hohhot NEIMENGGU RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Three arch criminals, Dong Silin, Pang Jingang, and 
Zhang Yan, who had absconded for six months and been listed as 
wanted by the public security organs of Erenhot city because 
they had long harassed the public security of the city, 
surrendered themselves to the public security organs on 15 
February due to being awed by the power of the campaign of 
dealing strict blows at crimes. 
  In the second half of 1993 the social order of Erenhot, a 
border city opening to the outside world, was once relatively 
chaotic because some local ruffians and unlawful elements had 
formed an evil force through collusion. They seriously 
disturbed the city's public security by stealing openly, 
stealing covertly, engaging in fighting, and dominating the 
markets through cheating. They were bitterly hated by the 
masses. The three criminals are the members of the noted 
criminal ring of gangsters in the city. Since August 1993, the 
public security bureau of Erenhot city has concentrated its 
efforts on dealing blows at "border bandits and trade despots" 
and a large number of serious criminal elements, who have long 
committed robbery and looting, have been successively arrested. 
During the activities of "concentrating efforts on dealing blows 
at crimes," the city's public security bureau has cracked down 
on 89 criminal cases of various categories and investigated or 
handled 259 cases of violation of the public security law. It 
has effectively held back the rising trend of criminal cases by 
dealing blows at crimes and having handled the cases involving 
570 criminal elements. Thus, the public security and social 
order of Erenhot have obviously achieved a turn for the better. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1765 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  26 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Power Company Goes Public in Inner Mongolia </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Power Company Goes Public in Inner Mongolia </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW2603164294 Beijing XINHUA in English 1459 GMT 26 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW2603164294 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Hohhot, March 26 (XINHUA) -- A thermal power 
company in northern China's Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region 
went public today. 
  This is the first company in the region to issue stocks to 
the public. 
  The company will sell 50 million shares, underwritten by the 
Shanghai International Securities Company. 
  With an installed capacity of 425,000 kilowatts, the thermal 
power plant generated 2.773 billion kilowatt-hours of 
electricity last year. 
  The power plant became a joint stock company last September 
with the approval of the State Securities Supervision and 
Administrative Committee. The company was jointly launched by 
the Inner Mongolia Electric Power Corporation, the Huaneng 
Energy Company and the Inner Mongolia Branch of the Huaneng 
Company. 
  Inner Mongolia boasts known reserves of coal topping 210 
billion tons. Power and other forms of energy are the key 
industries of the autonomous region. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1766 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hohhot City Telephone System `Totally Digitalized' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Hohhot City Telephone System `Totally Digitalized' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0304065394 Beijing XINHUA in English 0621 GMT 3 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0304065394 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Hohhot, April 3 (XINHUA) -- The telephone system of 
Hohhot City has been totally digitalized, with 20,000 
program-controlled telephone lines newly added to the network, 
official sources here said. 
  The sources said this has increased the total lines of the 
city to 50,000, a great relief of the former shortage of lines 
in the capital of northern China's Inner Mongolia Autonomous 
Region. 
  The city has been investing heavily in upgrading and 
expanding its telecommunications system in recent years to cope 
with the ever-increasing demands upon the telephone network 
accompanying rapid economic growth. 
  The city now has 13 telephone lines for every 100 citizens, 
which ranks eighth among the Chinese provincial capitals, 
according to the sources. 
  The city now provides direct calls to 1,600 Chinese cities 
and over 800 overseas cities. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1767 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94020" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  28 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   New Oil Field Discovered in Inner Mongolia </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    New Oil Field Discovered in Inner Mongolia </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   SK2903133594 Hohhot Inner Mongolia People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 1100 GMT 28 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> SK2903133594 </F>
<F P=104>  Hohhot Inner Mongolia People's Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Mandarin </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] The first carload of crude oil produced by the 
(Changcheng) Oil Field in Horqin Left Wing Rear Banner was 
officially shipped to outside the region recently. This marked 
a significant breakthrough in the oil prospecting in the Horqin 
Grassland. 
  Horqin Left Wing Rear Banner, an important resource deposit 
in the periphery of Liaohe Oil Field, is located in the 
(Zhangqiang) caved-in area in Zhangwu County of Liaoning 
Province. Crude oil was first discovered in (Zhandu) sumu of 
this banner in 1992. Among the five oil wells already drilled, 
four were found to have oil flow or (?oil layers). The first 
well put into trial production, the Bai No. 4 Well, produced 24 
cubic meters of crude oil a day. Not long ago, the Liaohe Oil 
Prospecting Bureau officially named the oil field discovered in 
Horqin Left Wing Rear Banner as the (Changcheng) Oil Field. 
Further prospecting work is being carried out in 20 sumu, 
towns, and townships of the banner. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1768 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94021" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Feb 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Inner Mongolia Holds Spring Festival Party </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Inner Mongolia Holds Spring Festival Party </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   SK0203042394 Hohhot NEIMENGGU RIBAO in Chinese 5 Feb 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> SK0203042394 </F>
<F P=104>  Hohhot NEIMENGGU RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Gao Ping (7559 1627): "The Regional Party </F>
Committee Holds a Tea Party of Nonparty Personages To Greet the 
Spring Festival"] 
  [Text] On 4 February, leaders of the regional party 
committee and government and various democratic party and 
nonparty personages gathered under the same roof to greet the 
Spring Festival with a cup of tea, to talk freely about the 
region's major achievements in reform and opening up, and to 
jointly discuss major plans for future economic development. 
  Wang Qun, Wu Liji, Qian Fenyong, and Wuyunqimuge attended 
the 
tea party. 
  On behalf of the regional party committee, the regional 
people's congress, and the regional government, Comrade Wang Qun 
first extended greetings and thanks to various democratic party 
and nonparty personages who contributed to the development of 
various undertakings in the region during the past year. Wang 
Qun said: During the past year, with the concerted efforts and 
hard work of all people, comprehensive progress was made in the 
region's social and economic development, the people's living 
standards improved, and the people of various nationalities 
lived a secure and happy life. All these helped to lay a 
foundation for a sustained, rapid, and sound future economic 
development in the region and to usher in a crucial year for 
expanding the reform strength and accelerating economic 
development. 
  Wang Qun said: During the crucial year of reform and 
development, party and government departments at all levels and 
all trades and professions should make their work serve the 
overall situation of "seizing the opportunity, deepening reform, 
expanding opening up, promoting development, and maintaining 
stability." We should soberly and objectively understand the 
problems emerged in the process of development, advance despite 
of difficulties, work hard to make the region strong, accelerate 
the building of the socialist market economic structure, 
properly handle the relations of reform, development, and 
stability, expand the reform strength, carry out a package 
reform with breakthroughs in key areas, and promote a sustained, 
rapid, and sound economic development in the autonomous region. 
  In referring to the major work tasks of the region during 
this year, Wang Qun pointed out: This year Inner Mongolia must 
break through "five barriers" in its reform and achieve 
breakthrough progress in five aspects. First, we must make a 
new breakthrough in deepening reform in the rural and pastoral 
areas and establish and improve the socialized comprehensive 
service system in the rural and pastoral areas. It is essential 
to orient the rural economy to the market economic structure, 
effect a transition from small-scale farming by many individual 
owners into large-scale farming and the market economy, and 
establish and develop various service systems that link with the 
peasant households, enterprises, and the market. Cadres at all 
levels should create conditions for peasants and herdsmen to 
march toward the market in line with market demands and actively 
guide and organize them enter the market. It is necessary to 
clearly define Inner Mongolia's advantages in developing 
agriculture and animal husbandry, and invigorate its economic 
development with local resources. We should take the market as 
our guide, regard economic efficiency as the central task and 
increase in the income of peasants and herdsmen as the 
objective, integrate foreign trade with industry and agriculture 
(animal husbandry) and crop cultivation with aquaculture and the 
processing industry, actively readjust the production set-up, 
develop "high-yield, fine-quality, and highly efficient" farming 
and animal husbandry, give play to the advantages of scale, and 
achieve a secure place in the market. It is necessary to 
actively develop township enterprises, develop things that are 
beneficial to economic development, and give priority to 
developing the "dragon-type" economy" with the processing of 
farm products and animal by-products as the mainstay. 
  Second, we should achieve new breakthroughs in reforming 
the industrial, commercial, grain, and foreign trade 
enterprises. Inner Mongolia Region and various leagues and 
cities should attend to reform of large and medium-sized 
state-owned enterprises and of major profit and tax delivering 
households and concentrate energy on helping small, poor, and 
deficit-incuring enterprises change their operational mechanism. 
It is necessary to accelerate the reform strength and reform 
progress of enterprises by sustaining the advanced and helping 
the backward so as to encourage the vast majority to move along. 
The key to helping state-owned, large and medium-sized 
enterprises change operational mechanisms lies in strengthening 
leadership. All levels of party and government leaders as well 
as enterprise leaders should further enhance spirit, advance in 
a pioneering spirit, never delay their work or adopt an attitude 
of relying on help from the higher level, and seek development 
in the course of development. Third, we should make new 
breakthroughs in reform of the financial and taxation system. 
We must enhance understanding, seek unity in action, and attend 
to reform in line with the financial and taxation reform plans 
issued by the state. Reform of the financial and taxation 
system is aimed at increasing income and solving financial 
problems. Financial and tax departments should exert efforts to 
strengthen financial and tax workers and raise their overall 
quality in line with the demand of developing the socialist 
market economy, change the old practice of collecting taxes in 
the office, and collect all taxes that should be collected. Tax 
departments, in addition to collecting more taxes, should also 
pay attention to actively supporting economic development and 
cultivating more sources of taxation. Fourth, we should make 
new breakthroughs in reform of the banking, investment, and 
price systems. To implement the socialist market economy, we 
must study the financial issue and give play to the role of 
banking departments as a lever in economic development. While 
actively introducing foreign capital, we should also exert 
efforts to invigorate our existing funds. It is necessary to 
manage prices to guarantee market stability and pay special 
attention to managing the prices of daily necessities that are 
closely related to people's living. Fifth, we should make new 
breakthroughs in organizational reform. We should accelerate 
organizational reform to meet the demands of economic reform as 
quickly as possible. We should pay simultaneous attention to 
streamlining the upper layer, changing their functions, and 
replenishing the forefront, select cadres and workers from party 
and government organs, institutions, and units who are young and 
have a good knowledge of management and operation to the 
forefront of production and construction to help in work or to 
hold a post in an effort to promote economic development in all 
localities and to put human resources to best use. 
  Comrade Wu Liji also addressed the tea party. 
  Persons from various democratic parties and the Federation 
of 
Industry and Commerce, and nonparty personages offered positive 
and constructive ideas and suggestions for Inner Mongolia's 
social and economic development at the tea party. 
  Also attending the tea party were Cui Weilin, Zhang Zuocai, 
Wang Chongren, Chen Jie, Lan Qianfu, Chen Youzun, and Xu Bainian. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1769 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94022" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Shanxi Private Sector Experiences `Sharp Growth' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Shanxi Private Sector Experiences `Sharp Growth' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204153494 Beijing XINHUA in English 1507 GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0204153494 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Taiyuan, April 2 (XINHUA) -- North China's Shanxi 
Province is experiencing a sharp growth in its private sector. 
  Thanks to the reform and opening-up policies since 1978, 
private businesses have mushroomed in the province and have 
shown their strong muscles in the intense market competition. 
  Now the private firms are playing an ever-increasing role in 
the province's economic development. 
  By the end of 1993, the number of private firms added up to 
507,000, involving more than one million local residents. Most 
of them were farmers. 
  The total production output value in the private sector 
reached 8.16 billion yuan and the taxes they have paid accounted 
for 7.9 percent of the province's revenue. 
  As the private firms have extended to every industrial 
sector 
and other fields, such as industry, construction, transport, 
science and technology, commerce, real estate, education, 
culture and information services, the investment in this sector 
has also expanded. 
  A recent survey shows that the average registered funds of 
each private firm topped 7,614 yuan in 1993, with nearly 100 
firms whose total registered funds surpassed one million yuan 
each. 
  Many of the private firms have now become large enterprises 
or group companies. 
  The survey also shows that about 90 percent of the 
individuals and private firms that were set up last year were 
engaged in the service industry, a hefty 40 percent rise from 
1992. 
  In addition, 43 private companies have received foreign 
investment, and thereby became joint ventures. 
  The products produced by the private companies have also 
been 
sold to many foreign countries, such as the United States, 
Canada and the Republic of Korea. 
  So far, the gross commodity retail sale of the private 
sector 
is about one fourth of the province's total. 
  The rapid development of the private sector not only drives 
the province's economy to a new height, but also promotes its 
social progress. 
  Li Anmin, a private business owner in Jiexiu County in 
central Shanxi and also a member of the National Committee of 
the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, has in 
past few years donated 7.53 million yuan (866,000 U.S. dollars) 
to develop local education. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1770 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94023" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  26 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Shanxi Increases Coal Conversion Into Electricity </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Shanxi Increases Coal Conversion Into Electricity </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW2603075494 Beijing XINHUA in English 0713 GMT 26 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW2603075494 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Taiyuan, March 26 (XINHUA) -- China's largest 
coal-producing province, Shanxi, has been converting more of its 
coal into electricity as a measure to help combat coal 
transportation bottlenecks and acute energy shortages in other 
parts of the country. 
  In 1993 the northwest China province shipped more than 224 
million tons of coal, or 72 percent of its total output, to 26 
provinces, municipalities and autonomous regions as well as 12 
cities. 
  The amount of electricity that Shanxi transmitted last year 
to other parts of the country was some 10.785 billion kwh, or 
26.46 percent of its total electricity production. The figure 
was 10.33 percent more than in 1992. 
  Shanxi's coal output accounts for more than one fourth of 
the 
national total. It ships some 300 million tons of coal every 
year, about three-fourths of the national total transported out 
from coal-producing provinces and regions. 
  During an inspection tour to China's largest industrial city 
of Shanghai, Vice-Premier Zhu Rongji said that the city's 
economy to a large extent relies on coal resources from Shanxi. 
So do many other fast-developing but energy-short provinces and 
cities, the vice-premier added. 
  However, Shanxi itself suffers from the low state-set prices 
for coal and coal-related products, and it remains one of 
China's backwater regions. 
  As one of China's most important powerhouses, Shanxi has in 
recent years stepped up the pace of building more coal-based 
power plants, in a bid to tap its coal resources and better 
serve the country's economic boom. 
  Included in Shanxi's energy development blueprint is the 
construction and upgrading of some ten electrical plants, which 
will transmit electricity to neighboring provinces and regions 
as far as east China's Jiangsu Province and the country's most 
dynamic province, Guangdong in the south. 
  Under the plan, Shanxi will be capable of generating some 
100 
billion kwh a year by the end of this decade. The amount of 
electricity it sends out will also jump from the present 10 
billion kwh to 43 billion kwh annually by then. 
  Experts said transmitting electricity instead of coal to the 
outside has considerably reduced the burden on railway 
transportation and has turned low-quality coal and coal 
byproducts into high-value-added electricity. 
  Shanxi's endeavors to turn coal into electricity have caught 
the attention of the country's energy-importing regions and has 
gained support from them. 
  Consumers of Shanxi coal and electricity, such as Beijing 
and 
Tianjin municipalities, and Hebei, Shandong, Jiangsu and 
Guangdong Provinces, have funded Shanxi's fledgling power plants. 
  Meanwhile, companies from 13 countries and regions, 
including 
the United States, Germany, Britain, the Republic of Korea, 
Singapore, Hong Kong and Taiwan, have signed with Shanxi 15 
investment contracts and letters of intent for co-operation. 
  One of the big joint ventures is the Hepo electrical power 
plant, a co-operative project between Shanxi and two U.S. 
companies, involving more than 110 million U.S. dollars in total 
investment. 
  Last year Shanxi pumped more than 1.94 billion U.S. dollars 
into its power industry, a move that has helped raise its total 
installed electricity generating capacity to 8.4 million kw. 
  Currently the construction of a group of electrical power 
plants is well under way, and a power-transmission network is 
also taking shape in Shanxi. 
  Officials said that another 6.1 million kw of installed 
generating capacity is expected to be added to the province's 
power network, making the electricity industry the 
second-largest mainstay industry in Shanxi after coal. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1771 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_r_94024" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Region </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tianjin People's Congress Session Ends 7 Mar </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Tianjin People's Congress Session Ends 7 Mar </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   SK0803053794 Tianjin People's Radio in Mandarin 2300 GMT 7 
Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> SK0803053794 </F>
<F P=104>  Tianjin People's Radio </F>
<F P=105>  Mandarin </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] After successfully fulfilling all items on the 
agenda, the Second Session of the 12th Tianjin Municipal 
People's Congress triumphantly ended at Tianjin Auditorium on 
the morning on 7 March. The closing ceremony was presided over 
by Executive Chairman Nie Bichu. Serving as executive chairmen 
of the congress session held on 7 March were Gao Dezhan, Li 
Jianguo, Nie Bichu, Lu Xuezheng, Zhu Wenju, Wang Chenghuai, Qian 
Qiao, Huang Qixing, Chen Rongti, Liu Wenfan, Zhang Yuhuan 
(female), Su Baocong, and Liu Huigen. Municipal leaders, 
including Zhang Lichang and Li Shenglin, and executive members 
of the congress presidium were seated on the rostrum. 
  Voting by a show of the hands, the congress session adopted 
the resolution of the Second Session of the 12th Tianjin 
Municipal People's Congress on the work report of the provincial 
government; the resolution on the fulfillment of Tianjin 
Municipality's 1993 economic and social development plan and on 
the 1994 economic and social development plan; the resolution on 
the fulfillment of Tianjin Municipality's 1993 financial budget 
and on the 1994 financial budget; the resolution on the work 
report of the Tianjin Municipal People's Congress Standing 
Committee; the resolution on the work report of the Tianjin 
Municipal Higher People's Court; and the resolution on the work 
report of the Tianjin Municipal People's Procuratorate. 
  The participants at the congress session believed that last 
year, the municipal people's government closely relied on the 
people across the municipality under the leadership of the party 
Central Committee, the State Council, and the Tianjin Municipal 
party committee, worked in unity, exerted positive efforts to 
make progress, and fulfilled the annual plans put forward by the 
first session of the 12th municipal people's congress, and 
achieved new progress in reform, opening up, and economic 
development, and in all other undertakings. The congress 
session was satisfied with the work of the municipal people's 
government during the past year. 
  The session pointed out: The year of 1994 is important to 
continuously maintaining a good national economic development 
trend, and is crucial to promoting reform and opening up. We 
should conscientiously follow the party Central Committee's 
basic principles for the work of the entire party and the whole 
country this year, submit ourselves to and serve the overall 
situation of seizing the opportunity, deepening reform, 
expanding opening up, promoting development, and maintaining 
stability, and earnestly implement all tasks proposed by the 
second enlarged plenary session of the sixth municipal party 
committee. All localities and departments, and all trades and 
professions should cultivate a high sense of urgency and 
responsibility, work hard, advance in a pioneering spirit, meet 
high standards, attain the goal of achieving high efficiency, 
good quality, and high economic returns, strive to make the 
major economic targets better than those of last year, and make 
new progress in all fields of work. 
  The session called on people across the municipality to take 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics and the party's basic line as the 
guidance, rally closely around the party Central Committee with 
Comrade Jiang Zemin as the nucleus, unite as one under the 
leadership of the party Central Committee, the State Council, 
and the Tianjin Municipal party committee, enhance spirit, 
advance in a pioneering spirit, work hard, and strive to win a 
victory in Tianjin Municipality's reform, opening up, and 
modernization undertakings in 1994. 
  The congress session came to a successful end with the 
playing of the majestic national anthem. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1772 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_n_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   Li Peng Promulgates Medical Institutions Managing Rules </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Li Peng Promulgates Medical Institutions Managing Rules </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204095094 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 0634 
GMT 4 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0204095094 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 4 Mar (XINHUA) -- Decree No. 149 of the 
People's Republic of China State Council: 
  The "Regulations for Managing Medical Institutions" is 
hereby 
promulgated for enforcement beginning on 1 September 1994. 
  [Signed] Premier Li Peng 
  [Dated] 26 February 1994 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1773 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_n_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   New Foreign Exchange System Taking Shape </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    New Foreign Exchange System Taking Shape </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104150194 Beijing XINHUA in English 1440 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104150194 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 1 (XINHUA) -- From today on, the 
exchange rate of Chinese yuan against U.S. dollar will be based 
on an inter- bank foreign exchange trading, which is carried out 
on the Shanghai Foreign Exchange swap market, now the country's 
leading market of such kind. 
  The closing price of the previous day will be used by the 
central bank as the basis of the inter-mediate price of the RMB 
[renminbi] against major foreign currencies. 
  This was announced today by the People's Bank of China, the 
central bank, which also indicated an official introduction of 
market force into foreign exchange trading. 
  The intermediate prices, or the basic rates, are used by 
banks and non-banking financial institutions to buy or sell 
foreign exchanges, but with a maximum floating range of 2.5 per 
thousand, a bank official said. 
  Today's basic rate for U.S. dollar was 8.6987 yuan. 
  The new system stresses the banks' role as they are now the 
major supplier of foreign currencies. 
  According to well-informed sources, more than 50 banks and 
financial institutions have gained the membership of the new 
center, a dozen of them are foreign banks. 
  But as foreign banks are barred from local currency 
business, 
they can only sell foreign currencies to their fellow members 
within the swap center. 
  The central bank allows them to exchange foreign currencies 
to some renminbi yuan as their circulation funds, but the total 
amount exchanged within a day cannot exceed 5 percent of their 
capital. 
  While the inter-bank market is taking shape, foreign 
exchange 
swap markets across the country are kept open, which is used 
exclusively by foreign funded companies. 
  "Unlike domestic companies, foreign-funded firms are not 
required to sell their foreign currency earnings to Chinese 
banks, therefore there is no point for the banks to meet their 
hard currency needs," said an official from the state 
administration of exchange control. 
  But he confirmed that the foreign exchange trading in the 
swap market also follow the central bank's basic rates, and 
hinted that the central bank will likely intervene in case of 
big exchange rates taken place. 
  Although some banks complain that the floating range is too 
narrow to reflect the actual market demand and supply, most of 
financial experts agree that the limitation is necessary, 
especially in the initial stage of the new exchange system. 
  The final goal of foreign exchange system reform is to make 
renminbi a freely convertible currency, experts said. But they 
added that the authorities will relax the control of the 
floating scope only when the new system takes roots and both 
banks and enterprises can afford the cost brought by bigger 
foreign exchange fluctuation. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1774 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_n_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   Government Approves Emergency Funds To Fight Drought </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Government Approves Emergency Funds To Fight Drought </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0204063094 Beijing CHINA DAILY in English 2 Apr 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> HK0204063094 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing CHINA DAILY </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Liang Chao: "Emergency Funds To Combat Drought"] </F>
  [Text] The central government yesterday approved a 28 
million yuan ($3.2 million) emergency fund to fight the severe 
drought devastating North China. 
  The money will go to cash-strapped local governments and 
farmers who cannot afford to pump water to their fields, said an 
official of the State Anti-Drought Office (SADO) who declined to 
be identified. 
  The drought has affected more than 17 provinces, regions and 
cities since last autumn and poses a major threat to spring and 
summer crops. 
  North China's major grain producing provinces will be 
particularly hard hit, said the official. 
  The severe drought threatens to destroy over 4 million 
hectares of wheat and made it difficult to sow 9 million 
hectares last month, SADO said. 
  Meanwhile, more than 6.8 million people and over 34 million 
heads of livestock are suffering from a severe shortage of 
drinking water. 
  Some rain is expected this month in North China, according 
the latest weather forecasts. 
  But it is too early to estimate its impact, the official 
said. 
  The affected crop land accounts for 4.5 percent of China's 
farmland, the official added. 
  But its impact on crops has been much greater. 
  Beijing and Tianjin and Hebei and Henan provinces have been 
plunged into the worst spell of dry weather. 
  Hebei Province has only received 3.8 millimeters of 
precipitation -- 68 percent less than in normal -- since last 
December. 
  And the soil moisture content there has dropped sharply due 
to dry and windy weather. Many plants are dying right after 
they sprout. 
  At least 30 percent of the province's wheat farms have been 
badly affected, SADO's statistics said. 
  The province's major reservoirs contain only 700 million 
cubic metres of water, while many small reservoirs in the area 
have dried up. 
  Ground water has even dropped three metres in some parts of 
the province. 
  Similar reports have come from Beijing, Tianjin, Henan, 
Shaanxi and Gansu. Barely any rain has fallen west of Qinghai 
Province. 
  To fight the drought, local authorities have renovated 
irrigation ditches and conserved water. 
  To date, they have brought badly needed water to more than 
3.2 million hectares of wheat farms. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1775 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_n_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   New Regulations To Simplify Port Inspections for Ships </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    New Regulations To Simplify Port Inspections for Ships </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0204063294 Beijing CHINA DAILY in English 2 Apr 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> HK0204063294 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing CHINA DAILY </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Xie Yicheng: "Simplified Port Checks Due For Ships"] </F>
  [Text] China is ready to reform its decades-old system of 
port inspections to bring procedures in line with international 
norms. 
  As proposed before the State Council, the new rules cancel 
the need for harbour officers to always conduct on-board 
inspections of ships entering and leaving Chinese ports. 
  Instead, the shipping companies or their agents can 
generally 
conduct the checks themselves and then report the results to the 
officials. 
  The checks affected by the new rules are for the harbour 
superintendency, customs, frontier checkpost and sanitary 
quarantine units. 
  The new procedures, called "clearance-upon-trust," are 
expected to take effect later this year if they get the nod from 
the State Council, said a source from the Ministry of 
Communications. 
  The ship inspections may be conducted within a specified 
period of time before or after the vessel pulls into a berth. 
The rule applies to both domestic and foreign ships. 
  The existing on-board checks have often delayed 
foreign-trade 
ships. As a result, many prefer to call at Hong Kong and ports 
of other countries. 
  According to the new rules, more flexible clearance checks 
are to be implemented for ships calling at frontier ports and 
shuttling within short routes. 
  The new system is also intended to establish more efficient 
ship inspections and to stress ship owners' awareness of Chinese 
laws. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1776 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_n_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  26 Feb 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tax Official on Enterprise Tax Deductions, Exemptions </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Tax Official on Enterprise Tax Deductions, Exemptions </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204162394 Beijing Central Television Program One Network 
in Mandarin 0530 GMT 26 Feb 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0204162394 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing Central Television Program One Network 
in Mandarin 0530 GMT 26 Feb 94 </F>

<F P=105> Mandarin </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Sixth of seven question-and-answer talks sponsored by the </F>
State Economic and Trade Commission (SETC) and the State General 
Administration of Taxation chaired by Wei Dong, deputy director 
of SETC Enterprises Department: "Answers to Questions Regarding 
Enterprises' Implementation of the New Tax System" -- recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [Wei] Today's talk is about enterprises' income 
taxes. This is one issue in which all enterprises are 
interested. Director Zhao [Zhao Huaitan, director of the State 
General Administration of Taxation Department of Income Taxes], 
would you please comment on the differences between the new and 
former systems on enterprises' consolidated taxes? 
  [Zhao] Generally speaking, the two systems are different in 
five respects. First, the new system has consolidated the tax 
rate at 33 percent, replacing the former three tax rates. 
Second, the new system has standardized the tax base. The tax 
law has standardized the pre-tax deductibles. [passage omitted] 
Third, under the new system, state enterprises do not have to 
pay regulatory taxes and the two types of funds, namely the fund 
for key energy and communications development projects and the 
fund for budgetary regulation. Fourth, after the tax base has 
been consolidated, a new system governing enterprises' loan 
repayment will be established. [passage omitted] While an 
enterprise may consider loan interests as a production cost 
after the new system has been instituted, it must use its 
disposable capital to pay the loan itself. Fifth, under the new 
system, state enterprises will no longer have to deliver 
contractual income taxes to the state. [passage omitted] 
  [Chen Shuqi, chief of the Beijing No. 4 Pharmaceutical 
Factory Financial Section] Director Zhao, according to the new 
tax law, which became effective on 1 January this year, the 
categories of deductible income taxes are different from those 
of the past. What are the major differences? 
  [Zhao] The new tax system is different from the Interim 
Regulations Governing Enterprises' Income Tax in the following 
areas: The first difference is about enterprises' loan 
interests. If an enterprise borrows money from a financial 
institution, the interest it pays to the institution is 
deductible; and if it borrows money from a nonbanking financial 
institution, the interest is deductible provided the interest 
rate does not exceed that for the same kind of loan borrowed 
from a banking institution during the same period. [passage 
omitted] Second, a worker may deduct his wages if the wages he 
receives from an enterprise does not exceed the standards set 
for taxable wages [ji shui gong zi]. [passage omitted] This 
measure is adopted to control the excessive growth of 
consumption funds when enterprises have yet to establish all 
their self-restraint mechanisms. [passage omitted] Third, the 
basic amounts of money that an enterprise retains for workers' 
welfare services, trade union budgets, and workers' education 
budgets should be calculated the same way as taxable wages. The 
fourth difference is about donations. [passage omitted] 
According to the new tax law, donations should be governed by 
several conditions. 1) They should be made through 
intermediaries, such as youth foundations, Hope Projects, [word 
indistinct] committees, and other nonprofit social and 
nongovernment groups. 2) They should be used for education, 
public welfare services, disaster- or poverty-stricken areas. 
3) As commonly practiced in foreign countries, there are limits 
for deductions. [passage omitted] 
  [Yun Qinghua, director of Beijing No. 1 General Machinery 
Plant] Director Zhao, enterprises are now very interested in tax 
deductions and exemptions. Before tax reform, enterprises could 
enjoy certain preferential treatment in terms of tax deductions 
and exemptions. What preferential measures will continue and 
what will be removed following the establishment of the new tax 
system? 
  [Zhao] Enterprises today enjoy too many tax deductions and 
exemptions and preferential tax treatment. [passage omitted] 
After enterprises' income taxes have been consolidated, the 
current tax deductions and exemptions have been screened. Most 
of the deductions and exemptions will be removed. This is 
because tax rates have been reduced under the new tax system. 
[passage omitted] But certain reasonable deductions and 
exemptions with a fairly great impact will be retained. After 
study, we consider continuing giving preferential tax treatment 
for high-tech enterprises in high-tech industrial development 
zones, newly established tertiary industries, school-operated 
enterprises, nongovernment welfare enterprises, enterprises 
providing employment services, enterprises engaged in 
controlling industrial wastes and protecting the environment, 
and enterprises in need of assistance after being hit hard by 
natural disasters. [passage omitted] 
  [Yun] Director Zhao, comrades of local economic commissions 
have asked whether local governments still can authorize tax 
deductions and exemptions after the new tax system has been 
implemented. 
  [Zhao] Enterprises' income tax is a tax that came into being 
through national legislation. This means that the same tax law 
and tax collection policy should be applied nationwide. After 
the system of separating central and local taxes has been 
established, income taxes paid by local enterprises are 
considered part of the local authorities' regular incomes, and 
local authorities can handle certain issues according to actual 
local situations with the authority prescribed in the tax law 
and other relevant regulations. Local authorities may not exceed 
the bounds of this authority and do what they want in deducting 
or exempting taxes. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1777 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_n_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   Official on Increment Value Indexes in Statistics </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Official on Increment Value Indexes in Statistics </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204163894 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 0456 
GMT 3 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0204163894 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Zhang Jinsheng (1728 6930 0524)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 3 Mar (XINHUA) -- After the State 
Statistical Bureau [SSB] recently published the statistics on 
economic and social development in 1993, many people have asked: 
Why does China use increment value indexes in its statistics 
instead of total output indexes? In connection with this 
question, this reporter today interviewed Qiu Xiaohua, an 
economist and SSB spokesman, and asked him to talk about related 
matters. 
  Qiu Xiaohua said: In general, internationally GNP [gross 
national product] or GDP [gross domestic product] is used to 
measure the index of a country's economic development. China 
began to use GNP and GDP as a transitional measure in 1985, 
hoping at the same time to preserve the indexes such as total 
industrial and agricultural output value, total social output 
value, and national income, which it used in the past. 
Beginning in 1992, the state abolished the total output value 
index in its statistical communique released for foreign 
consumption and retained only the GDP and other related indexes. 
GDP is the sum of the added value from various departments. 
  What are the defects of the total output value index which 
China used in the past? 
  Qiu Xiaohua said: Total output value is merely a statistic 
of the total production result of a material production 
department. As far as the price structure is concerned, total 
output value includes newly created value and material 
consumption in various links of production, such as the two main 
consumptions, energy and raw and semifinished materials 
consumption. Because total output value includes material 
consumption from the intermediate link, the double computation 
factor exists. For example, in the textile industry if 
spinning, weaving, printing, and dyeing are done separately by 
various industrial enterprises that conduct business accounting 
independently, the value of these raw and semifinished materials 
are again added to the total output value. This makes it 
difficult to truly reflect the national economy's growth. With 
the development of various types of social services, it is also 
difficult to comprehensively reflect, using only the total 
output value indexes of material departments, the economic and 
social development of a country or a region. 
  What is an increment value index? 
  Qiu Xiaohua pointed out: The increment value index covers 
all national economic departments, including the original 
material production departments as well as the nonmaterial 
production ones. As far as the price structure is concerned, an 
increment value index only includes newly created value and 
depreciation but excludes energy and raw and semifinished 
material consumption in the various production process links. 
Thus, it avoids the factor of overlapping computation and more 
truly and accurately reflects changes in the national economy. 
  Qiu Xiaohua pointed out: The replacement of the total output 
value index with the increment value index has the following 
benefits: First, it will encourage production enterprises to 
reduce consumption and save energy and guide all sectors of 
society to develop the economy while keeping efficiency in mind; 
it will also help overcome the tendencies of one-sidedly going 
after total output value and growth rate. Second, it is 
conducive to bringing the indexes of various industries in line 
with the GDP or GNP, because the sum of their increment values 
is equal to the GDP. Third, it will help enterprises upgrade 
their equipment and technology, increase their economic 
efficiency, and strengthen their competitiveness. Fourth, it 
will make it easier to make international economic comparisons. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1778 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_n_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   Aviation Industry Fund-Raising Operation Successful </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Aviation Industry Fund-Raising Operation Successful </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204022694 Beijing XINHUA in English 0150 GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0204022694 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Tianjin, April 2 (XINHUA) -- The China Aviation 
Foundation, the latest effort by the Chinese aviation industry 
to raise funds from overseas, has achieved total success, 
official sources here said. 
  The sources said that within a year's time in its first 
campaign, the foundation has raised 96.6 million U.S. dollars. 
  Now these funds have found their way into aviation 
enterprises, among which eight have begun to operate on new 
bases, the sources said. 
  Once a part of China's defense industry, the aviation sector 
has in recent years transformed itself into a major manufacturer 
of aircraft, combustion turbine engines, automobiles, 
motorcycles, foodstuff packaging machines and other civil 
products, the sales income of which now accounts for 70 percent 
of the industry's total output value. 
  Despite its advantages in high-tech fields, the industry 
nonetheless has been beset by a shortage of funds. The whole 
industry received only seven million U.S. dollars of overseas 
investment before the foundation was established. 
  In 1993, the China National Aviation Industry Corporation 
(CNAIC), with the support of several overseas companies and 
banks, established the China aviation foundation. 
  Soon after it was launched, the foundation entrusted the 
Hong 
Kong-based Tienlee Company with raising funds from overseas for 
66 industrial projects it had selected out beforehand. 
  Zhang Hongbiao, vice-president of CNAIC, said that the 66 
projects were chosen on the basis of strict feasibility studies, 
including predicted investment and marketing prospects. 
  Zhang said project enterprises could use the funds for 
technical upgrading, purchase of equipment, personnel training, 
marketing studies, or even as circulating capital. 
  The vice-president said that project enterprises receiving 
the funds may operate as Sino-foreign joint ventures, though 
they must be solely managed by Chinese. 
  Among those to begin to operate on the new basis is Tianjin 
Tianli Aviation Electronics Ltd., which received 7.95 million 
U.S. dollars from the foundation for new product development. 
  The vice-president pointed out that the aviation foundation 
will be playing an important role in the industry's blueprint 
for the coming 10 to 15 years. 
  He added that preparations for the raising of second and 
third batches of funds are already under way. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1779 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_n_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Dense Oil' Technology Reaches World Advanced Level </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    `Dense Oil' Technology Reaches World Advanced Level </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204155694 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 0719 
GMT 1 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0204155694 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Zheng Feifei (1728 7236 7236)] </F>
  [Text] Shenyang, 1 Mar (XINHUA) -- The Gaosheng Oilfield 
has explored and found a whole set of technologies for 
recovering dense oil [chou you 4464 3111] from deep wells and 
enabled China's dense oil industry to reach the advanced world 
level after tackling key problems during the "Sixth Five-Year 
Plan," the completion of necessary accessories during the 
"Seventh Five-Year Plan," and improvement and perfection during 
the first three years of the "Eighth Five-Year Plan." 
  The Gaosheng Oilfield is under the jurisdiction of the 
Liaohe 
Oilfield Administration, and is located in areas of Panshan and 
Taian Counties, Liaoning Province. It is a base for recovering 
dense oil from medium and deep wells. The total area with oil 
is 14.5 square kilometers and the total geological deposit is 
100 million tonnes. Most of the deposit is irregular [yi chang 
xing 8381 1603 1840] dense oil, and the oil horizon is as deep 
as 1,500- 1,700 meters. It is one of the deepest dense oil 
fields being tapped in the world today. 
  In 1977, the Petroleum Industry Ministry decided to turn the 
Gaosheng Oilfield into China's first dense oil development and 
experimental zone and make a plan to "gain experience, train 
talented people, and yield output." 
  "People in Gaosheng" plunged themselves into the work of 
opening up the oilfield in the spirit of "giving their lives for 
science." During the "Sixth Five-Year Plan" period, they 
imported and absorbed advanced technologies from abroad. They 
tested self-gushing by means of hot water circulation under the 
well, self-gushing by means of lowering an electric cable under 
the well [jing xia dian lan jiang zhan zi pen 0064 0007 7193 
4968 7100 4724 5261 0899], self- gushing of oil with water 
flooding under the well, the conventional method of extracting 
heavy oil with water flooding under well, extracting oil by 
lowering water [chan huo xing shui jiang zhan chou you 2296 3172 
1840 3055 7100 4724 2132 3111], and other technologies. They 
successfully explored the "12-character" complete technology 
suitable for recovering dense oil from deep wells, namely "big 
machine, long pump, thick tube, strong lever, deep under, and 
tap oil [chan you 2296 3111]," which can be used as a model for 
reference by other dense oilfields. They honorably received the 
state's scientific and technological progress prize of the first 
class for their experiment in recovering dense oil. 
  During the "Seventh Five-Year Plan" period, the Gaosheng 
Oilfield entered a period of high production and reached the 
goal of producing 1 million tonnes of petroleum steadily and 
annually three years ahead of the development plan. Their oil 
recovering speed exceeded the average speed of thin oil fields 
in the country. Gaosheng Oilfield became the country's only 
dense oilfield receiving the title of "oil field with high 
efficiency." Despite their achievements, they have not 
slackened their efforts to tackle scientific and technological 
difficulties and achieved another major breakthrough in oil 
recovery technology. In recovering dense oil, they carried out 
large-scale experiments on sucking and discharging steam, and 
gradually used domestically produced boilers. Their research 
and manufacturing of air-filled oil wells [zhu qi jing tian 3137 
3086 0064 3944], heat separation tubes, gas sealers, and other 
items all reached or were close to the world advanced level. 
During the "Seventh Five-Year Plan" period, the Gaosheng 
Oilfield also completed a ground transportation system for 
petroleum, and changed the past practice of carrying oil by 
horse-drawn wagons and oil drum cars. It has also realized 
fully automatic computerized management technology, and its oil 
transportation technology also reached the world advanced level. 
  Since entering the "Eighth Five-Year Plan" period, the 
Gaosheng Oilfield continued to raise its oil recovery rate and 
engaged in difficult scientific and technological research 
projects, including steam flooding technology [zheng qi gu pei 
tao gong yi ji shu 5544 3086 7517 6792 1152 1562 5669 2111 
2611], steam sucking and discharging technology, sand prevention 
for oilfields, and other subjects. In recent years, it has been 
carrying out over 10 technological innovations each year and 
maintaining the oil production quantity. As of the end of last 
year, the Gaosheng Oilfield produced an accumulated total of 
11.81 million tonnes of oil for the state. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1780 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_n_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  28 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   CPC Circular on Study of Economy Theory </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    CPC Circular on Study of Economy Theory </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0404001894 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 1202 
GMT 28 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0404001894 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["The General Office of the CPC Central Committee Issues a </F>
Circular Concerning Organizing the Broad Masses of Cadres To 
Conscientiously Study the Theory and Basic Knowledge of a 
Socialist Market Economy"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 28 Mar (XINHUA) -- The General Office of 
the CPC Central Committee [CPC CC] recently issued a circular 
urging the party committees of all levels to organize the broad 
masses of cadres to conscientiously study the theory and basic 
knowledge of a socialist market economy. 
  The circular pointed out: At present, the whole party and 
the 
whole country are striving to carry out the guiding spirit of 
the 14th National CPC Congress and the decision of the Third 
Plenary Session of the 14th CPC CC. China's economic 
restructuring has developed to a new stage where overall 
progress and major breakthroughs are integrated. In China, the 
establishment of a socialist market economy and further 
emancipation and development of the productive force mean a 
great creative undertaking, an arduous and complex project 
involving all of society, and a brand new subject which should 
be handled properly in establishing socialism with Chinese 
characteristics. Facing the new situation and tasks, we are 
confronted with many unfamiliar and incomprehensive things which 
require our earnest and arduous efforts to study them. How well 
cadres of all levels and particularly leading cadres study the 
subject has great bearing on persisting in carrying out the 
party's basic line to the fullest extent, on initially 
establishing a socialist market economy by the end of this 
century, and on smoothly carrying out the second strategic goal 
of national economy and social development. For this purpose, 
the CPC CC has decided to urge the broad masses of cadres to 
conscientiously study the theory and basic knowledge concerning 
a socialist market economy during the course of organizing 
comrades of the whole party to study and master Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics. 
  Concerning the major content and basic requirement of 
the study, the circular points out: 
  1. The establishment and development of a socialist market 
economy constitutes an important part of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's 
theory of building socialism with Chinese characteristics. This 
theory is an ideological weapon which we must master in carrying 
out our economic restructuring. In studying the theory of a 
socialist market economy, we must, first of all, comprehensively 
and systematically study relevant expositions in Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's works to understand the guiding spirit and essence of 
his ideas. The report of the 14th National CPC Congress and the 
decision of the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC CC, which 
are formed with the theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics as a guide, must be used as required reading 
materials for studying the theory and basic knowledge of a 
socialist market economy. It is necessary to understand in a 
broad and deep-going way from these materials the guiding 
ideology, target requirements, basic principles, major links, 
and work arrangements for conducting this reform. It is 
imperative to study various principles, policies, and reform 
plans adopted by the CPC CC, as well as relevant laws and 
regulations in an effort to carry out a socialist market 
economic system. Meanwhile, it is necessary to pay attention to 
the study of basic knowledge of a socialist market economy. The 
book entitled "What a Socialist Market Economy Is," jointly 
compiled by the Development Studies Center under the State 
Council and the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, can be used 
as a popular textbook. Cadres at all levels, no matter whether 
they are engaged in economic work or otherwise, should have a 
full understanding of the importance of the study and enhance 
their self-awareness and sense of urgency. 
  2. It is necessary to adhere to the principle of linking 
theory with practice and manage to apply what one has learned. 
Guided by Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics, and based on China's basic 
socialist system and economic development, we should emancipate 
the mind, seek truth from facts, and conscientiously study and 
boldly borrow all useful experiences of other countries of the 
world that conform with the rule of modern socialized production 
during the course of developing their market economy. Efforts 
should be made to integrate the study of the theory and basic 
knowledge of a socialist market economy as well as the party's 
principles and policies with the summing up of practical 
experiences of each locality, department, and unit in carrying 
out reform and economic construction and with the efforts to 
study and resolve understanding problems and working problems in 
the current reform drive. 
  3. Efforts should be made, through study and education, to 
ensure that cadres at all levels will achieve practical results 
in the following three aspects: First, it is necessary to 
further unify the ideology to carry out the guiding spirit of 
the 14th National CPC Congress and the Third Plenary Session of 
the 14th CPC CC. We must correctly understand the intrinsic 
characteristics of a socialist market economy and have full 
understanding of the necessity, urgency, and arduousness of 
setting up this new economic system so as to strengthen the 
self-awareness and resolution of carrying out the party's line, 
principles, and policies, and to push forward and support the 
reform with one heart and one mind. Second, it is necessary to 
master the theory and basic knowledge of establishing a 
socialist market economy as well as relevant principles and 
policies, strive to understand and handle issues involving new 
theories and ideas, be bold in exploration and practice, 
promptly sum up new experiences, continuously enhance working 
standards, and gain initiative in pushing forward reform and 
economic development. Third, it is necessary to have an 
all-round understanding of the inner relationship between 
developing a socialist market and rigidly following the 
principle of the party spirit in running business, consciously 
uphold the party's ideal and faith, and persist in a correct 
sense of value, integrity, and self- discipline so as to resist 
the corrosion of passive and corrupt phenomena and withstand the 
new test faced in the new period. 
  Concerning the methods and measures of the study, 
the circular points out: 
  1. Teaching plans for all regular training classes of party 
schools, institutes, and centers at all levels should be 
properly readjusted to arrange necessary time for teaching 
special courses such as the theory and basic knowledge of a 
socialist market economy, as well as relevant plans, principles, 
and policies for the reform. In addition, rigorous checks and 
evaluations of such efforts should be carried out. 
  2. Party schools, institutes, and centers at all levels 
should sponsor, in a planned way, backbone cadres' training 
classes and special topic study classes for the study of the 
theory and basic knowledge of a socialist market economy. 
  3. It is necessary to organize on-the-job studies for the 
majority of cadres. Necessary time for the studies must be 
ensured in accordance with various situations. The study 
methods should proceed from reality and be flexible and varied 
in form. In general, the method of releasing cadres from work 
to enable them to study in classes can be integrated with that 
of individual studies. Other methods include a combination of 
reading, supplementary lectures, and discussion. 
  4. The central study groups of the party committees at all 
levels should treat the study of the theory and basic knowledge 
of a socialist market economy as one of the important elements 
and strive to study them better and genuinely play exemplary 
roles. 
  5. It is necessary to launch a publicity campaign to educate 
the people about the knowledge of a socialist market economy by 
putting mass media to full use. The central television station 
as well as provincial, autonomous regional, and municipal 
television and radio stations should arrange proper times for 
broadcasting special supplementary lectures. All localities and 
units should organize cadres to watch or listen to these 
programs. In accordance with needs, some video or audio tapes 
may be produced as a supplementary aid to cadres' studies. 
Newspapers, publications, and propaganda and public opinion 
departments must closely coordinate this educational campaign 
and launch their work purposely to give publicity to good study 
experiences. 
  Concerning the organizational and leading work, 
the circular emphatically points out: 
  1. Party committees at all levels should conscientiously 
strengthen their leadership by paying great attention to the 
study and education of the theory and basic knowledge of a 
socialist market economy among all cadres. Major efforts should 
be made to ensure a success in the study and education of 
leading cadres of party committees and governments, cadres of 
economic administration, and cadres in charge of the management 
of the state-owned large- and medium-sized enterprises on or 
above county level. Localities should formulate practical plans 
and, in accordance with the characteristics and the needs of 
practical work of those cadres who are in various trades, 
professions, departments, and levels, put forward various 
specific requirements and adopt various methods for the study 
and education. In addition, they should pay great attention to 
carrying out these plans. In order to achieve effective 
results, it is necessary to have good preparation for and 
regular inspections of the work. Efforts should be made to 
avoid formalism. Cadres' study should be considered as an 
important content of their evaluation. Under the unified 
leadership of the party committees, party organization 
departments as well as publicity departments of the party 
committee at all levels should be responsible for carrying out 
the work of organizing and implementing study and education. 
  2. The State Economic and Trade Commission is responsible 
for 
the unified arrangement of the study and education of 
enterprises' leading cadres and administrative personnel. The 
Work Committee for Organs under the CPC CC and the Work 
Committee for Central Government Organs shall arrange for the 
study and education of cadres working for the CPC CC and the 
state organs. 
  3. Each level is responsible for its own work, with a higher 
level supervising lower levels. The Organization Department and 
the Propaganda Department of the CPC CC will conduct a selective 
inspection by the end of this year on the study of the central 
studying groups of all provincial, autonomous regional, and 
municipal party committees as well as on that of the central 
study groups of the party committees (party organs) of the CPC 
CC and the state organs. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1781 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_n_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  26 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Economic &amp; Agricultural </F>
<H3> <TI>   Text of Provisions on Exchange Control </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Text of Provisions on Exchange Control </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0404023994 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 1547 
GMT 26 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0404023994 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 26 Mar (XINHUA) -- Zhu Rongji, vice 
premier of the State Council and governor of the People's Bank 
of China [PBC], today signed PBC decree No. 3 to promulgate the 
"Interim Provisions on the Control of Exchange Settlements, 
Sales, and Payments." The provisions were approved by the State 
Council on 24 March 1994, and will go into effect on 1 April 
1994. The full text of the "Provisions" is as follows: Interim 
Provisions on the Control of Exchange Settlements, Sales, and 
Payments. 
<H5>  Chapter I. General Rules </H5>
  Article 1. The following provisions were specially 
formulated for the purposes of standardizing exchange 
settlements, sales, and payments and realizing conditional 
convertibility of renminbi under current accounts. 
  Article 2. Authorized banks for dealing in foreign exchange 
must handle exchange settlements and sales, open foreign 
exchange accounts, and make payments. 
  Article 3. Various foreign exchange receipts of all domestic 
enterprises, public institutions, government agencies, and 
social organizations within the boundaries of China (hereinafter 
referred to as "organizations in China") must be repatriated in 
a timely manner. These organizations in China must handle 
exchange settlements and purchases, open foreign exchange 
accounts, and make payments in accordance with the Provisions. 
<H5>  Chapter II. Exchange Settlements </H5>
  Article 4. Aside from those defined by Articles 5 and 6 of 
the Provisions, all the following foreign exchange receipts 
obtained by organizations in China must be settled and sold to 
authorized banks for dealing in foreign exchange: 
  1) foreign exchange receipts earned from exports, transit 
goods whose payments were made before deliveries are taken, and 
other trading activities; 
  2) foreign exchange receipts earned from winning 
international tenders financed by overseas loans; 
  3) foreign exchange receipts earned from dealing in 
duty-free 
commodities within the boundaries of China under the supervision 
of customs; 
  4) foreign exchange receipts earned by such trades and 
professions as communications and transportation (including all 
types of means of transportation), ports (including harbors and 
airports), posts and telecommunications (excluding international 
remittances and exchange), tourism, commercials, consultations, 
exhibitions, consignment sales, and maintenance, and by various 
agents of business providing commodities or services; 
  5) foreign exchange receipts by administrative and judicial 
organs from the payment of various stipulated fees and penalties; 
  6) foreign exchange receipts from the transfer of such 
intangible assets as rights for land use, copyrights, trademark 
ownership, patent rights, technologies without patent rights, 
and business reputations; 
  7) foreign exchange receipts from sales of real estate and 
other assets to buyers outside the boundaries of China; 
  8) inbound remittances of foreign exchange profits made by 
enterprises which have made investments outside the boundaries 
of China, amounts of foreign exchange recovered from projects 
involving economic assistance to foreign countries, and foreign 
exchange receipts from assets outside the boundaries of China; 
  9) foreign exchange receipts from claims filed to foreign 
firms for compensation and foreign exchange receipts from the 
return of warrant money; 
  10) foreign exchange receipts from insurance organizations 
handling insurance businesses involving foreign exchange; 
  11) income from financial institutions that have obtained 
"permits for dealing in foreign exchange businesses" for 
conducting business operations in foreign exchange; 
  12) foreign exchange receipts from foreign donations, 
subsidies, and aid; and 
  13) other foreign exchange receipts that must be settled as 
per stipulations of the State Administration of Exchange Control. 
  Article 5. In dealing with the following foreign exchange 
receipts, organizations in China may apply with the State 
Administration of Exchange Control or its branches (hereinafter 
referred to as "foreign exchange bureaus") to open 
foreign-currency accounts in banks authorized to deal in foreign 
exchange and to settle foreign exchange transactions in 
accordance with relevant provisions: 
  1) foreign exchange receipts earned by companies from 
contracted projects outside the national boundaries, from labor 
services to foreign countries, from technical cooperation with 
foreign countries, and from other services; 
  2) foreign exchange receipts that are payable and are 
collected by organizations acting as agents abroad or outside 
the national boundaries; 
  3) payable or yet-to-be-settled foreign exchange receipts 
collected on an interim basis, including cash deposits remitted 
from outside the national boundaries for bidding purposes and 
for performing contractual obligations, foreign exchange 
receipts earned from entrepot trade in which goods are delivered 
before payments are made, foreign exchange proceeds derived from 
international foreign exchange business conducted by postal and 
telecommunications departments, foreign exchange receipts 
collected by first-category travel agencies as advance payments 
from foreign tourist organizations, foreign exchange proceeds 
collected by railway departments from insured transportation 
services outside the national boundaries, and foreign exchange 
receipts collected by customs authorities as cash deposits and 
mortgage payments; and 
  4) premiums earned by insurance agencies from foreign 
exchange insurance business and reinsurance business, as well as 
premiums that have yet to be settled. 
  All proceeds remaining from the aforementioned foreign 
exchange receipts after the latter are settled on a regular 
basis in accordance with the accounting system shall be sold to 
banks authorized to deal in foreign exchange. 
  Article 6. Foreign-currency accounts may be opened in banks 
authorized to deal in foreign exchange for the following foreign 
exchange transactions which need not be settled through the 
banks: 
  1) foreign exchange used, with the state's approval and 
after 
examination and verification by foreign exchange bureaus, 
specifically to repay foreign exchange debts incurred within and 
outside the national boundaries; 
  2) foreign exchange paid as cash donations outside the 
national boundaries in accordance with agreements on cash 
donations; 
  3) foreign exchange earned from loans made outside the 
national boundaries and from foreign currency debentures and 
stocks issued outside the national boundaries; 
  4) foreign exchange remitted by legal or natural persons 
outside the national boundaries for investment purposes; 
  5) foreign exchange held by foreign embassies and consulates 
in China, by international organizations, and by organizations 
in China that represent legal entities outside the national 
boundaries; 
  6) foreign exchange held by foreign-funded enterprises; and 
  7) foreign exchange held by residents and visitors to China. 
  Article 7. When opening foreign-currency accounts in banks 
authorized to deal in foreign exchange, organizations in China 
that are allowed to open such accounts per Articles 5 and 6 of 
these provisions shall produce certificates issued by foreign 
exchange bureaus after verification. 
<H5>  Chapter III. Foreign Exchange Sales </H5>
  Article 8. In making foreign-currency payments for the 
following commercial and noncommercial business, organizations 
in China shall make payments in banks authorized to deal in 
foreign exchange upon producing valid commercial bills that 
correspond to the payment methods and valid certificates: 
  1) importing goods subject to quotas or product-specific 
controls on the strength of licenses or import certificates 
issued by relevant departments and corresponding import 
contracts; 
  2) importing goods under the voluntary registration system 
on 
the strength of corresponding registration documents and import 
contracts; 
  3) importing goods other than those mentioned in the 
preceding two paragraphs in conformity with state import 
management provisions on the strength of import contracts. 
  Valid certificates or relevant ratification documents 
mentioned in items one through three shall be produced when 
making advance payments (within the prescribed amounts), when 
paying cash deposits, and when defraying outstanding payments, 
transportation costs, insurance premiums, and ancillary expenses 
that fall under the areas mentioned in items one through three. 
The same documents shall be produced when paying commissions 
(within the prescribed amounts), transportation costs, insurance 
premiums, and ancillary expenses that fall under the areas 
mentioned in items one through three. 
  4) purchasing goods from bonded zones and warehouses and 
buying goods brought in from abroad for exhibitions on the 
strength of valid certificates mentioned in items one through 
three; 
  5) importing intangible assets such as patents, copyrights, 
trademarks, and computer software on the strength of import 
contracts or agreements; 
  6) compensating foreign companies in foreign exchange that 
falls under the areas involving the strength of exchange 
settlement certificates, claims agreements, claims settlement 
certificates, and exchange refund certificates; 
  7) paying cash deposits for bidding on contracted projects 
in 
foreign countries on the strength of bidding documents; paying 
cash deposits for performing contractual obligations and making 
advance payments for projects on the strength of agreements. 
  Article 9. Authorized banks for dealing in foreign 
exchange will effect payments to foreign companies against 
detailed payment lists submitted by organizations in China, who 
are banks' clients, for the following expenses incurred by trade 
and nontrade business operations, and will verify the detailed 
payment lists after payments are effected: 
  1) payments against imports of materials for processing and 
reexport when such imports are supported by contracts for 
processing imported materials approved by foreign trade and 
economic cooperation departments; 
  2) payments by companies approved by the State Council to 
deal in duty-free commodities against imports of duty-free 
commodities within the scope of their authorized business 
operations; 
  3) payments by civil aviation, sea freight, and railway 
departments (organizations) for international combined transport 
charges, equipment maintenance expenses, expenses for the use of 
terminals, airports, and harbors, fuel supply charges, insurance 
premiums, leasing expenses which are not financed, and other 
service charges incurred outside the boundaries of China; 
  4) payments by civil aviation, sea freight, and railway 
departments (organizations) as meal and allowance subsidies to 
their personnel engaged in international operations; and 
  5) payments by posts and telecommunications departments for 
expenses incurred by international posts and telecommunications 
business operations. 
  Article 10. Organizations in China that intend to make the 
following payments to foreign companies for trade and nontrade 
business operations may submit exchange sales slips issued by 
foreign exchange bureaus to authorized banks for dealing in 
foreign exchange for conversion and effecting payments: 
  1) advance payments and commissions which exceed the 
prescribed ratio; and 
  2) payments to foreign companies incurred under the item of 
transit goods whose payments were made before deliveries are 
taken. 
  Article 11. Foreign exchange needed by government agencies, 
domestic enterprises, and public institutions for payments 
against nontrade expenses and expenses not incurred by business 
operations which are covered by budget shall be processed in 
accordance with the "Interim Provisions on Financial Management 
of Nontrade and Non- Business Operations-Related Foreign 
Exchange." 
  Article 12. If organizations in China need the following 
foreign exchange for extra-budgetary payments against expenses 
not incurred by business operations, they may submit exchange 
sales slips issued by foreign exchange bureaus to authorized 
banks for dealing in foreign exchange for conversion and 
effecting payments: 
  1) foreign exchange needed for payments against expenses 
incurred by sponsoring exhibitions, trade fairs, and training 
sessions outside the boundaries of China, and by shooting motion 
pictures and TV films also outside the boundaries of China; 
  2) expenses for propaganda to foreign countries, foreign aid 
expenses, donations in foreign exchange to foreign countries, 
membership fees for international organizations, and 
registration fees for participating in international conferences; 
  3) expenses needed for establishing representative offices 
or 
organizations outside the boundaries of China and outlays for 
their operations; 
  4) payments made by the Examination Coordination Center of 
the State Education Commission for examination fees outside the 
boundaries of China; and 
  5) other foreign exchange needed for payments against 
expenses not incurred by business operations. 
  Article 13. Foreign exchange for the following non- trade 
and non-business needs of individuals shall be sold according to 
relevant provisions by the designated foreign exchange banks 
authorized by the foreign exchange bureau: 
  1) foreign exchange conversion of renminbi wages and 
separation pay issued to foreign experts hired working in China; 
  2) foreign exchange needed by individuals for private trips 
abroad; 
  3) foreign exchange conversion of retirement pay, separation 
pay, and pensions of individuals who leave China for immigration 
purposes; and 
  4) foreign exchange for mail order purchase of a small 
amount 
of medicine or medical care articles outside China needed by 
residents in China; 
  Article 14. By showing valid proofs, organization in China 
may buy foreign exchange at designated foreign exchange banks to 
meet the following capital-related needs: 
  1) by showing the loan agreement and the debtor 
organization's payment notice, to buy foreign exchange for the 
purpose of paying principal, interest, and fees of foreign 
exchange loans extended by financial institutions in China; 
  2) by showing the guarantee contract and the debtor 
organization's payment notice, to buy foreign exchange for the 
purpose of fulfilling foreign exchange guarantee contracts in 
China; and 
  3) by showing the dividends distribution decision of the 
board of directors and the tax payment proof, to buy foreign 
exchange for the purpose of paying government-approved foreign 
exchange dividends of shares. 
  Article 15. By showing valid proofs, organizations in China 
may apply for approval from the foreign exchange bureau to buy 
foreign exchange for the following capital-related needs; and 
with the approving document of the foreign exchange bureau, they 
may buy the needed foreign exchange at designated foreign 
exchange banks: 
  1) by showing "foreign debt registration" or "foreign 
exchange (transferred) loan registration" and the debtor 
organization's payment notice, to apply for foreign exchange to 
meet the needs of servicing foreign debts or paying the 
principal, interest, and fees of foreign exchange (transferred) 
loans; 
  2) by showing the guarantee contract, the "foreign exchange 
guarantee registration certificate" issued by the foreign 
exchange bureau, and the debtor organization's payment notice, 
to buy foreign exchange for the purpose of fulfilling foreign 
exchange guarantee contracts outside China; 
  3) by showing the approving document of the department in 
charge of investment projects, and the investment contract, to 
buy foreign exchange for investment outside China; and 
  4) by showing the approving document of the department in 
charge of investment projects, and the contract, the Chinese 
investor of a joint venture may buy foreign exchange to meet the 
needs of the approved registered foreign exchange capital. 
  Article 16. In order to convert and remit to areas outside 
China their legitimate renminbi income (such as visa and notary 
fees), foreign diplomatic missions may request the remittance 
and buy the needed foreign exchange at designated foreign 
exchange banks authorized by the foreign exchange bureau. 
  In order to convert and remit to areas outside China their 
legitimate renminbi income (such as income from passenger and 
cargo transport of the Chinese offices of foreign airlines), the 
Chinese office of a corporation outside China may apply for the 
remittance at the foreign exchange bureau by displaying 
appropriate documentation, and after obtaining the foreign 
exchange sales notice issued by the foreign exchange bureau, it 
may buy the needed foreign exchange at designated foreign 
exchange banks. 
  Article 17. When leaving China, foreigners, overseas Chinese 
and Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan compatriots who stay in China 
temporarily may, by showing their passports and the original 
exchange receipts (valid for six months), convert unused 
renminbi back into foreign exchange and take it out of China. 
Chapter IV. Foreign Exchange Payments [subhead] 
  Article 18. If foreign currency account holders need to make 
payments to areas outside China, they shall first use the 
balances from their accounts to make the payments, provided the 
payments conform to the authorized purposes of the foreign 
currency accounts; foreign exchange may be bought only if the 
payment is for other than the authorized purposes of the foreign 
currency account, if the payer does not have a foreign currency 
account, or if the balance of the account is insufficient to 
make the payment. 
  Article 19. If a payment is made using funds from a 
foreign currency account, the bank keeping the account shall 
handle the payment after reviewing it in accordance with the 
purposes of the foreign currency account and the relevant 
provisions in Chapter III. 
  Article 20. A payment, either with purchased foreign 
exchange or with funds from a foreign currency account, shall be 
made on the date prescribed by the relevant accounting methods 
and contract, and must not be made ahead of the prescribed date. 
  Article 21. If payment of the principal and interest on a 
debt owed outside China must be made before the prescribed date, 
the payee must first obtain approval from the foreign exchange 
bureau before being permitted to buy the necessary foreign 
exchange and make the payment. 
<H5>  Chapter V. Supplementary Provisions </H5>
  Article 22. To help organizations which sign long-term 
forward payment contracts or debt servicing agreements avoid 
risks resulting from fluctuations in the exchange rate, the 
designated foreign exchange banks shall offer them long-term 
forward sales of renminbi and foreign currency and other 
value-ensuring services according to relevant provisions. 
  Article 23. It is impermissible to buy foreign exchange or 
use the balance of foreign currency account to pay for imports 
of barter trade. 
  Article 24. A designated foreign exchange bank shall set up 
a counter account for an export enterprise up to the amount of 
50 percent of its total exchange settlement. The export 
enterprise shall obtain foreign exchange to meet export 
expansion needs (including import of materials for processing 
and packing materials, export bases, claims, freight and 
insurance, after-sale service, and other trade-related expenses) 
in accordance with Article 8 and Article 9 of these Provisions. 
The foreign exchange bank shall deduct a corresponding amount 
from the balance of its counter account. 
  Article 25. The designated foreign exchange banks shall 
submit to the foreign exchange bureau their 10-day 
[thrice-monthly] report on foreign exchange settlements, foreign 
exchange sales, and foreign exchange payments. 
  Article 26. Organizations in China may select a designated 
foreign exchange bank in their place of registration to handle 
their foreign currency accounts, exchange settlements, and 
foreign exchange business, and they shall report their bank 
selection to local foreign exchange bureaus for the record. 
  Banking facilities handling foreign exchange business and 
other organizations in China handling exchange settlements, 
foreign exchange sales, and foreign exchange payments shall 
unconditionally accept the foreign exchange bureau's supervision 
and inspection and shall show or provide relevant materials to 
the bureau. 
  Article 27. The foreign exchange bureau may impose 
penalties, including fines and suspension of exchange 
settlements, foreign exchange sales and foreign exchange payment 
businesses, on violators of these Provisions. 
  Article 28. The articles in Chapter III of these Provisions 
are not applicable to foreign-funded enterprises. 
  Article 29. These Provisions shall be interpreted by the 
State Administration on Exchange Control. 
  Article 30. These Provisions shall be implemented as of 1 
April 1994. If previous provisions contravene these Provisions, 
these Provisions shall apply. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1782 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_k_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  5 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   Chen Huanyou Addresses Nanjing Work Meeting </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Chen Huanyou Addresses Nanjing Work Meeting </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0404112494 Nanjing XINHUA RIBAO in Chinese 5 Mar 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> OW0404112494 </F>
<F P=104>  Nanjing XINHUA RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Reporter Liu Shoutong (0491 1108 2717)] </F>
  [Excerpts] A provincial meeting on propaganda and 
ideological work was held in Nanjing on 4 March. 
  The meeting, sponsored by the provincial CPC committee, was 
an important one because it concerned all aspects of our work in 
the province. Major topics and tasks discussed at the meeting 
included how to convey and carry out the guiding spirit of the 
national meeting on propaganda and ideological work by adhering 
to Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics, and the basic line of the party; how to 
strengthen and improve propaganda and ideological work under the 
new situation in accordance with the principle of paying equal 
attention to both material and spiritual civilization 
construction; and how to make concrete plans for carrying out 
propaganda and ideological work across the province. 
  Attending yesterday morning's meeting were leading comrades 
of the provincial CPC committee including Chen Huanyou, Sun 
Jiazheng, Cao Hongming, Cao Keming, Xu Zhonglin, Zheng Bingqing, 
Ji Yunshi, Yu Xingde, and Wang Xialin. Leading comrades of the 
provincial people's congress, government, and provincial Chinese 
People's Political Consultative Conference, including Gao 
Dezheng, Zhang Huaixi, and Duan Xushen as well as responsible 
persons of the provincial government's relevant departments 
including Liang Baohua and Liu Jian also attended the meeting. 
  Sun Jiazheng, deputy secretary of the provincial CPC 
committee, conveyed the guiding spirit of the national meeting 
on propaganda and ideological work and the important speech made 
by General Secretary Jiang Zemin at the national meeting on 
propaganda and ideological work. Wang Xialin, standing 
committee member and head of the provincial CPC committee's 
propaganda department, presided over the meeting. 
  Chen Huanyou's report was in three parts: first, to have a 
clear understanding of the overall situation, unify ideology, 
and further define the extreme importance of propaganda and 
ideological work; second, to conscientiously carry out various 
tasks concerning propaganda and ideological work by firmly 
upholding the theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics; and third, to adhere to the principle of paying 
equal attention to both material and spiritual civilization 
construction as well as to strengthen and improve the party's 
leadership over propaganda work. 
  During his speech, Chen Huanyou emphasized the extreme 
importance of propaganda and ideological work, and affirmed the 
results achieved in our propaganda and ideological work. He 
said: Since the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central 
Committee, Jiangsu has persisted in centering its propaganda and 
ideological work around economic development. All other work in 
Jiangsu has been subject to and served the party's central task. 
We have persisted in the correct orientation of public opinion 
and paid attention to improving the front and facilities for 
propaganda and ideological work. We have effectively carried 
out propaganda work as well as ideological and political work. 
We have continuously met the people's needs in their cultural 
life by producing fine spiritual products. [passage omitted] 
  While talking about how to conscientiously carry out various 
propaganda and ideological tasks, Chen Huanyou said: The most 
important and urgent task for the propaganda and ideological 
front lies in adhering to the principle of arming the whole 
party with Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics. [passage omitted] 
  In conclusion, Chen Huanyou said: The propaganda and 
ideological work is faced with an arduous mission and the 
provincial CPC committee has a great hope for propaganda and 
ideological workers across the province. He expressed his hopes 
that all comrades will further boost their spirit and carry out 
their work creatively so as to make even greater contributions 
to the reform, development, stability, and all-round progress in 
Jiangsu. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1783 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_k_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   Wei Jingsheng Detained Upon Return to Beijing </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Wei Jingsheng Detained Upon Return to Beijing </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Police Force Dissident From Car </H4>

<F P=102> OW0104123694 Tokyo KYODO in English 1221 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104123694 </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo KYODO </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 1 KYODO -- China's most famous 
dissident Wei Jingsheng was detained for yet another time Friday 
[1 April] while returning to Beijing, his secretary said. 
  Wei was coming from the port city of Tianjin when at least 
seven police vehicles stopped the car he was riding in and took 
him away, his secretary, who was riding with him, said. 
  Police showed Wei a "summons and investigation warrant" 
before taking him off, the secretary said in describing the 
incident which occurred about 5:00 p.m. [0900 GMT] Beijing time. 
  Wei was returning from what is believed to have been a 
forced 
exile after being detained in early March, several days before 
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher arrived in Beijing to 
press China's communist leaders for progress in human rights. 
  The dissident, who became famous for his publications and 
imprisonment during the democracy wall period in the late 1970s, 
was released on parole last September 15, days before the 
International Olympic Committee (IOC) voted on what city was to 
hold the 2000 Olympics. 
  Many surmised his release was a cynical move by Beijing to 
attempt to polish its human rights image for IOC voters, while 
using its political dissidents as hostages. 
  Wei was jailed for "counterrevolutionary propaganda and 
incitement" 15 years ago March 29, which was also the date on 
which his parole was to end. 
  However he had also been deprived of his political rights 
for 
three years following his release. Deprivation of civil rights 
for varying periods is among China's punishments. 
  The Chinese Foreign Ministry confirmed Thursday that despite 
the termination of his parole, Wei is not allowed to give 
interviews to foreign journalists. 
  The ministry refused to clarify under which law such a 
restriction is stipulated, although it stressed that china has 
"a rule of law." 
  Theoretically a "summons and investigation warrant" allows 
for the detention of citizens for up to three days. 
  Wei incensed Chinese leaders when he met U.S. Assistant 
Secretary of State for Human Rights John Shattuck at Shattuck's 
request two weeks before the Christopher visit and said the U.S. 
should continue to link trade with progress in human rights. 
  The United States has tied the renewal of China's 
most-favored- nation (MFN) trading status, which facilitates 
billions of dollars in bilateral trade, to progress on the 
rights front. 
  Wei, similarly incensed paramount leader Deng Xiaoping in 
1978 when he called democracy China's "fifth modernization," at 
a time when Deng was pushing the "four modernizations" -- of 
agriculture, industry, defense and science -- in his attempt to 
rebuild china after the disastrous 10-year cultural revolution. 
  Deng reportedly personally ordered Wei's arrest at that 
time, 
saying, "arrest Wei Jingsheng and never let him go." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1784 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_k_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   Wei Jingsheng Detained Upon Return to Beijing </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Wei Jingsheng Detained Upon Return to Beijing </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Secretary Hopeful of Early Release </H4>

<F P=102> HK0204042494 Hong Kong AFP in English 0352 GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> HK0204042494 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 2 April (AFP)--China's leading dissident 
Wei Jingsheng has been detained by police for the second time in 
a month while attempting to return to Beijing from the nearby 
city of Tianjin, a friend of Wei's said Saturday. Wei's car, in 
which he was travelling with his secretary Tong Yi, was stopped 
by police Friday afternoon on its way to the capital, the friend 
said, adding that Wei was removed from the car and driven away. 
[passage omitted] 
  Wei's secretary, Tong Yi, said Saturday that she "hoped" he 
would be released after 24 hours as happened after his previous 
detention one month ago. "But it is possible that the police 
would renew his detention for another 24 hours," she said, 
adding she did not know where the dissident was being held. She 
said Wei was detained around 5:00 p.m. (0900 GMT) on the road 
from Tianjin to Beijing, about 20 km (12 miles) southeast of the 
capital. 
  Another friend of Wei's confirmed he had received a 
telephone 
call from him Friday morning, informing him that the dissident 
planned to return to Beijing during the day. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1785 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_k_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   Wei Jingsheng Detained Upon Return to Beijing </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Wei Jingsheng Detained Upon Return to Beijing </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    `Unable To Confirm' Release </H4>

<F P=102> HK0304023694 Hong Kong AFP in English 0213 GMT 3 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> HK0304023694 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpt] Beijing, April 3 (AFP)--The whereabouts of 
China's leading dissident, Wei Jingsheng, were unclear Sunday [3 
April], with his secretary unable to confirm an official report 
that he had been released from police detention. According to 
the official Xinhua news agency, Wei was released shortly after 
being picked up and questioned by police Friday as he was 
attempting to return to Beijing from the nearby port city of 
Tianjin. 
  "The Beijing Municipal Public Security Bureau summoned Wei 
Jingsheng and had a talk with him yesterday," Xinhua said in a 
brief dispatch late Saturday. "Wei left the bureau immediately 
afterwards," it added. The dispatch gave no reason for Wei's 
detention and no indication as to his present circumstances. 
  However, Wei's secretary Tong Yi, who was travelling in the 
same car as the 43-year-old dissident when he was stopped and 
detained on the outskirts of Beijing, said Sunday that she was 
unaware of his release. "I have not seen him and he hasn't 
called me," Tong said by telephone, adding that she had no idea 
of his whereabouts. 
  The secretary had earlier said that she hoped Wei would be 
released after 24 hours, as happened when he was detained during 
a police sweep of at least 15 dissidents in Shanghai and Beijing 
in early March. Following his release at that time, Wei left 
Beijing on March 6, for what his secretary said was a period of 
recuperation, and had not attempted to return to the capital 
until Friday. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1786 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_k_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   Wei Jingsheng Detained Upon Return to Beijing </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Wei Jingsheng Detained Upon Return to Beijing </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Wei `Violated' Parole </H4>

<F P=102> OW0404100694 Tokyo KYODO in English 0927 GMT 4 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0404100694 </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo KYODO </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 4 KYODO -- Dissident Wei Jingsheng 
has violated the conditions of his parole and is being 
investigated by Chinese security departments, a Foreign Ministry 
spokesman said Monday [4 April]. 
  "Wei Jingsheng, during the period of his parole and 
deprivation of his political rights, has violated the concerned 
regulations, and the public security organs have the right to 
investigate him according to the law," the spokesman said. 
  The statement came days after Wei was detained by police 
while returning to Beijing following a forced exile from the 
capital, which coincided with a visit by U.S. Secretary of State 
Warren Christopher and the meeting of China's National People's 
Congress. 
  Wei, the godfather of China's pro-democracy movement, was 
detained in early March after meeting with U.S. Undersecretary 
of State John Shattuck and expressing his view that the United 
States should continue to pressure China on human rights issues. 
  The meeting reportedly infuriated China's dictatorial 
leaders 
who has viewed Wei as a menace to their authority since he 
called for greater democracy in the late 1970s. 
  On Saturday, Xinhua News Agency reported that Wei "had a 
talk" with Beijing police and "left the bureau immediately 
afterwards," but on Monday the dissident's family and friends 
had no clue as to his whereabouts and under what pretext he was 
taken away. 
  Wei was released last September, seven months short of a 
15-year term, in what was widely regarded as a cynical human 
rights gesture aimed at influencing the International Olympic 
Committee into selecting Beijing as the host for the 2000 
Olympic games. 
  His parole was to last until March 29, the original date of 
his release, while his political rights will continue to be 
withheld for three years. 
  Since his release, Wei has been hounded by the police and 
told to refrain from being interviewed by foreign journalists 
and writing essays for the foreign press. 
  Last year, Wei, who steadfastly maintained his innocence 
throughout his 15-year ordeal, was a cowinner with Nelson 
Mandela of the Gleitsman Foundation international activist award. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1787 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_k_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hong Kong Reporter Given 12-Year Sentence </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Hong Kong Reporter Given 12-Year Sentence </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    MING PAO Sends Reps To Inquire </H4>

<F P=102> HK0104150894 Hong Kong RTHK Radio One in Cantonese 1430 GMT 
1 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK0104150894 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong RTHK Radio One </F>
<F P=105>  Cantonese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] This station has learned that MING PAO reporter Xi 
Yang has been sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment. 
  A Beijing court official confirmed that the trial of Xi 
Yang, 
who was accused of stealing and gathering state financial 
secrets, has already wound up. However, the authorities have 
not yet officially made public the result of the trial. 
  On the other hand, the MING PAO hierarchy has already sent 
representatives to Beijing to inquire about the latest 
developments. 
  Nevertheless, up to now, the above report has not been 
confirmed by the authorities. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1788 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_k_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hong Kong Reporter Given 12-Year Sentence </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Hong Kong Reporter Given 12-Year Sentence </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Further on Sentencing </H4>

<F P=102> HK0204082094 Hong Kong HSIN PAO in Chinese 2 Apr 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> HK0204082094 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong HSIN PAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report: "Xi Yang Sentenced to 12 Years Imprisonment"] </F>
  [Text] The Beijing Municipal Intermediate People's Court 
confirmed yesterday that the case wherein MING PAO reporter Xi 
Yang was charged with stealing and prying out state financial 
secrets had been wound up. According to information not yet 
officially confirmed, Xi Yang has been sentenced to 12 years 
imprisonment. Chang Chien-po, executive chief editor of MING 
PAO, and Chang Hsi-hung, senior editor of the MING PAO China 
Page, left for Beijing yesterday to find out what has happened. 
The Hong Kong Government will also make enquiries about the 
latest development in the Xi Yang case through the British 
Embassy in China 
  An official from the Beijing Municipal Intermediate People's 
Court confirmed that the case of MING PAO reporter Xi Yang was 
already wound up but he refused to disclose the ruling in the 
case. 
  However, information obtained by a HSIN PAO reporter which 
has not yet been officially confirmed disclosed that Xi Yang had 
been sentenced to 12 years imprisonment. 
  The MING PAO Editorial Department issued a statement 
yesterday evening saying that after making enquiries in various 
quarters, MING PAO is still not able to confirm the information 
that Xi Yang had been sentenced to imprisonment. Chang 
Chien-po, executive chief editor of MING PAO, and Chang 
Hsi-hung, senior editor of the China Page of MING PAO, left for 
Beijing at noon yesterday to find out what has happened but have 
not yet had confirmation from the authorities on Xi Yang's 
imprisonment. 
  The statement says that Chang Chien-po and Chang Hsi-hung 
will use the time and endeavor to find out as soon as possible 
the latest development in the case. 
  However, Chang Chien-po and Chang Hsi-hung did not meet Hong 
Kong reporters who were gathering information in Beijing 
yesterday evening. Even MING PAO reporters who were in Beijing 
were not able to get in touch with them. The whereabouts of the 
two in Beijing are a mystery. 
  It has been learned that, today, they will once again make 
inquiries at the Beijing court about Xi Yang's case and will 
meet some personalities to seek help. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1789 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_k_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hong Kong Reporter Given 12-Year Sentence </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Hong Kong Reporter Given 12-Year Sentence </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Reporter's Family Notified </H4>

<F P=102> HK0304052294 Hong Kong MING PAO in Chinese 3 Apr 94 p b1 </F>
<F P=103> HK0304052294 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong MING PAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special dispatch": "Xi Yang's Relatives Have Received </F>
Notice of the Conclusion of His Trial"] 
  [Text] MING PAO officers have indicated that the relatives 
of MING PAO reporter Xi Yang have already been notified by an 
official from the Beijing Municipal People's Court that the 
first hearing of Xi Yang's case concluded on 28 March and he has 
been sentenced. 
  Because the notice was made verbally and the official did 
not 
present any written statement or docket, the two MING PAO 
officers remained in Beijing and made great efforts to get in 
touch with the relvant authorities to verify the information. 
  Xi Yang's relatives received a telephone call from a court 
official early in the morning of 1 April, and they were informed 
that the first hearing of Xi Yang's case of stealing and 
gathering state secrets had concluded and he had been sentenced. 
This paper immediately sent men to Beijing to learn more about 
the situation. Because it was the weekend, the relevant court 
officials were not in their offices. That being the case, the 
verbal notice still has not been verified by the authorities. 
  Chang Chien-po, MING PAO executive chief editor, and Chang 
Hsi-hong, senior editor of the China page, contacted lawyers in 
the hinterland yesterday to learn more about the possibility of 
filing an appeal for Xi Yang's case. Chang Chien-po said: 
"When I met with Xi Yang's relatives the day before yesterday, 
they indicated that they were also thinking of consulting a 
lawyer. We will do our best to find a lawyer for Xi Yang's 
relatives. To our knowledge, under current Chinese law, Xi 
Yang's relatives may consult a lawyer, but we can only offer 
assistance from behind the scenes." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1790 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_k_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   Hong Kong Reporter Given 12-Year Sentence </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Hong Kong Reporter Given 12-Year Sentence </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Court Confirms Sentence </H4>

<F P=102> HK0404043594 Hong Kong AFP in English 0410 GMT 4 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> HK0404043594 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong AFP </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 4 (AFP)--Hong Kong journalist Xi 
Yang has been sentenced to 12 years imprisonment for spying and 
stealing state secrets, a spokeswoman for the Beijing 
Intermediate Court said Monday [4 April]. "Xi Yang was 
sentenced on March 28 to 12 years imprisonment and deprived of 
political rights for two years," the spokeswoman said, adding 
that Xi had already lodged an appeal with the Beijing Higher 
People's Court. 
  A mainland-born journalist working for the Chinese-language 
MING PAO DAILY NEWS, Xi was detained in September and charged 
with "espionage regarding state secrets on banking." Xi had 
worked here for the semi-official CHINA NEWS SERVICE before 
moving to Hong Kong two years ago. He is a Chinese national and 
subject to Chinese laws. 
  Formally announcing his arrest on October 7, state-run 
television said an employee of the central People's Bank of 
China, identified as Tian Ye, had supplied Xi with a "large 
quantity" of secret financial information, including unpublished 
policy decisions on bank rates and international gold trading. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1791 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_k_94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   Compact Disc of Zhou Enlai Speeches Released </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Compact Disc of Zhou Enlai Speeches Released </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104140694 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104140694 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in 
Chinese at 1026 GMT on 2 March carries a 1,026-character 
"feature" entitled: "Everlasting Memory -- Sidelights on a 
Ceremony Marking the Publishing of Compact Disc, `Voice of a 
Giant -- Zhou Enlai.'" 
  According to the report, a ceremony was held at the Great 
Hall of the People in Beijing on 2 March to mark the release of 
a compact disc of Zhou Enlai's speeches. 
  Song Ping, Huang Hua, Chen Xilian, Deng Liqun, Wang 
Guangying, Cheng Siyuan, Li Peiyao, and Wu Jieping were present. 
They heard a playback of a toast speech given by Zhou Enlai at 
the National Day reception in 1974 marking the republic's 25th 
founding anniversary, and portions of a government work report 
Zhou delivered on 13 January 1975 to the First Session of the 
Fourth National People's Congress. Wang Guangying and Wu 
Jieping, both chairmen of the National Committee of the Chinese 
People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) and the 
latter was also Zhou's doctor in his final days, recalled how 
great a man Zhou was. 
  Ye Huaming, board director and general manager of the Xianke 
Enterprise Group in Shenzhen, told the meeting that his company 
will release "Voice of a Giant -- Deng Xiaoping" on the eve of 
the 45th anniversary of the PRC's founding this year. The 
company also plans to release recordings of speeches by other 
proletarian revolutionaries of the older generation including 
Liu Shaoqi, Zhu De, and Dr. Sun Yat-sen. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1792 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_k_94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  31 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   Public Security Minister Urges Anticorruption Work </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Public Security Minister Urges Anticorruption Work </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104124094 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 1112 
GMT 31 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0104124094 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 31 Mar (XINHUA) -- Speaking at a 
just-concluded national conference of secretaries of discipline 
inspection commissions of public security departments and 
bureaus, Public Security Minister Tao Siju stressed: The 
in-depth struggle against corruption launched by public security 
organs is extremely important, because it affects the overall 
situation of safeguarding reform, development, and stability. 
He urged public security organs to enhance their awareness, 
have a clear idea on what is important, vigorously carry out 
preparatory work to truly deepen the struggle and produce new 
results. He urged them to nurture a strong force to accomplish 
the arduous task of defending reform and opening up, and of 
safeguarding stability. 
  Tao Siju said: Since the second plenary session of the 
Central Discipline Inspection Commission last August, the 
Ministry of Public Security, under the leadership of the party 
Central Committee and the State Council; and public security 
organs in various provinces, autonomous regions, and 
municipalities, under the leadership of their local party 
committees and governments, have attached great importance to 
the anti-corruption struggle. With a strong determination, they 
swiftly swing into action. Thanks to the effective measures and 
a tremendous amount of work performed, they have achieved 
varying degrees of success in attaining the interim goals 
established by the Ministry of Public Security party committee 
on the basis of the three tasks set by the central authorities. 
Leading cadres at the departmental level and above, and county 
and city (district) public security directors and commissars 
have generally carried out internal investigation and 
rectification, and have enhanced self-discipline and integrity. 
Discipline was strictly enforced, and a number of cases of 
violation of law and discipline were earnestly investigated and 
dealt with. The unhealthy practice of public security organs in 
coastal areas taking part in smuggling and shielding smugglers 
has been effectively curbed. The unhealthy practice of wanton 
collection of fees has basically stopped. The question of 
public security organs going into business and setting up 
enterprises has been initially resolved. The practice of 
unfairness in enforcing the law, of breaking the law to seek 
personal gain, and of imposing fines instead of criminal 
punishment has been effectively checked. Tao Siju continued: 
Under no circumstances should we overestimate our recent 
achievement in combating corruption, nor should we take problems 
existing in our ranks lightly. We must not ignore the serious 
problems in our ranks simply because our ranks are good in 
general. If our ranks become corrupt, it would seriously damage 
our party and government images. In addition, we will not be 
able to discharge the heavy responsibility of safeguarding 
stability and we may even endanger stability. Public security 
organs shoulder a heavy responsibility in combating corruption; 
we must remain sober-minded. 
  Tao Siju pointed out: Public Security organs must wage the 
struggle against corruption with reference to their 
characteristics and give due emphasis to important issues. They 
must give top priority to and earnestly investigate such abuses 
in the law enforcement process as breaking the law to embezzle 
money for personal gain, extorting confessions by torture, and 
abusing their power for personal gain in issuing licenses, 
certificates, and household registration cards. Efforts should 
be made to investigate cases of serious violation of law and 
discipline involving leading organs, leading cadres, and police 
cadres and men. 
  Tao Siju stressed: Public security organs must strengthen 
leadership and establish a system of leadership responsibility 
in deepening the struggle against corruption. Beginning from 
the Ministry of Public Security, every public security organ 
shall be responsible for their subordinate agencies and report 
to their superior. Leading cadres at each level must attend to 
the building of the public security ranks while taking care of 
their work. We must strengthen management awareness and have 
the courage to enforce strict discipline in public security 
units. Leaders who pay no attention to the building of the 
ranks are not qualified to serve as leaders. When problems 
occur in the ranks, leaders concerned, as well as the parties 
involved, will be held accountable. To carry out the struggle 
against corruption, we must strengthen the building of a clean 
government on a long-term basis. This requires education and 
the establishment of a system. Public security organs at all 
levels must continue to educate police cadres and men to 
establish the goal of serving the people wholeheartedly and to 
educate them in the mass and legal concepts. At the same time, 
it is necessary to strengthen rules and regulations and 
establish a sound supervision mechanism. It is particularly 
necessary to vigorously establish systems. 
  Tao Siju concluded by asking public security organs' 
discipline inspection and supervision departments, as well as 
administrative departments, to strengthen work and create a 
situation in which everyone is involved in comprehensively 
improving public security, and successfully carrying out the 
struggle against corruption. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1793 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_k_94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  18 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   Circular on Returning Students, Residence Registration </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Circular on Returning Students, Residence Registration </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0304232794 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 0805 
GMT 18 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0304232794 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 18 Mar (XINHUA) -- The Ministry of Public 
Security issued a circular the other day on residence 
registration of people returning home after studying abroad. 
  The circular notes: Since China started implementing the 
policy of reform and opening up, exchanges with the outside 
world have increased and more and more people are going abroad 
to pursue their studies, either on government or their own 
expense. This has had a positive impact in promoting domestic 
economic development and advancing China's cultural, scientific, 
and technological exchanges with countries of the world. To 
broaden the appeal to skilled personnel and promote rational 
mobility, the circular urges public security departments to 
simplify procedures for people returning home from studies 
abroad to file for residence registration. 
  The circular provides that when a person returning home from 
study abroad applies to have his residence restored in the 
location where he formerly kept residence registration, the 
police station should, upon examining his passport, restore his 
canceled residence registration. Where a person files for 
residence registration with another police station within the 
same city or county, the police station in the location where 
the person wants to move in should accept his application after 
examining his passport and a residence registration cancellation 
certificate issued by the police station in the locality where 
the person used to live. Where a person needs to settle down 
and work in another city or county, he should -- with documents 
issued by the State Education Commission and the Ministry of 
Personnel -- file for residence registration with the police 
station in the location where his employing unit resides. A 
person who has obtained a doctoral degree, or has been assigned 
to a key state project, to a state-owned large- or medium-sized 
enterprise, or to remote border region where conditions are 
tough, should have relevant documents issued by a personnel 
department at the provincial level or higher and a certificate 
on change of household registration; he may also apply for 
change of residence for his family members and under-age 
children. The circular also readjusts the time limit for 
canceling residence registration. Students who go abroad for 
studies for less than one year need only complete their exit 
registration, and do not need to cancel their residence 
registration. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1794 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_k_94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  31 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   Spokesman Views `Phony' State Security Officials </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Spokesman Views `Phony' State Security Officials </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104125694 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 1119 
GMT 31 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0104125694 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Excerpts] Beijing, 31 Mar (XINHUA) -- According to the 
spokesman of the Ministry of State Security, since the "State 
Security Law" was promulgated, the broad masses have become more 
conscious of state security and have actively supported and 
cooperated with state security organs in carrying out their 
work. He said: However, some lawless elements, posing as workers 
of state security organs, have swindled and bluffed the public, 
tarnishing the image and reputation of state security organs. 
Recently, more than 10 criminal cases of this nature have been 
investigated in a certain city alone, and a number of lawless 
elements have been brought to justice. 
  Judging from the investigated cases, the main purpose of 
these lawless elements posing as state security personnel was to 
swindle money without being brought to justice. [passage omitted] 
  The spokesman pointed out: This kind of case of posing as 
state security personnel for swindling purposes recently has 
been uncovered in various localities, and all of them were made 
known to the public and handled in a timely manner. These 
lawless elements were not skillful swindlers; they could have 
easily been identified if we stayed alert and were familiar with 
relevant laws and regulations. Although state security 
personnel are authorized to exercise necessary authority 
pertaining to their jobs while performing their duties, they are 
required to do things strictly according to law, and use their 
authority correctly under any circumstances; under no 
circumstances are they allowed to overstep their authority or 
abuse their powers. The Ministry of State Security recently 
unveiled its standardized "investigation badge," which is 
applicable across the country. One of the purposes of using 
this investigation badge is to enable the public to distinguish 
real state security personnel from phony ones, and to enable the 
public to more effectively exercise supervision over state 
security personnel using their authority. 
  The spokesman stressed: If anyone is found to have committed 
illegal or criminal acts using the name of a state security 
organ or personnel, the public should promptly report this to a 
local state security organ. State security organs, together 
with concerned departments, will punish strictly according to 
law criminal elements using the name of a state security organ 
to swindle. Every case will be properly handled as soon as it 
is uncovered -- we will not show mercy. State security 
personnel themselves also will be seriously dealt with if they 
are found to have committed illegal acts or acts in violation of 
discipline. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1795 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_k_94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Snakeheads' Running Illegal Immigrant Trade </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    `Snakeheads' Running Illegal Immigrant Trade </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0304062694 Hong Kong THE SUNDAY STANDARD in English 3 Apr 
94 p 1 </F>

<F P=103> HK0304062694 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong THE SUNDAY STANDARD </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Mark Bode] </F>
  [Text] Chinese snakeheads have taken over the illegal 
immigrant trade from their Hong Kong counterparts and are 
ferrying thousands of mainlanders into Hong Kong by sea. Marine 
Police South Division commander at Aberdeen John Cox said 
importing illegals was big business for snakeheads, but the 
involvement of Hong Kong residents in the practice had died down 
dramatically. 
  "Hong Kong people were heavily involved in the smuggling of 
IIs [illegal immigrants] here in the 1980s but we haven't 
arrested a Hong Kong person in connection with this sort of 
thing in a long time," Mr Cox said. He said the preferred 
smuggling route now seemed to be by sea. 
  Last year, police arrested 21,003 illegals arriving by boat, 
compared with 12,373 using overland routes. In 1992, 17,891 
were arrested arriving by sea and 15,812 by land. In 1991, only 
10,023 were arrested arriving by sea and 14,066 by land. 
  Mr Cox said Hong Kong smugglers had virtually abandoned the 
illegal immigrant trade in favour of smuggling electrical 
products, which were much more profitable. "I don't know what 
the Chinese officials are doing to combat snakeheads, but it's 
hard for us to do anything about them." 
  Last year, 37,517 illegal immigrants were arrested--an 
increase of more than 5 per cent on the 35,645 illegals arrested 
in 1992. Police said the arrests reflected a small percentage of 
illegals entering the territory. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1796 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_k_94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   Crime, Punishment Report for 15-28 Mar </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Crime, Punishment Report for 15-28 Mar </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0104154894 </F>
<F P=103> HK0104154894 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on crime, investigations, trials, sentencings, and other 
judicial-related activities in the PRC monitored by Hong Kong 
Bureau during the period 15-28 March. The source and mode of 
processing are given in parentheses at the end of each entry. 
Certain reports deemed more significant may have been filed 
separately, in which case the summary will include the serial 
number of the separately filed item. 
  As evidenced by the stories listed below, during the month 
PRC crime reportage focused on no single issue. 
<H8>  INTERNATIONAL </H8>
  In the Russian city of Grodekovo, 20 km from Suifenhe in 
Heilongjiang Province, about 3,000 Chinese do business in the 
peak season. Four gangs can be identified among them, namely 
the "Harbin group," the "Wuchang group," the "Yanji group," and 
the "Hunchun group," which prey on their compatriots and extort 
money from them. On 22 September 1993, the head of the criminal 
investigation section of the provincial public security bureau 
led 16 criminal investigation detectives to Grodekovo, with the 
consent of the Russian side. As a result of the joint operation 
by Chinese and Russian police, 40 persons who had committed 
crimes outside the border were arrested. (Summary) (Hong Kong 
WEN WEI PO in Chinese 20 Mar 94 p b4) 
  Since the normalization of Sino-Vietnamese relations, border 
trade has developed rapidly, while transnational crime such as 
drug and gun trafficking have also become more rampant. Since 
last June, the People's Armed Police Guangxi Border Detachment 
has mainly cracked down on guns and drugs. In half a year, they 
have cracked 152 drug and gun cases; seized 1,463 guns of 
various kinds, including 217 army guns, 7,179 rounds of 
ammunition, and 418 hand grenades and antitank grenades; seized 
69,037 grams of opium and 7,099.4 grams of heroin; crushed 49 
gangs specialized in gun and drug trafficking; and arrested 239 
criminals involved in gun and drug crimes. Guangxi party Deputy 
Secretary Ding Tingmo said that Guangxi has a coastline of over 
2,000 km, and that the crackdown on transnational crimes along 
the border will be a long-term task. (Summary) (Hong Kong WEN 
WEI PO in Chinese 14 Mar 94 p b2) 
  Senior Colonel Si Jiuyi, National People's Congress deputy 
and commander of the Yunnan Armed Police Corps, in an exclusive 
interview with a ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE staff reporter on 21 March, 
said that in 1993 armed police and public security authorities 
in Yunnan cracked over 4,000 drug cases, 27 of which were cases 
of armed drug trafficking; seized five tonnes of heroin and 
opium; and arrested over 6,000 criminals, 473 being sentenced to 
death. He said that the drug problem is still very serious in 
Yunnan. Trafficking is showing an upward trend, and the 
following new developments have been observed: 
  -- A rise in major drug trafficking cases. After making some 
money, drug traffickers tend to try making colossal profits by 
engaging in transactions involving 100 kg, 200 kg, or more. 
  -- A steady growth in armed drug trafficking. Last year, 
Yunnan police seized a total of 33 military firearms, 13 other 
firearms, and 50 hand grenades. 
  -- Better organized means of trafficking. Drug trafficking 
using cars and motorcycles is no longer a novelty. Criminals 
use mobile phones and walkie-talkies to communicate with one 
another and transport drugs through such methods as relaying or 
sending traffickers and drugs separately. 
  -- An increase in sources of drugs. Drugs used to come only 
from the Golden Triangle, but are now infiltrating into China 
from Laos and Vietnam. Last year, Yunnan's border towns Honghe 
and Wenshan cracked over 200 drug cases originating from Laos 
and Vietnam. 
  -- An increase in drug traffickers from other provinces. 
Last year, Yunnan police arrested nearly 900 drug traffickers 
from other provinces, and the number of provinces and autonomous 
regions they came from increased from 22 the previous year to 
27. Most active were drug traffickers from Sichuan, Zhejiang, 
Ningxia, Qinghai, Gansu, and Xinjiang. 
  Si Jiuyi explained that as Yunnan borders on Vietnam, Burma, 
and Laos, the residents in the border areas share customs and 
languages with those three countries, and the border markers are 
not very clear, posing enormous difficulty for antinarcotics 
operations. Drug traffickers have such slogans as "You can 
execute me, but my future generations will benefit" or "I may 
stay in jail for a while, but I will enjoy prosperity for the 
rest of my life." Criminal organizations give pensions to the 
families of arrested or executed drug traffickers. Another 
problem is that antinarcotics operations are short of funds and 
manpower and suffer from backward equipment. In one case, a 
drug-fighting unit leader had to chase a criminal by bicycle. 
In the end, the criminal got away in a car. 
  Si Jiuyi said that the Yunnan Armed Police have steadily 
increased the number of cases cracked over the years. Many 
armed policemen have received awards. Two of China's 10 Young 
People of the Year were antinarcotics heroes from Yunnan. Over 
20 members of the Yunnan Armed Police were killed in 
antinarcotics battles over the past few years. (Summary) 
(Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 0701 GMT 21 Mar 94) 
(filed as hk2903092194) 
  Officials in charge of public security departments in 11 
provinces, municipalities and autonomous regions, including 
Beijing, Tianjin, Liaoning and Shanghai, gathered in Shanghai to 
discuss with representatives from the Hong Kong police force the 
fight against organized crime committed by triads. The meeting 
was held amid the budding of some Hong Kong underground groups 
in the Mainland. Participants believed that the strengthening 
of cooperation between Mainland and Hong Kong police was 
necessary. The director of the Criminal Investigation Bureau of 
the Ministry of Public Security stressed that underground forces 
from outside the borders were in no way sheltered in the 
mainland. All members of illegal groups were harshly punished in 
accordance with the law once they were found guilty of 
committing crimes inside the Mainland. (Summary) (Beijing 
ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in English 1140 GMT 17 Mar 94) (filed as 
hk1703145194) 
<H8>  CENTRAL </H8>
  A spokesman of the Ministry of Public Security said that in 
1993 public security organs handled 1.617 million criminal cases 
and cracked 1.212 million which occurred in the same year, up by 
2.2 and 12.3 percent over 1992. Over 290,000 cases which had 
occurred before 1993 were also solved. 
  Among the 1.61 million criminal cases handled by public 
security organs in 1993, 539,000 were major and serious ones, an 
18 percent increase over 1992. Of the major and serious cases, 
302,000 robbery cases involved amounts of 2,000 yuan and above, 
20.2 percent up over 1992, while the number of major cases 
cracked which occurred in the same year rose to 370,000, a 23.4 
percent increase. 
  The spokesman said that the security situation remains grim 
in a handful of cities and counties, where murders, robberies, 
and "highway and railway looting" are happening all the time. 
(Summary) (Beijing FAZHI RIBAO in Chinese 23 Feb 94 p 1) (filed 
as hk1703141194) 
  The state council recently promulgated regulations on the 
protection of computer systems. They apply to all systems in 
the country, covering construction of buildings for computers, 
the putting on record of connections of systems with overseas 
entities, a unified practice for prevention of viruses and other 
data related to viruses, and the issuing of permits for the 
exclusive sale of antivirus safety products. 
  There are up to 500,000 computer systems in China. Computer 
crime is rising, with a single case involving 14 million yuan. 
  Around 70 to 80 percent of 400,000 computers across the 
country have been infected once with a virus. Some scientific 
research institutes and higher learning institutes have had all 
their computers infected. (Summary) (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN 
SHE in English 0352 GMT 19 Mar 94) 
<H8>  PROVINCIAL </H8>
<H5>  Anhui </H5>
  Anhui's campaigns against serious crime in recent years have 
seen 6,300 big cases discovered, over 20,000 criminals caught, 
and more than 3,400 gangs smashed. There were campaigns against 
stealing in Hefei City, against possession of tools and weapons 
for criminal purposes in Huainan City, and, together with 
Jiangsu, Shandong and Henan, against crimes along the Chiang 
Jiang. In fighting road robberies, 3,615 criminals were 
arrested and 606 criminal rings destroyed. In the struggle 
against the abduction of women and children, 26 criminal dens 
were destroyed, 422 abductors arrested, and 660 women and 
children freed. The Ministry of Public Security and the 
All-China Women's Federation cited Anhui on several occasions 
for its notable achievements. Severe punishment has resulted in 
social order being much improved, promoting reform and opening 
up and economic development. (Summary) (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN 
SHE in English 0351 GMT 19 Mar 94) 
<H5>  Guangdong </H5>
  At the 6 March provincial work meeting for chief procurators 
at provincial and city levels, the chief procurator emphasized 
continuing to focus on major cases. The key to the 
anticorruption struggle would be continuously dealing with cases 
involving workers of party and government organizations and 
judicial, administrative, law-enforcement, and economic 
administrative departments. 
  In January procuratorate organizations filed 235 economic 
criminal cases involving corruption and bribery for 
investigation, of which 190 were major cases, accounting for 
80.6 percent of all cases filed and involving a total of 6.42 
million yuan. (Summary) (Guangzhou Guangdong People's Radio 
Network in Mandarin 0400 GMT 7 Mar 94) 
  On 18 March, 90 persons in charge of the Army, Navy, and Air 
Force units in Guangzhou; the People's Armed Police; and public 
security organs attending the forum on managing servicemen and 
Army vehicles in Guangzhou inspected passing Army vehicles. 
Guangzhou Railway Station was the first stop in the move to 
crack down on "bogus Army vehicles, bogus Army car plates, and 
bogus documents" by Guangzhou Military Region. Four or five 
bogus Army vehicles were found. All the owners were outsiders 
pretending to be servicemen to solicit customers. A coach 
driver shouted for customers in the name of "a hostel run by 
Guangdong Military Command," but he was seeking customers for 
Tangxi Hotel. In Tianhe District a black Lexus car was stopped, 
and the "bogus lieutenant" admitted that he was with a taxation 
bureau. The inspection teams found six bogus Army vehicles in 
Guangzhou Railway Station, Guangzhou Boulevard, and Guangyuan 
Road East. Eleven bogus soldiers were found, four overloaded 
Army vehicles were detected, and six Army trucks could not 
produce sufficient documents. (Summary) (Hong Kong WEN WEI PO 
in Chinese 20 Mar 94 p a5) 
  Last year Guangzhou City police seized 145.3 kg of heroin 
and over 3.9 kg of "ice" and investigated and punished over 
6,500 people involved in drug trafficking and drug abuse. 
  Guangzhou City Public Security Bureau seized 1,425 guns of 
various kinds (of which 57 were designed for military use) and 
3,237 bullets last year. 
  Last year, more than 32,000 people in Guangzhou were 
involved 
in gambling and were punished, and more than 9,700 people were 
investigated for being involved in prostitution, patronizing 
prostitutes, procuring prostitutes, and harboring prostitutes. 
  The total value of goods and money confiscated by the 
Guangzhou police in criminal cases amounted to more than 310 
million yuan. 
  A Guangzhou City Public Security Bureau report said that the 
social order situation in Guangzhou remains quite grim. The 
number of serious criminal cases is increasing steadily, the 
damage resulting from organized crime is increasing day by day, 
and some criminal gangs are becoming underworld societies. 
Manifestations of the "seven vices" rise and fall. Road and 
fire accidents occur frequently. 
  The number of cases of missing cars is increasing. Last 
year, 965 cars and more than 6,600 motor cycles were stolen in 
Guangzhou. 
  This year the Guangzhou police will make great efforts to 
improve Guangzhou's social order and will curb the momentum in 
the rising number of major and serious cases, will send more 
policemen to patrol the streets, will arm traffic policemen so 
that they can take care of both traffic and social order, and 
will strengthen the management of people from other localities 
and mobilize the residents to set up "small security zones" to 
promote the comprehensive improvement of social order. 
(Summary) (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 0540 GMT 
14 Mar 94) (filed as hk2403063494) 
  This morning, the Guangzhou City Intermediate People's Court 
announced the execution of six criminals whose death sentences 
and life-long deprivation of political rights had been confirmed 
by the provincial higher people's court. The six convicted drug 
traffickers were taken to an execution ground and shot in the 
head. (Summary) (Guangzhou Guangdong People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 0400 GMT 18 Mar 94) (filed as hk3003123294) 
  The Shenzhen Work Conference on the Anticorruption Struggle 
and Maintaining Clean Government called on 19 March revealed 
that in recent years Shenzhen has rounded up 43 criminals who 
had embezzled huge sums of money, and absconded overseas, 
outside the border, and in the hinterland, in addition to five 
criminals who surrendered themselves. Among those criminals 
rounded up were Wen Shibin, former Shenzhen Haicheng Company 
manager, who had embezzled a huge sum of tax from the state, and 
absconded for three years. His was the most serious case, 
involving embezzlement of some 100 million yuan of tax in 
addition to smuggling goods worth scores of millions of yuan. 
(Summary) (Guangzhou Guangdong People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 0400 GMT 19 Mar 94) 
  Public security organs in Shenzhen's Baoan District cracked 
a 
firearms-smuggling and robbery gang on 18 March, putting 10 
suspects under arrest. They also seized a 0.54-caliber pistol 
with 17 bullets and eight riot guns with 230 bullets. Initial 
investigations show that the gang came from Guangxi and 
specialized in firearms smuggling and trafficking. (Summary) 
(Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 0510 GMT 19 Mar 94] 
  Shenzhen Airport Public Security Sub-Bureau recently found a 
stun gun on a passenger, the 26th case of a boarding passenger 
armed with gun since January. The passenger was head of the 
security team of a company. The state has repeatedly instructed 
clearly that no passenger, including servicemen on active 
service and in-service policemen, is allowed to board a plane 
with police equipment or sharp objects, except those who have 
permission from the special department of the state. (Summary) 
(Hong Kong WEN WEI PO in Chinese 22 Mar 94 p a5) 
  In January and February 263 car thefts were reported in 
Shenzhen, 11.4 percent up on the same period last year. Last 
year the economic loss from such thefts was 430 million yuan. 
Reasons for the increase include the authorities failing to act 
firmly enough, with few cases being dealt with, and criminals 
often inviting robbers from Hong Kong to commit such crimes. 
(Summary) (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in English 1402 GMT 25 
Mar 94) 
  On 30 March, Shenzhen's Futian District Court sentenced a 
man 
to 18 months imprisonment for evading some 70,000 yuan of taxes 
in addition to fining him 5,000 yuan and having him repay the 
evaded taxes. The man was an individual entrepreneur. 
(Summary) (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 1409 GMT 30 
Mar 94) 
<H5>  Jiangxi </H5>
  On 15 January, the public security bureau of Jiangxi's 
Xinjian County intercepted cigarettes worth over 770,000 yuan 
being transported by a private business operator. The victim 
took legal action against the bureau with Nanchang City 
Intermediate Court on 20 January. On 29 March, the court passed 
a verdict demanding that the bureau pay 55,813.89 yuan in 
compensation. (Summary) (Hong Kong LIEN HO PAO in Chinese 31 
Mar 94 p 10) 
<H5>  Sichuan </H5>
  At an open judgment pronouncement meeting on 18 March, the 
Chongqing City Intermediate People's Court sentenced Liu Feng to 
death and deprived him of political rights for life. On 27 
April last year, after his courtship was rejected by his senior 
middle school classmate, Liu Feng poured a bottle of sulfuric 
acid on her face, seriously burning her face and body, and 
stabbed her in the back, leaving her permanently disabled. 
(Summary) (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 0930 GMT 18 
Mar 94) 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1797 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_k_94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   Benefits of Birth Control Program Noted </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Benefits of Birth Control Program Noted </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204153294 Beijing XINHUA in English 1430 GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0204153294 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Weihai, April 2 (XINHUA) -- Long Na, a villager in 
the Rongcheng city area in Shandong Province, is proud of her 
only daughter, for the teenager has done well both in school and 
in after-school training such as piano and calligraphy. 
  Long is one of over 5,400 rural women in the region who 
refuse to have a second child in this rich city on the eastern 
tip of China. 
  The city has been in the forefront of China's "family 
planning" campaign since the government spread the message 
throughout the country ten years ago. 
  The city's mayor, Lin Lexin, said that in 1993 the major 
indexes of population development, including the natural growth 
rate of 1.31 per thousand, were all lower than the national 
average. On the other hand, the average life expectancy of 74.6 
years was as long as that in developed countries. 
  So far, about 70 percent of the rural areas under the city's 
administration have seen a drop in population growth. 
  Lin said its successful birth control has paid off in many 
areas. 
  Last year, the city, with a population of less than 800,000, 
registered 2,005 yuan in annual per capita income, jumping to 
the leading place among the cities of similar size in north 
China. 
  Lin said that he imagined that the city would not have 
achieved that if it had had an extra 400,000 mouths to feed. 
That number is calculated on the supposition that the 
population had kept growing at the same pace as it was doing 
before enforcing family planning. 
  Long and her husband are living in a three-storey building. 
They earned 15,000 yuan last year. 
  "Men no longer look down upon us, because we women earn 
bread 
and butter to support the family as they do. And we also get 
self-confidence in our work," said Long, who is now employed as 
an accountant in a township enterprise. 
  In 1993, 98 percent of local women were working in various 
spheres. 
  Experts considered that the local residents have broken with 
the old concept which looked to offsprings for support in their 
old age. 
  A recent sample survey shows that 35 percent of women of 
child-bearing age intend to have only one child, and 80 percent 
of households welcome girl babies as well as boy babies. 
  A population of reasonable size also results in better 
education. Last year, 99 percent of primary-school-age children 
studied in classrooms. The rate of those passing higher 
education entrance exams is in the top ranks in the country. 
  It seems that in most cases, it is easier for the 
economically strong regions like Rongcheng city to fully 
implement birth-control policies. 
  According to a recent national conference on this issue, the 
coastal areas in east China like the provinces of Shandong and 
Zhejiang and the cities of Shanghai and Tianjin have seen a 
birth rate below 15 per thousand. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1798 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_k_94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   Article Views Education in Ethnic Areas </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Article Views Education in Ethnic Areas </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0404075494 Beijing CHINA DAILY in English 4 Apr 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> HK0404075494 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing CHINA DAILY </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter: "Education Is the Root of Poverty in </F>
Ethnic Areas"] 
  [Text] The under-developed educational system in minority 
nationality regions is the main bottleneck holding up economic 
progress in those areas, according to Wang Xiumei, Vice Chairman 
of the People's Congress of Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region. 
  A vicious cycle is at play because the regions are so poor, 
qualified educators cannot be enticed to stay and improve the 
schools. Then the students who attend -- or more likely, drop 
out of -- the substandard schools do not acquire the skills and 
knowledge needed to bring about progressive economic growth. 
  Adding to the problem, native students who have been sent to 
study in other areas of the country quite often refuse to come 
back after graduation. 
  The shortage of talented teachers endangers the very 
existence of some of the schools in minority regions. Low 
salaries and bad working and living conditions for the teachers 
are to blame, according to Hu Shiqiang, a professor at Yunnan 
Normal University. 
  Yet even if a good teacher stays, the poor facilities of the 
schools make it difficult to carry out many educational 
programmes. 
  Of course, having good teachers and facilities is pointless 
unless the school has students. But in the minority areas, 
economic pressures keep many students out of school. 
  In the rural areas of Inner Mongolia, the annual expenses of 
a primary school or high-school student in a peasant's family is 
about 100 yuan ($11), Wang said. But many minority families 
have more than one child and very low incomes, and they can't 
pay for all of their children to go to school at the same time. 
As a result, many peasants stop their children's schooling 
after primary school. 
  Similar problems plague Yunnan, according to Hu. For 
example, a student of the Lisu nationality who was admitted into 
a university had to refuse the offer even though he would 
receive a 30-yuan ($3) monthly allowance and transportation 
expenses between his home and the university. 
  "I am grateful to the goodwill of the departments concerned, 
but this can only solve my own problem, and not that of my 
family, who depend on me to make both ends meet," said the 
student. 
  And now, schooling costs are getting even steeper. The 
traditional educational system that enabled students to receive 
college education largely at governmental expense is changing, 
due to the establishment of the market economy. Most students 
now have to pay some of the tuition themselves. 
  Hu offered several suggestions to overcome the roadblocks to 
educational progress. 
  First, the government should allocate special funds to the 
regions to improve the school facilities and the teachers' 
living and working conditions. Teachers working in such areas 
should be offered higher salaries than their counterparts in 
other regions. 
  Secondly, scholarships and allowances should be provided to 
a 
certain proportion of students from poor minority areas. 
  Thirdly, the central government should establish an 
educational fund encouraging teachers who devote themselves to 
ethnic education in the remote and under-developed regions. 
  In addition, Hu suggested that the educational 
administrations should make it clear that college graduates from 
other areas can return to their home towns for work after five 
to eight years of teaching in minority nationality areas. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1799 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_k_94020" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> NATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Political &amp; Social </F>
<H3> <TI>   Measures Aid Survival of Endangered Animals </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Measures Aid Survival of Endangered Animals </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0304045694 Beijing XINHUA in English 0134 GMT 3 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0304045694 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Harbin, April 3 (XINHUA) -- Wild Siberian tigers, 
which were thought to be on the verge of extinction until 
recently, are being sighted more and more frequently nowadays in 
northeast China, due to expanding local forest coverage and 
meticulous human protective measures. 
  Miao Liping, a worker with the Dongfanghong Forestry Bureau 
in Heilongjiang Province, and other passengers on a bus saw a 
female Siberian tiger and three cubs drinking from a spring near 
the Qiyuan Forest Farm not so long ago. The cubs were each 
about one m long and 50 cm tall. They were so leisurely as if 
they knew that they were specially protected by the government 
and people. 
  There have also been reports that the endangered animals 
were 
recently seen in the Xiao Hinggan Mountains, Wanda Mountains and 
Laoye Ridge, also in Heilongjiang Province. 
  The tiger used to be regarded as the "king" of the animal 
world in China but human beings proved to be more powerful. As 
human activities expanded, the number of tigers was reduced 
drastically until the government and people in the country 
urgently adopted measures to protect the tiger and other 
endangered animals in the past decades so as to maintain 
ecological balance. 
  The Siberian tiger has also been listed as the most 
endangered of ten species of wild animals by the World Wildlife 
Fund International. It is the largest among all the ten species 
of tigers in the world. 
  A group of wildlife experts from the northeast China 
Forestry 
University confirmed that the number of wild Siberian tigers in 
China has increased to nearly 100 from the 1990 figure of 30. 
The experts have been keeping tract of the animal since 1980. 
  There are now less than 300 wild Siberian tigers in the 
whole 
world, exclusively in northeast China and Siberia. More are 
being bred in captivity. 
  According to experts, a Siberian tiger usually needs an area 
of a dozen sq km of forest to survive. It lives alone and is 
particular about selecting a spouse. An estrous female Siberian 
tiger has often to wander a vast distance before finding a male 
tiger. If the two tigers do not get along with each other, the 
female tiger has to look for another male tiger. Very often, 
before the female tiger finds a spouse, her estrum has passed. 
The difficulty for the animal to mate limits its number in the 
wild. 
  China has listed the tiger as a first-class protected animal 
since the early 1950s. Hunting of the tiger and trading in 
products made from tigers have been banned. In 1989 Zhang 
Guojun and two other farmers were sentenced to six years in 
prison for killing a Siberian tiger. In January this year 50 kg 
of tiger bones confiscated from smugglers and destined for use 
in traditional Chinese medicinal recipes were burned. 
  The country has also set up several nature forest reserves 
with a total acreage of 100,000 ha. The oldest one was 
established in Heilongjiang in 1958. 
  In 1986 the China Administrative Office in Charge of 
Endangered, Rare and Precious Animals and the Heilongjiang 
Provincial Government invested over 10 million yuan (about 1.2 
million U.S. dollars) to establish a breeding center in a 
mountainous forest at Hengdaohezi in Hailin County, 
Heilongjiang, to raise Siberian tigers in captivity. The annual 
expenses for feed, equipment and medical treatment in the center 
surpasses three million yuan. The initial population of five 
male and 15 female Siberian tigers at the center were collected 
from zoos in Beijing, Shanghai, Chengdu and Guangzhou. 
  Tigers at the center are fed at 3:30 p.m. in the spring, 
fall 
and winter, and at 4:00 p.m. in summer. A total of three head 
of cattle are slaughtered to feed them daily. In addition, 
nutritional materials such as milk, eggs, liver, mutton, pork 
bones, racoon meat, yeast, multivitamins and dog meat are added 
to their food. 
  However, feeding is withheld on Sunday to increase their 
ability to endure the torments of hunger, as in the wild. On 
Fridays they are fed live food, mainly chickens and rabbits, to 
maintain their preying ability. "This is to pave the way for 
their return to the wild," said Liu Xinchen, director of the 
center. 
  It has been reported that the estrus, mating and whelping 
phases of the Siberian tiger are strongly seasonal. However, 
Director Liu said, this seasonal behavior can be changed by 
using scientific management and nutrients. The tigers can be in 
estrus, mate, be pregnant and whelp in every season, with the 
peak birth rate occuring from June to August. The gestation 
periods of 12 pregnancies at the center so far has been 107 to 
108 days. 
  Scientists at the center also noted that when a male tiger 
was permitted to mate with five females at will, it mated 333 
times over 35 days, resulting in three whelpings. By adopting a 
managed mating method or separating the male and female tigers 
for 12 hours after each mating, however, all five females 
whelped, although merely 51 matings were allowed in 24 days. 
Moreover, eight cubs were produced from the natural method and 
14 from the managed method. 
  The tiger in captivity also selects its spouse carefully, 
Director Liu stressed. The technicians have to transfer a male 
tiger to the neighboring shed of a female tiger to let them get 
familiar with each other first. Even so, many of the 
neighboring tigers fail to mate. 
  A male tiger called "Beijing Prince", which was transferred 
from the Beijing Zoo to the center in 1986, refused to mate 
female tiger no. 001 in 1987. Later, it was introduced to 
female tiger no. 014. Since then, "Beijing Prince" has never 
shown any interest in any other female tiger. 
  After seven years of effort, the center has succeeded in 
increasing its initial tiger population to 73. During this 
period 67 cubs in 28 litters have been born, and 58 have 
survived. Female tiger no. 010 has given birth to 25 cubs in 
seven litters, with the largest litter size being five. The 
tiger has been honored as a "Heroic Mother". Both the litter 
size and the survival rate are records and the center is now the 
largest of its kind in the world. 
  Director Liu revealed that the center has mapped out a 
program to send the tigers raised in captivity back to the wild. 
It is expected to return some of them to nature by the year 
2003. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1800 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_m_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  27 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Military </F>
<H3> <TI>   Fang Zuqi Attends Meeting on NPC </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Fang Zuqi Attends Meeting on NPC </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0304141394 Nanjing Jiangsu People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 2300 GMT 27 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0304141394 </F>
<F P=104>  Nanjing Jiangsu People's Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Mandarin </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "News" program] </F>
  [Text] Yesterday morning [27 March], more than 1,000 
officers and men from the Nanjing Military Region organs and 
units stationed in Nanjing happily gathered together to hold a 
report meeting on guidelines of the Second Session of the Eighth 
National People's Congress [NPC]. Attending the meeting were 
Fang Zuqi, Guo Xizhang, Wang Yongming, (Zang Ying), (Chen 
Binde), (Wang Chongguo), (Wang Caiwu), and Miao Guoliang, who 
are Eighth NPC deputies from the party committee standing 
committee and organs of the Nanjing Military Region, standing 
committee members of the Eighth Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference, and leaders of headquarters, political 
department, and logistics department of the Nanjing Military 
Region. 
  Guo Xizhang, deputy commander of the Nanjing Military 
Region, 
presided over the meeting. Wang Yongming, NPC deputy and deputy 
political commissar of the Nanjing Military Region, briefed the 
participants on the grand event of the Second Session of the 
Eighth NPC and relayed basic guidelines of the session. 
  Political Commissar Fang Zuqi spoke at the meeting. He said: 
The Second Session of the Eighth NPC was a very important 
meeting held at the crucial moment of China's reform, opening 
up, and socialist modernization. Party committees and political 
organs at all levels must attach great importance to this 
session and seriously and responsibly do a good job in studying 
and carrying out the guidelines of this session. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1801 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_m_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Military </F>
<H3> <TI>   Yu Yongbo Addresses `Grass-Roots' Forum </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Yu Yongbo Addresses `Grass-Roots' Forum </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204063094 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 1107 
GMT 1 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0204063094 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Luo Yuwen (5012 3768 2429)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 1 Mar (XINHUA) -- An all-army grass-roots 
political work forum was held in Beijing today. Addressing the 
forum, Yu Yongbo, member of the Central Military Commission 
[CMC] and director of the General Political Department of the 
People's Liberation Army [PLA], emphasized the necessity of 
strengthening overall grass-roots construction by firmly taking 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping's thinking on army building in the new 
period as guidance, and meeting the overall demands put forward 
by CMC Chairman Jiang Zemin: "Be qualified politically and 
competent militarily, have a fine work style, maintain strict 
discipline, and be assured of adequate logistical support." 
  The forum was held with the approval of the CMC, whose 
leaders, including Jiang Zemin, Liu Huaqing, and Zhang Zhen have 
attached great importance to it by putting forward demands. The 
forum's main topic of discussion was to study ways and means to 
implement the "Outlines on Grass-Roots Army Building," reissued 
by the CMC, so as to enhance the combat effectiveness of 
grass-roots party organizations, raise grass-roots cadres' 
ability to lead troops, and promote overall improvement in the 
grass roots. Cadres in charge of political work in various 
major PLA units and the armed police force attended the meeting. 
  In his speech, Yu Yongbo elaborated Comrade Jiang Zemin's 
overall demands in standardizing and guiding grass-roots 
construction. He said: These five phrases: "Be qualified 
politically and competent militarily, have a fine work style, 
maintain strict discipline, and be assured of adequate 
logistical support" were based on Comrade Deng Xiaoping's 
thinking on army building in the new period and took into 
consideration the realities of doing so. Broadly summing up the 
tasks and criteria of army building, these statements fully 
reflected the demands and missions of army building in the new 
situation and are in complete compliance with the objective law 
of grass-roots construction. Standardizing and guiding 
grass-roots construction with these "five phrases" is not only a 
practical application of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's thinking on 
army building in respect to grass-roots construction in the new 
period, but are also important measures needed for realizing the 
great goal of establishing a powerful, modernized, regular 
revolutionary army. Armed with this guidance, we should be able 
to build a more solid foundation for army building, coordinate 
various work, strengthen overall construction, and perform the 
basic functions of our army. We must implement these new 
"guidelines" with a new attitude and style, and proceed toward 
the goals of "qualification, competence, fineness, and 
strictness." 
  Yu Yongbo said: Party committees at company level are the 
core of unified leadership and solidarity. Efforts should be 
made to improve quality and grass-roots construction, enhance 
party spirit and the concept of pioneering among party members; 
and to strengthen party committees' ideological and political 
leadership and bring into full play the role of fighting force. 
  Touching on vigorously promoting the fine tradition of unity 
between officers and men and enhancing the troop-leading ability 
of grass-roots cadres in the new situation, Yu Yongbo 
emphasized: Unity between officers and men is the fine tradition 
of our army; leaders at various levels, particularly grass-roots 
cadres, should correct their basic attitude toward the soldiers 
by genuinely understanding and loving them. In improving our 
overall troop- leading ability, we should act fairly and 
honestly, build a good self-image, and closely integrate strict 
control and guidance with patience. 
  Yu Yongbo demanded leaders at various levels and political 
organs strictly adhere to the "guidelines" in guiding 
grass-roots construction. He urged them to always keep the 
grass roots in mind, constantly think of the soldiers, and look 
for new ideas and ways to help solve real grass-roots problems. 
  Leaders from departments connected with the General Staff 
Headquarters and General Logistics Department, including Zhou 
Ziyu, Du Tiehuan, Xu Caihou, and Tang Tianbiao, attended the 
meeting. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1802 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_m_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  26 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Military </F>
<H3> <TI>   Jinan Military Region Relays NPC Guidelines </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Jinan Military Region Relays NPC Guidelines </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   SK3003065294 Jinan Shandong People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 2300 GMT 26 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> SK3003065294 </F>
<F P=104>  Jinan Shandong People's Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Mandarin </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] On the afternoon of 26 March at Jinan Bayi Assembly 
Hall, leading organs under the Jinan Military Region 
ceremoniously held a rally to relay and implement the guidelines 
of the second session of the eighth National People's Congress 
[NPC] and the second session of the eighth national committee of 
the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference [CPPCC]. 
  The rally was chaired by Song Qingwei, political commissar 
of 
the region. Zhang Taiheng, commander of the Jinan Military 
Region, gave a speech. He pointed out in his speech: We should 
closely proceed from reality to relay and implement the 
guidelines of the two sessions, promote progress in the work of 
various spheres, lead the broad masses of cadres and fighters to 
accurately handle the readjustment of interests in the course of 
reform, inherit and carry forward the glorious traditions, 
deeply launch the campaigns of learning from Lei Feng and Xu 
Honggang, highly develop the main melody of the times, deeply 
implement [words indistinct] in the new age, strengthen military 
training and war preparedness, and upgrade the combat 
effectiveness of the army. According to President Jiang Zemin's 
general requirements for grasping favorable opportunities, 
deepening reform, expanding the scale of opening up, promoting 
development, and maintaining stability, we should vigorously 
strengthen the overall construction of grass roots so as to meet 
the demands of the grass roots. We should carry forward the 
fine traditions of supporting the government and cherishing the 
people and further achieve unity between the army and the 
government and between the army and the people, and narrow the 
relationship between the army and the government and between the 
army and the people in the new situation. 
  Zhang Wentai, deputy political commissar of the Jinan 
Military Region, relayed the guidelines of the second session of 
the NPC and the second session of the national CPPCC committee. 
  Present at the rally were some 1,500 people, including 
standing committee members of the party committee of the Jinan 
Military Region, deputies to the NPC and members of the Eighth 
National CPPCC Committee living in Jinan, leading comrades of 
organs of the region, veteran comrades of the region, and [words 
indistinct] of the units of the region stationed in Jinan. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1803 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_m_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Military </F>
<H3> <TI>   PLA Promotes Advanced Units, Soldiers </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    PLA Promotes Advanced Units, Soldiers </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204162194 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 0855 
GMT 3 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0204162194 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Luo Yuwen (5012 3768 2429)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 3 Mar (XINHUA) -- With the Central Military 
Commission's [CMC] approval, the People's Liberation Army's 
[PLA] General Staff, Political, and Logistics Departments 
[GSPLD] decided that beginning in 1994, all military units 
should launch campaigns to promote advanced companies and 
soldiers through competition; that they should facilitate a 
lively situation whereby the broad masses of grass-roots units 
will emulate, learn from, catch up with, and be helped by the 
advanced units so as to forge ahead; and that they should 
enhance grass-roots units' development in an effort to 
comprehensively raise the army's fighting power. 
  Under the guidance of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on army 
building in a new era and in accordance with CMC Chairman Jiang 
Zemin's proposed general requirements that all army units must 
be qualified politically and competent militarily, and that they 
must have a fine work style, maintain strict discipline and be 
assured of adequate logistical support, at the end of 1993, the 
GSPLD again amended the "Program of Developing Military 
Grass-Roots Units [jun dui ji ceng jian she gang yao 6511 7130 
1015 1461 1696 6080 4854 6008]." With CMC approval, the 
"program" has been publicized and promulgated in all military 
units on a trial basis. The "program" urged the whole army: to 
activate the enthusiasm and creativity of officers and men in 
grass-roots units and to launch campaigns to promote advanced 
companies and soldiers through competition. The activities 
should improve and advance the grass-roots units' inspirational 
mechanisms and should serve as an important measure for 
enhancing grass-roots units' development. 
  The GSPLD urged: While carrying out the activities, military 
units should aim at development, maintain consistency, pay 
attention to attaining realistic results, and stress 
expeditiously accomplishing tasks and enhancing development in 
an all-around manner. The evaluation of advanced companies and 
soldiers should be combined with the assessment of their overall 
work performance at year-end. When choosing an advanced 
company, grass-roots units should conduct self-assessment in 
accordance with the requirements on grass-roots units' 
development and submit and register their assessments with a 
unit at higher level. To be chosen as an outstanding soldier, 
service members should aim to become soldiers who have ideals, 
moral integrity, good educational backgrounds, and discipline 
and should emulate Lei Feng. The outstanding soldier 
requirements include: maintain high political and ideological 
standards, have outstanding military skills, assert a strict 
work style and discipline, and have a good record of 
well-accomplished missions. The approving unit will present an 
advanced company with a meritorious certificate that has been 
uniformly designed by the General Political Department. For an 
outstanding soldier, the approving unit will send to his family 
a happy-tidings bulletin also uniformly designed by the General 
Political Department, and will record the event in his personal 
file. The approving unit will publish a circular to commend an 
advanced company and will award an outstanding soldier according 
to the "Discipline Stipulations [ji lu tiao ling 4764 1774 2742 
0109]." When electing squad leaders and special task force 
members, promoting soldiers to be cadres, and allotting 
candidates for admission examinations to academies and colleges, 
military units should consider outstanding soldiers. 
  The GSPLD urged: The broad masses of officers and men at 
grass-roots units should join in the "campaigns that promote 
advanced companies and soldiers through competition" so as to 
advance the grass-roots units' development to a higher level. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1804 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_m_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Military </F>
<H3> <TI>   Paper Refutes Allegations of Budget Increase </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Paper Refutes Allegations of Budget Increase </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0204061094 Beijing RENMIN RIBAO OVERSEAS EDITION in 
Chinese 1 Apr 94 p 6 </F>

<F P=103> HK0204061094 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing RENMIN RIBAO OVERSEAS EDITION </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Ling Zi (0407 1311): "Racking One's Brains Is to No </F>
Avail"] 
  [Text] Recently, public opinion in some Western countries 
has tried hard to play up allegations that China has increased 
its military spending by a big margin and that this "constitutes 
a threat" to its neighbors. This is nothing but an attempt to 
sow discord between China and its bordering countries and to 
incite an anti-China feeling. What is the reality? 
  According to reports by the London Institute of 
International 
Strategic Studies and the Stockholm International Peace Research 
Institute, authoritative Western organs, China's national 
defense spending is not much in fact. Take, for instance, the 
years 1991 and 1992. The U.S. national defense budgets for 
these two years were $290.9 billion and $270.9 billion 
respectively but the figures for China were only $6.13 billion 
and $6.73 billion respectively, only 2.1 and 2.4 percent of the 
U.S. budget figures. The percentage of per capita military 
spending is even less. The per capita military spending figures 
for the United States in those two years were $1,155 and $1,076 
respectively but those for China were only $5 and $6. The per 
capita military spending of China is only 0.43 and 0.55 percent 
of those of the United States. Even if compared with those of 
the bordering countries, China's national defense budget cannot 
be ranked among the top three and the ranking of its per capita 
military spending is much lower. 
  China has increased its national defense budget by a small 
amount this year. However, as Vice Premier and concurrently 
Foreign Minister Qian Qichen said: "As a matter of fact, this 
is mainly to make up for the increase in commodity prices." 
  How can China's military spending be considered large when 
viewed from the facts? China has always pursued a foreign 
policy of peace and has made efforts to safeguard world peace. 
This is known to all. Racking one's brains in an attempt to 
make use of the issue of military spending to incite an 
anti-China feeling is completely to no avail. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1805 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_m_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  19 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Military </F>
<H3> <TI>   Circular Urges Easing Troops' Financial Burdens </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Circular Urges Easing Troops' Financial Burdens </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0304083594 Beijing JIEFANGJUN BAO in Chinese 19 Mar 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> HK0304083594 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JIEFANGJUN BAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By special correspondent Chu Yu (2806 7183): "The PLA </F>
General Logistics Department Issues a Circular Calling for a 
Reduction in the Financial Burdens of the Troops"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 8 Mar (JIEFANGJUN BAO)--In a circular 
issued today to the logistics departments of all major Army 
units and the direct-supply units of the General Logistics 
Department, the General Logistics Department calls for reducing 
the troops' financial burdens. 
  The circular points out that, in recent years, all levels 
and 
departments throughout the Army have conscientiously implemented 
the spirit of the instructions of the Central Military 
Commission on stepping up army building at the grass-roots 
levels. Given the shortage of funds, they have done a great 
deal of practical work for the troops and have been well 
received by them. However, the problem of heavy financial 
burdens is still fairly conspicuous. Now that combat units 
below the army level are no longer engaged in business 
production, the financial reserves at their disposal have 
correspondingly decreased, and the contradiction between fund 
supply and demand has become even more apparent. For this 
reason, all levels and departments -- especially the leading 
organs -- should conscientiously reduce meetings and documents 
and work vigorously to cut administrative expenditures. When 
holding exchange-experience meetings, on-the-spot meetings, and 
commendation meetings, when running training classes, and when 
launching goal-reaching activities, they are not allowed to 
apportion the outlays to Army units or do it in a disguised way, 
because the expenditure of higher levels should not be 
reimbursed by lower levels. No organ (unit) or individual is 
allowed to indiscriminately demand reimbursements or aid from 
Army units for whatever reason or in whatever name. Army units 
have the right to refuse, in accordance with the relevant state 
regulations, the apportionment of charges or aid requests by the 
local authorities. 
  The circular specifically prohibits the diversion of surplus 
company funds for any other purpose. It is necessary to supply 
in full funds allocated to the grass-roots units according to 
certain criteria. The surplus food expenses of company units 
should be concentrated and placed in safe-keeping at units above 
the regimental level. Company units should nevertheless be 
given ready access to the funds, and the diversion of the funds 
for any other purpose is strictly prohibited. 
  The circular says that, when inspecting work in Army units, 
higher-level organs should make overall arrangements, improve 
planning, have a clearer objective in mind, and pay attention to 
practical results. They should travel with a minimum of pomp 
and pay table expenses according to regulations. Army units are 
not allowed to give special treatment to people from higher 
levels, including leading cadres. Financial departments have 
the right to refuse to reimburse expenses incurred in violation 
of the regulations. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1806 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_m_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Military </F>
<H3> <TI>   Beijing Starts Test Pilot `Postgraduate School' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Beijing Starts Test Pilot `Postgraduate School' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204141894 Beijing XINHUA in English 1335 GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0204141894 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Xian, April 2 (XINHUA) -- A postgraduate school for 
test pilots was set up Friday [1 April] in Xian, capital of 
north-west China's Shaanxi Province. 
  The school will enrol 8 to 15 postgraduate aviation students 
every year who have more than 600 hours of flying experience. 
  This is the first such college in Asia, and there are a few 
countries that have schools to train master's degree students 
for the aviation industry. 
  Involved in the joint founding of the school are the 
National 
Defence Commission for Science, Technology and Industry, the 
State Education Commission, the State Planning Commission, the 
State Science and Technology Commission and the Ministry of 
Personnel. 
  Also involved are the Civil Aviation Administration of 
China, 
the air and naval forces of the People's Libration Army, and the 
China Industrial Aviation Corporation. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1807 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_l_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  29 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Science &amp; Technology </F>
<H3> <TI>   Song Jian Hails Single Atom Manipulation </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Song Jian Hails Single Atom Manipulation </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0404054194 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 2108 
GMT 29 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0404054194 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Zhang Jimin (1728 4949 3046)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 30 Mar (XINHUA) -- Science and technology 
personnel at the Beijing Laboratory of Vacuum Physics, an 
affiliate of the Chinese Academy of Sciences [CAS], made an 
outstanding achievement after only months of effort: They 
succeeded in removing and implanting silicon atoms with relative 
ease, thus enabling our country to penetrate the world's front 
line of high technology research conducted in the nanometer 
range. 
  The good news won words of praise from inside and outside 
China. State Councillor Song Jian asked relevant departments to 
relay congratulations from the State Council to the researchers. 
CAS President Zhou Guangzhou was deeply gratified at the 
achievement. Nobel Laureate Binnig and Doctor Ke-er-dun [2688 
1422 7319], a world-renowned expert in the nanometer field, 
separately sent letters highly estimating the achievements with 
such praise as "a world-level achievement" and "a very beautiful 
experimental result." 
  Shifting a single atom was once a dream of mankind. Atoms 
are so small that if we arrange 100 million of them in a row, 
their collective length will amount to only about 1 cm, and we 
will still have difficulty picking them up. Starting in the 
1990's, a few countries, including the United States, startled 
the world by succeeding in shifting an atom in the low 
temperature range of 269 degrees Celsius below zero. The 
technique involved, which is extremely attractive due to its 
potential applications and commercial value, can push mankind's 
ability to reorder the world from the micrometer to the 
nanometer range (one nanometer is equal to one billionth of a 
meter), and foretells a revolutionary leap in future production 
methods. 
  Initially, our scientific and technological circles, which 
lacked the means to conduct experiments, could only watch 
impatiently as others scored successes. In August 1993, the 
Beijing Laboratory of Vacuum Physics imported an ultravacuum 
tunnel scanning microscope [chao gao zhen kong sao miao sui dao 
xian wei jing 6389 7559 4176 4500 2217 4178 7143 6670 7359 1792 
6975], which is used for observing the surface topography of 
substances. To modify equipment for atomic manipulation, the 
laboratory added a special microcontroller, and even used 
aluminium lunch boxes to form a series of shields along the 
scanning path. Led by Professor Pang Shijin, researchers worked 
day and night and successively made significant progress in 
experiments conducted under normal temperatures: 
  They wrote the smallest possible characters. Other countries 
have displayed their abilities to manipulate atoms by utilizing 
a shape similar to the Chinese character "xie [write 1400]." 
How good is the vacuum laboratory when it comes to "writing?" 
The laboratory removed atoms from the crystal lattice of the 
silicon surface with a probe attached to the ultravacuum tunnel 
scanning microscope, and purposely traced out the Roman letters 
"PRC" and the Chinese characters "zhong guo [China 0022 0948]" 
on the surface. Each stroke of the Chinese characters has an 
average width of two nanometers, and was produced by removing 
three to four silicon atoms that were arranged side by side. It 
is believed that these characters are the smallest in the world. 
  Atomic insertion is regarded as being more significant than 
removal. For example, when in the future we wish to fine-tune 
an apparatus at the nanometer level to change or enhance its 
performance, we have to implant foreign atoms to form an alloy 
with the existing substance. Photographs produced by 
researchers at the vacuum laboratory indicated that the 
researchers were successful. White spots on the photographs 
showing that the inserted atoms are the result of a pile-up -- 
an increase in the atomic radius which results in a clear atomic 
lattice being obscured. The researchers claimed that the 
process of atom insertion has not yet been reported inside or 
outside the country. 
  The researchers more or less figured out the patterns of 
atomic arrangements pertaining to the bounded domains [chou jie 
3985 3954] of atoms on a silicon surface. They discovered that 
basically two kinds of defects can occur in the geometric 
patterns of atomic lattices: "Z-shape" and "ladle-shape" 
defects. Using these findings, the physics vacuum laboratory 
has introduced over 30 types of possible patterns of atomic 
arrangements on a silicon surface. It is believed that the 
laboratory has scored a first in the world in this respect. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1808 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_l_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  31 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Science &amp; Technology </F>
<H3> <TI>   Official Announces Plan To Develop S&amp;T </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Official Announces Plan To Develop S&amp;T </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK3103080694 Beijing CHINA DAILY in English 31 Mar 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> HK3103080694 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing CHINA DAILY </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By He Jun: "Fresh Plan To Develop Science and Technology"] </F>
  [Text] China is to set up a new framework to develop 
science and technology by the end of the century, it was 
announced yesterday. 
  It aims to make them a more important force in the country's 
drive towards a market economy, said Zhu Lilan, Vice-Minister of 
the State Science and Technology Commission (SSTC). 
  The system will free the distribution of China's scientific 
and technological resources to be adjusted by the market while 
the government retains overall control, she said. 
  The new scheme is contained in newly-published guidelines 
worked out jointly by the SSTC and the State Commission for 
Economic Restructuring. 
  The document calls on academics to develop simultaneously 
China's new and pillar industries as well as high technology. 
  It focuses on large regional projects which aim to improve 
social development in West and Central China through the latest 
technology. 
  And it lists environmental protection and other problems 
among the priorities for China's technological development. 
  The document stressed the SSTC's policy of bringing 
researchers out of their laboratories and into business so they 
can put their findings into commercial and industrial use. 
Meanwhile, said Zhu, the country will continue to give 
technology industries preferential treatment. 
  She also said China will do more to improve the working and 
living conditions of staff in the key research institutes which 
will bear the brunt of the new drive. 
  Laws will also he worked out to guide China's technological 
development, she said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1809 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_l_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Science &amp; Technology </F>
<H3> <TI>   Beijing `To Put Into Use' 2 Satellites `Soon' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Beijing `To Put Into Use' 2 Satellites `Soon' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0304134094 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 0839 
GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0304134094 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Xu Jingyue (1776 0079 6460)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 2 Apr (XINHUA) -- China is stepping up its 
efforts to develop applied satellite technology and satellite 
application technology, striving to satisfy needs of the 
national economy, science and technology, culture, and defense. 
  The new generation of applied satellites currently under 
research and development includes large-capacity longevity 
communication and broadcasting satellites, meteorology 
satellites, navigation position satellites, disaster-minimized 
satellites, and multipurpose earth resource satellites. Of 
these, the Dongfanghong [East Is Red] No. 3 communication 
satellite and Fengyun [Wind and Cloud] No. 2 meteorology 
satellite will soon be put into use, and will be the important 
indicators of China's applied satellites catching up with the 
advanced level in the world. With 24 transmitters and an 
eight-year designed longevity, the Dongfanghong No. 3 satellite 
is capable of meeting China's satellite communication 
requirements till the year 2000 or even a longer period of time 
beyond. The Fengyun No. 2, the first earth-synchronous 
remote-sensing meteorology satellite developed by China, will 
play an active role in developing meteorological science and 
technology in China and the world. 
  Meanwhile, China is improving and perfecting the Changzheng 
[Long March] series of carrier rockets, and has successfully 
developed a batch of more advanced and larger-capacity carrier 
rockets to satisfy domestic and international demands for 
launching different applied satellites. The Changzheng No. 3B 
cluster rocket's loading capacity on the earth-synchronous orbit 
can reach 4.8 tonnes, while its low-orbit loading capacity is 
about 12 tonnes. The Changzheng No. 1D rocket's loading capacity 
on the near-earth orbit has been greatly enhanced. The 
Changzheng No. 3A rocket, which was successfully launched 
recently, has increased Chinese rockets' loading capacity on the 
earth-synchronous orbit to 2.5 tonnes, and has upgraded a number 
of China's new technologies to the world's advanced level. 
  To provide advanced technical means for telecommunications, 
broadcasting, education, meteorology, resource prospecting, 
ocean exploitation, cartography, navigation position, traffic 
control, maritime accident rescue, environment monitoring, and 
other national economic departments, China has also established 
selected nationwide ground satellite application systems, such 
as satellite travelling communication system, rapid satellite 
position system, special satellite data information system, 
satellite financial and taxation system, and satellite wage 
issuance system. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1810 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_l_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Science &amp; Technology </F>
<H3> <TI>   Cable Optic Line To Cross Northwest China </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Cable Optic Line To Cross Northwest China </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104113594 Beijing XINHUA in English 1055 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104113594 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Lanzhou, April 1 (XINHUA) -- Work on a cable optic 
line that runs from Xian to Urumqi via Lanzhou started in Xian, 
Lanzhou and Urumqi simultaneously today. 
  The cable line will cut through Shaanxi, Ningxia, Gansu and 
Xinjiang, totalling 3,068 kilometers. 
  The line, a key construction project in the Eighth Five-Year 
Plan period (1991-1995), has been undertaken by the China 
National Telecommunications Construction Corporation, the Gansu 
Posts and Telecommunications Construction Corporation and others. 
  The cable line will eventually extend to Shanghai in the 
east 
and Frankfurt in the west, totalling 16,000 kilometers. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1811 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_l_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Science &amp; Technology </F>
<H3> <TI>   National Computer Software Fair Opens in Beijing </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    National Computer Software Fair Opens in Beijing </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104102094 Beijing XINHUA in English 0952 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104102094 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 1 (XINHUA) -- The fifth national 
computer software fair, which will last six days, opened here 
this morning. 
  The fair, co-sponsored by the China Software and Service 
Corporation and the China Software Exhibition Corporation, now 
has over 200 participants from all over China as well as from 
foreign land. 
  The fair, the only one of its kind approved by China's 
Ministry of Electronics Industry, covers more than 3,000 
categories of products in the fields of teaching, printing, 
hotel management, project design and application in 
architecture, energy, petrochemicals, iron and steel, most of 
which can enter the market directly. 
  Relevant seminars will also be held during the fair. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1812 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_l_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Science &amp; Technology </F>
<H3> <TI>   XINHUA Carries Scientific News Briefs </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    XINHUA Carries Scientific News Briefs </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0304041694 Beijing XINHUA in English 0329 GMT 3 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0304041694 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 3 (XINHUA) -- Today's scientific news 
in brief: 
<H5>  Ethylene Project </H5>
  Two large steam boilers have been ignited, marking the 
beginning of the trial operation of the Beijing ethylene 
project, one of the national key projects. 
  The project, which is scheduled to go into full operation in 
September next year, will be capable of producing 115,000 tons 
of ethylene, 40,000 tons of epoxyethane, 40,000 tons of eva 
resin and 70,000 tons of butyl alcohol. 
<H5>  Ship Export </H5>
  A 150,000-ton-class bulk carrier, the largest-ever ship made 
by China alone, has been completed at the Dalian Ship-Building 
Factory in northeast China's Liaoning Province. The "Samarinda" 
has been handed over to the Cobelfert N.V. [expansion unknown] 
Company of Belgium, the commissioner said. 
<H5>  Steel Cutting </H5>
  A new type of portable cutter powered by oil and oxygen has 
been produced in Beijing by the Sino-foreign jointly invested 
Xindu Thermal-Powered Cutting Equipment Co. Designed by Liang 
Guangqi, the new cutter consumes less energy and is safer 
compared to similar cutting instruments. It can cut plate steel 
of 3 to 60 mm. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1813 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_u_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  31 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> PRC MEDIA ON TAIWAN AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Failure of Beijing-Taipei Talks Examined </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Failure of Beijing-Taipei Talks Examined </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    XINHUA Correspondents Write </H4>

<F P=102> OW0204045594 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 0719 
GMT 31 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0204045594 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by XINHUA correspondents Fan Liqing (5400 7787 </F>
7230) and Liu Shizhong (0491 0670 1813): "Maintain the Consensus 
That Has Been Reached To Push Forward Cross-Strait Talks on 
Routine Affairs"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 31 Mar (XINHUA) -- In accordance with the 
consensus reached between responsible officials of the 
Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Strait [ARATS] and 
the Straits Exchange Foundation [SEF] of Taiwan during their 
Beijing talks held in February this year, the two organizations 
began their fourth round of talks on routine affairs on 25 
March. Both sides carried out discussions on three topics, 
including "the repatriation of people entering each other's area 
in violation of relevant regulations and other issues 
concerned," but no agreement was reached because the Taiwan side 
repudiated some areas of consensus reached earlier between the 
officials of the two organizations during their Beijing talks; 
discussions on other items on the agenda could not be held 
either. The SEF delegation returned to Taibei [Taipei] on 31 
March. 
  The latest talks were arranged on the basis of the consensus 
reached between Tang Shubei, executive vice president of the 
ARATS, and Jiao Renhe [Chiao Jen-ho], vice chairman and 
secretary general of the SEF, during talks in Beijing in 
February. Their main tasks were to hold discussions on the 
three topics, including "the repatriation of people entering 
each other's area in violation of relevant regulations and other 
issues concerned" and "the handling of cross-Strait fishing 
disputes"; to try to overcome, on the basis of the high degree 
of consensus reached by officials during their talks, remaining 
differences in order to reach a written agreement at an early 
date; and to exchange views or carry out discussions on "a joint 
crackdown on maritime smuggling, robbery, and other crimes," on 
the "protection of intellectual property rights," on "ties and 
mutual assistance between related law courts" on both sides of 
the Taiwan Strait, as well as on economic, scientific, and 
technological issues listed in "the General Agreement on the 
Wang-Ku Talks." This time the SEF arranged to have Deputy 
Secretaries General Xu Huiyou [Hsu Hui-yu] and Shi Qiping [Shi 
Chi-ping] each lead relevant officials in two echelons to 
Beijing for talks. 
  During the talks which began on 25 March, Sun Yafu, ARATS 
deputy secretary general, and Xu Huiyou, chief negotiators of 
both sides, discussed the written wording of an agreement for 
the three topics on routine affairs. However, after the talks 
began, the SEF side raised some issues which had been solved 
during earlier talks between the officials in Beijing, thus 
changing the nature of the current talks which should have 
discussed the written wording for the text of an agreement and 
once again leading to debates over past differences. Despite 
the eight discussion meetings over five days, no solution 
acceptable to both sides could be found, and talks on routine 
affairs between the two sides were once again deadlocked. The 
second echelon of SEF's negotiators including Shi Qiping and 
others have put off their visit to Beijing. 
  In explaining the reason for once again bringing up 
differences which had been resolved, Taiwan's SEF Deputy 
Secretary General Xu Huiyu said: "Both sides should be serious 
and practical in interpreting the `consensus reached at the 
Tang-Jiao talks.' A process of discussion cannot be called a 
consensus. The conditions of the specific time should be taken 
into consideration in interpreting consensus." Taiwan's 
"Mainland Affairs Council" has blamed ARATS for "magnifying the 
interpretation of consensus." As a result, the current talks 
created a spectacular issue -- how to interpret consensus 
reached earlier by officials of the two organizations during 
their talks in Beijing. 
  Let us recall their talks. During the three-day talks, Tang 
Shubei and Jiao Renhe [Chiao Jen-ho] thoroughly discussed the 
differences faced in the consultation of three topics on routine 
affairs and reached consensus on solving several issues. Both 
sides also agreed to hold the fourth round of talks on routine 
affairs on the basis of the consensus. The principled consensus 
reached at the talks were written in the "Joint News Release by 
Tang Shubei and Jiao Renhe After Their Talks." After conclusion 
of the talks, SEF Vice Chairman Jiao Renhe issued a statement, 
saying, the talks "almost resolved all the issues in the three 
topics for discussion. Only one issue -- the use of written 
expressions. The joint news release by both sides should be 
binding." He said he was confident the fourth round of talks 
would succeed in deciding the text of an agreement. Huang 
Kunhui [Huang Kun-hui], chairman of Taiwan's "MAC," also said 
the SEF conducted consultations within the scope it authorized, 
adding the MAC was not only satisfied with, but also highly 
affirmed the results of the talks. 
  According to Taiwan media reports, the MAC convened two 
meetings of relevant departments in mid-March to discuss 
"countermeasures" for the fourth round of talks. During the 
meetings the MAC vetoed some of the consensus reached between 
Tang Shubei and Jiao Renhe, and "repudiated the important 
consensus reached at the Tang-Jiao talks on three topics." It 
also asserted the necessity of "maintaining the bottom line in 
the Taibei talks between the two organizations under the premise 
of upholding the dignity of judicial jurisdiction." 
  From this one can see it is the Taiwan side that repudiated 
the Tang-Jiao consensus and revived the differences that had 
already been resolved, thus causing the current talks to be 
deadlocked. 
  Interpreting the consensus reached between the two 
organizations' officials during the Beijing talks is, no doubt, 
a question that must be dealt with seriously. Only the 
preservation of the consensus will help bring about an early 
agreement on the various topics discussed at the talks on 
routine matters between the two sides of the strait. In 
interpreting the "consensus," the two sides should begin with 
the following goals in mind: 
  -- The consensus reached by the two organizations' officials 
during their talks must be recognized and earnestly carried out. 
This is because the officials conducted their discussions in 
accordance with "the agreement on the liaison and meeting of the 
two organizations" signed during the "Wang-Ku talks." Moreover, 
they were authorized by their respective competent departments. 
The authorization and legal basis for the discussions was 
beyond all doubt, and so the results are of course effective. 
  -- In the area of major principle, the consensus reached by 
officials during the Beijing talks, for example: "Political 
issues should be pragmatically avoided in discussions on routine 
matters between the two organizations," was written into the 
"Joint News Release by Tang Shubei and Jiao Renhe After Their 
Talks." As for the specific high degree of consensus reached on 
the three topics, only "a high degree of consensus was reached" 
was written in the "Joint News Release" without listing the 
specific contents one by one, but consensus is consensus -- and 
it was the common view agreed on by both sides during their 
talks. The words are still ringing in one's ears; the consensus 
should be carried out. 
  -- In their talks on routine affairs, the two sides should 
adhere to the guideline of "seeking truth from facts, seeking 
common ground while reserving differences, holding discussions 
on equal terms, and respecting each other" and to the principle 
of avoiding political issues; and resolve the easy issues first 
and tackle the difficult ones later in order to quickly find a 
way in which both sides can cooperate in resolving issues which 
have developed in the course of cross-strait exchanges, to 
safeguard and promote cross-strait exchanges, and to avoid 
binding their own hands and feet, thus setting restrictions on 
themselves. The Taiwan side's adoption of an interlocking 
stratagem to confine the two organizations' operations and talks 
on routine affairs to one or two issues will cause the scope of 
cross-strait consultations on routine affairs and exchanges, 
which was very broad at the beginning, to continue to narrow 
down to the point where there is no more space to move. 
  -- Keeping one's word and promise is a traditional, noble 
quality of the Chinese nation. Sincerity in resolving issues 
constitutes the necessary condition for success in cross-strait 
discussions on routine affairs. Therefore, in their talks on 
routine affairs, the two sides should conduct discussions by 
proceeding from the aim of solving issues and seeking mutual 
benefit -- benefit for compatriots on both sides of the strait. 
The consensus reached in each stage of the discussions should 
be cherished and safeguarded. Even if it is necessary to once 
again bring up an issue for discussion, mutual respect and 
consultations on equal terms should be adhered to with a 
sincerity to resolve issues. One should not negate the 
consensus already reached and deliberately raise new issues. 
  Although the two organizations met with setbacks in their 
recent talks, the delegates -- realizing the need for an early 
solution of issues developed in the course of cross-strait 
exchanges and that the two organizations are willing to maintain 
ties and channels of communication -- indicated after the end of 
the talks that they will continue. Therefore, maintaining the 
consensus reached at the talks and striving to expand the 
results of such consensus will be crucial to the success of the 
next round of talks. People on both sides of the strait are 
expecting the two organizations' officials to continue to work 
hard, seek truth from facts, seek common ground while reserving 
differences, and discover a way to resolve the issues at an 
early date. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1814 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_u_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  30 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> PRC MEDIA ON TAIWAN AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Failure of Beijing-Taipei Talks Examined </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Failure of Beijing-Taipei Talks Examined </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Press Agency Assesses Outcome </H4>

<F P=102> HK0404141094 Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 1415 GMT 
30 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> HK0404141094 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by staff reporters Zhou Jianmin (0719 1696 7044) </F>
and Lu Junjun (7120 8823 8823): "Keeping Faith Is the 
Foundation and Departure Point for the Consultations Between the 
Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Strait and Taiwan's 
Straits Exchange Foundation"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 30 Mar (ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE) -- The 
Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Strait [ARATS] and 
Taiwan's Straits Exchange Foundation [SEF] started their fourth 
round of routine consultations on 25 March. After several days 
of argumentative negotiations, the two sides could not reach the 
expected agreement on three routine matters, including the 
"repatriation of personnel entering the opposite regions in 
violation of the relevant regulations and related issues." Under 
the pretext that no progress had been made in their 
consultations on the three routine matters, the SEF unilaterally 
canceled the prescheduled agenda reached between the ARATS and 
SEF leaders during their Beijing talks on exchanging opinions or 
holding consultations at the fourth round of consultations on 
three topics, including "making joint efforts to curb maritime 
smuggling and robberies and other crimes," as well as on several 
economic, scientific, and technological issues listed in the 
"Wang-Gu talks agreement." 
  These consequences have arisen from many factors, but the 
most important one is whether or not the ARATS-SEF consultations 
should abide by the principle of keeping faith and should take 
this as the foundation and departure point for their 
consultations. 
  As everyone is aware, after the "Xiamen consultations" and 
the "Taipei consultations," the leaders of the two organizations 
made breakthrough progress during their Beijing talks in 
February, and reached a high degree of common understanding on 
three topics, including "repatriation of personnel entering the 
opposite regions in violation of the relevant regulations." The 
two sides' ideas were tending toward a consensus on the 
"standard clauses" to be applied, on the "ships to be used by 
the two sides," and on "not repatriating Taiwanese hijackers to 
the mainland" proposed by the SEF. According to these ideas, 
the ARATS raised suggestions fully absorbing the SEF opinions 
during the ongoing consulations. We should say that the common 
understanding reached between the ARATS and SEF leaders during 
their Beijing talks created excellent conditions and laid a 
solid foundation for resolving the three routine matters. If 
the current consultations can make further progress on this 
basis according to this common understanding, the pending 
problems and differences will not be difficult to resolve, and 
reaching an agreement can be expected soon. 
  Prior to the current consultations, the ARATS had made 
further efforts so that an agreement could be reached. On each 
side, concerning the formation of a fishing dispute coordination 
organization and enabling the results of mediation to have a 
binding force, the ARATS and the relevant mainland departments 
studied the existing law and regulations and worked out a 
practical method, whereby the results of mediation are to be 
changed into a financial claim document with a mandatory binding 
force entrusted by a notary office according to the law. At the 
current consultations, the SEF raised some opinions concerning 
the issues on which the ARATS and SEF leaders had reached a 
consensus during their Beijing talks. The ARATS expressed its 
willingness to discuss this problem and seek settlement methods 
acceptable to both sides. 
  Comments from Taiwan press circles on the achievements of 
the 
Beijing talks were good, and Taiwan's "Mainland Affairs 
Committee" also issued a statement confirming these 
achievements. However, while when these acclaims were still 
resounding in the ear, in mid-March the "Mainland Affairs 
Committee" and the relevant departments in Taiwan partially 
renounced the consensus reached at the Beijing talks. A Taiwan 
press report said: "The special group panel decided that the 
agreement plan on the three topics, including the repatriation 
of hijackers, will abide by the Taiwan side's principle 
clarified at the `Taipei meeting'; in other words, our 
government and the relevant departments have renounced the high 
degree of common understanding reached at the `Chiao-Tang 
meeting.'" Under these circumstances, it is not surprising that 
no achievements have been made during the current consultations. 
  Meetings between the ARATS and SEF leaders are important, 
high-level meetings held according to the "two organizations' 
meeting and relation system," and the opinions and consensus 
they express are solemn. Indiscreetly renouncing the consensus 
reached between the ARATS and SEF leaders is an act of 
disrespect to the leaders of the two organizations. These 
people's sincerity for routine consultations and development of 
relations between the two sides is doubtful. Recently, Mr. Li 
Tenghui has indicated repeatedly that this year "is one for both 
sides to form mutual trust." The most important point in 
forming mutual trust is keeping faith. If what is agreed today 
is renounced tomorrow, and if a consensus reached between the 
ARATS and SEF leaders can be denied or neglected, how can 
consultations proceed normally and achieve results? How can we 
talk about sincerity or forming mutual trust? 
  Since their establishments, the two organizations have 
conducted many rounds of consultations on routine matters 
involving the interests of the people on both sides of the 
strait, and also have reached two agreements. A review of past 
experience enables us to easily understand that as long as both 
sides abide by the spirit of mutual respect, equal 
consultations, practicality, seeking common ground while 
reserving differences, and accumulating common understandings, 
it will not be difficult to achieve results and reach an 
agreement. Consultations on routine matters should proceed with 
the aim of resolving problems and gaining mutual benefit. 
Sensitive political issues absolutely can be avoided. The 
attitude of making simple problems complicated and politicizing 
routine matters is not commendable, and also runs counter to the 
fundamental interests and expectations of the people on both 
sides of the strait. 
  The people hope that the leaders of the two organizations 
will take keeping faith as the foundation and departure point 
for their routine consultations, and on the basis of the 
agreements they have reached, will make further efforts for an 
early consensus and the happiness of the people on both sides. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1815 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_u_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> PRC MEDIA ON TAIWAN AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Column Views Use of Force Against Taiwan </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Column Views Use of Force Against Taiwan </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0304064294 Hong Kong HSIN PAO in Chinese 1 Apr 94 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> HK0304064294 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong HSIN PAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Beijing Political Situation" column written by Jen Hui-wen </F>
(0117 1979 2429) on 30 March 1994 in Beijing: "Why Liu Huaqing 
Does Not Renounce the Use of Force Against Taiwan"] 
  [Text] Premier Li Peng delivered his "Government Work 
Report" at the Second Session of the Eighth National People's 
Congress [NPC] on 10 March. When talking about the Taiwan 
issue, Li pointed out: In the new year, we should continue to 
unswervingly follow the policy of "peaceful reunification and 
one country, two systems" and work actively to promote the great 
cause of reunifying the country. It is necessary to uphold the 
principle of one country and solve differences between the two 
sides of the strait through increased contacts and 
consultations. Moreover, at the Second Session of the Eighth 
National Committee of the Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference [CPPCC] in March, Guo Pingtan, vice 
president of the All-China Federation of Taiwan Compatriots, 
stressed that "an awareness of Taiwan is not tantamount to an 
awareness of Taiwan independence" and that "the aspiration of 
Taiwan compatriots to become masters in administering Taiwan is 
fair, reasonable, and just and is different from "Taiwan 
independence." Consequently, some media maintain that communist 
China has recently toned down the Taiwan issue, most likely in 
an effort to find a mutually-acceptable breakthrough point in 
the peace talks as quickly as possible. In fact, what Li Peng 
and Guo Pingtan said were reaffirmations of the basic stand of 
the White Paper entitled "The Taiwan Issue and the Reunification 
of China," which was issued by the State Council on 1 September 
1992, and this basic stand had its origin with General Secretary 
Jiang Zemin's report before the 14th party congress on 12 
October 1992. 
<H5>  The Circumstances Under Which China Will Use Force Against </H5>
Taiwan 
  If there should be new moves in communist China's Taiwan 
policy, it is, as this writer pointed out in this column on 4 
March, that the impact of Taiwan President Li Teng-hui's 
"holiday diplomacy" has forced communist China to review its 
tactics toward reunification with Taiwan. Specifically, it 
should be prepared for both eventualities. While basing itself 
on "peaceful reunification," it should also prepare for 
"reunification by force." In the view of communist China, 
without preparing for "reunification by force" it will be hard 
to realize "peaceful reunification"; after the possibility of 
"peaceful reunification" is ruled out, "reunification by force" 
will become necessary. 
  According to a source in Beijing, it was reported in the 19 
March TONGXUN JIANBAO [News Dispatches in Brief] of the CPC 
Central Committee's General Office that, when talking with 
People's Liberation Army [PLA] delegates attending the NPC and 
CPPCC sessions on 18 March, Liu Huaqing, vice chairman of the 
Central Military Commission, specifically stressed the need to 
be prepared for "reunification by force." 
  Liu pointed out: The question of whether there will be war 
between the two sides of the strait depends on the Taiwan 
authorities. He said: "Reunification of the motherland through 
peaceful means is the common aspiration of all Chinese. The 
people on both sides are Chinese. It would be extremely 
unfortunate if the compatriots on both sides should resort to 
arms and kill one another due to a split in China's sovereignty 
and territorial integrity. This is something that we are very 
reluctant to see, but it cannot be determined by our subjective 
desire. Li Teng-hui's basic strategy is to work for Taiwan 
independence. If Taiwan declares independence, this should be 
resolved by war. We stand firm on matters of principle. Why do 
our troops retain the two characters meaning `liberation'? 
Because our country has yet to be fully reunified, and it is 
probably necessary to safeguard state sovereignty and 
territorial integrity through military means." 
  Liu added: "We put forward the principle of `peaceful 
reunification and one country, two systems,' i.e. achieving 
reunification under the principle of `I will not eat you up nor 
should you eat me up.' This expresses our greatest sincerity for 
peace. So far, however, we have not seen such sincerity on the 
part of Li Teng-hui. If the senior Chiang (Chiang Kai-shek) and 
the junior Chiang (Chiang Ching-kuo) were still alive, they 
would not tolerate `Taiwan independence,' `one China, one 
Taiwan,' and `two Chinas.' Why do we say that Li Teng-hui does 
not have sincerity for the peace talks? He himself knows the 
answer very well. He openly pushes forward international 
activities for `Taiwan independence,' supports the Democratic 
Progressive Party, and squeezes out and attacks the backbone 
forces in the Kuomintang who uphold one China. This is known to 
all. Precisely because of this, we cannot but prepare for the 
worst and make preparations for `reunification by force.'" 
  According to an expert on the Taiwan issue at the Chinese 
Academy of Social Sciences in Beijing, Liu Huqing did not 
advocate "reunification by force." His original intention was 
that the Taiwan people would urge the Taiwan authorities to set 
store by the righteous cause of the nation and strive for the 
peaceful reunification of the two sides. 
<H5>  Liu Huaqing Cites 10 Facts To Show That Li Teng-hui Is </H5>
Working for Taiwan Independence 
  The source said: In his talk, Liu cited 10 facts to show 
that Li Teng-hui has persisted in working for "Taiwan 
independence" since he took office as Taiwan president. 
  1. The roping in of and collusion with anti-China and 
anti-communist congressmen and political forces in the congress 
in supporting the practice of "Taiwan independence," "one China, 
one Taiwan," and "two Chinas." 
  2. Collusion with the anti-China, anti-communist 
political forces in Japan in supporting "Taiwan independence" 
and engaging in the long-standing activities of being 
antagonistic to the mainland. 
  3. Acceleration of the expansion of military strength, 
incitement of hostile sentiments among Taiwan compatriots 
against the mainland, and moving toward the goal of Taiwan 
independence. 
  4. Creation of the so-called "theory of military 
expansion" to sow dissension between Southeast Asian countries 
and China. 
  5. Continued dispatch of hostile elements to the mainland 
to steal intelligence on the party, government, Army, and 
economy. 
  6. Continued provision of economic aid under various 
names to overseas and outside-the-border organizations hostile 
to the mainland. 
  7. Collusion with the Tibetan separatist, the Dalai Lama, 
in conducting separatist activities. 
  8. Support for the British Hong Kong authorities' acts of 
violating the Sino-British Joint Declaration and the agreements 
between the two countries. 
  9. Creation of numerous incidents of shooting and killing 
mainland compatriots (fishermen in the coastal areas) on the 
Taiwan Strait. 
  10. When the Olympic Committee decided on the country to 
host the 2000 Olympics last year, a major issue of principle 
which had a bearing on national dignity, Taiwan voted for 
Australia instead of the Chinese mainland. 
  As pointed out by the aforesaid expert in the Taiwan issue, 
Liu Huaqing cited the fact that Li Teng-hui engages in "Taiwan 
independence" activities to enable PLA officers and men to 
clearly understand Li Teng-hui's true colors and to warn Li not 
to go further down the path of "Taiwan independence" or even 
count on the involvement of the United States and other Western 
countries in supporting "Taiwan independence." Otherwise, a war 
to liberate Taiwan will become inevitable. 
<H5>  Deng Xiaoping Wants To Curb Taiwan Independence Through </H5>
Economic Links 
  The source added: To work for peaceful reunification with 
Taiwan, communist China has adopted a series of measures to 
boost development in cross-strait relations. On the political 
front, those going to Taiwan will no longer be held accountable 
for the crimes they committed before the founding of the PRC. 
On the military front, the shelling of Jinmen and other islands 
have been suspended, and some forward positions and observation 
posts in the coastal areas of Fujian are being turned into 
economic development zones or tourist spots. On the economic 
front, the mainland has opened the door wide to promote 
exchanges. Taiwan businessmen are welcome to invest in the 
mainland or carry out trade activities; in fact, the mainland 
has given them preferential terms and legal guarantees. On 
other fronts, such as personnel contacts, post and 
telecommunications, communications, science and technology, 
culture, sports, academic research, and news, the mainland is 
also vigorously encouraging exchanges and cooperation. The 
mainland has set up the Association for Relations Across the 
Taiwan Strait, a government-sanctioned nongovernmental 
organization, to establish contacts with the Straits Exchange 
Foundation and other relevant nongovernmental organizations in 
Taiwan to boost development in cross-strait relations. The 
Wang-Koo meeting held in April 1993, during which four 
agreements were signed, represents an important step of 
historical significance in cross-strait relations. An 
atmosphere of relaxation, which has never been seen in the past 
40 years and more, has emerged in the Taiwan Strait. This is 
favorable to peaceful reunification. 
  Of the numerous measures, Deng Xiaoping reportedly puts 
particular emphasis on the need to increase cross-strait 
economic links. He said: "By closely linking the economy of 
the two sides we can curb `Taiwan independence' to a maximum 
degree." To this end, the communist Chinese authorities 
recently approved the establishment of several Taiwan investment 
zones in the coastal areas to suit the situation of Taiwan 
investments on the mainland. Meanwhile, at its sixth meeting in 
March this year, the Eighth NPC Standing Committee approved the 
"Law of the PRC on Protecting Investments by Taiwan 
Compatriots." The protection of Taiwan investments in terms of 
a law will further promote cross-strait economic cooperation. 
  However, as the Kuomintang and the CPC have many 
long-standing grievances against one another, plus the fact that 
the international forces support "Taiwan independence" by every 
possible means, people dare not be optimistic about the prospect 
of the two sides burying the hatchet. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1816 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_u_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  22 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> PRC MEDIA ON TAIWAN AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Enterprise Management Symposium Held in Beijing </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Enterprise Management Symposium Held in Beijing </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW2203085894 Beijing XINHUA in English 0803 GMT 22 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW2203085894 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 22 (XINHUA) -- A symposium on 
enterprise management on both sides of the Taiwan Straits opened 
here this morning. 
  About 60 senior management personnel from enterprises across 
the Taiwan Straits and Overseas Chinese enterprises attended the 
opening session of the five-day symposium. 
  During the meeting, the participants are to discuss the 
current economic situation on the mainland and in Taiwan, the 
development features of various industries, the set-up of modern 
enterprise system and cooperation between enterprises on both 
sides of the straits. 
  Wu Jie, president of the Chinese Institute of Reforms, 
wished 
the meeting success. 
  Professor Ma Junru, chairman of the Association for 
Personnel 
Exchanges Across the Taiwan Straits, expressed the hope to the 
gathering that senior management personnel would compare notes 
on the set-up and management of modern enterprises. 
  Mutual understanding and contacts between the participants 
would help to forge cooperative ties in various forms and 
provide a good infrastructure for closer cooperation between the 
participants in the days to come, Ma said. 
  David Chen, chairman of the Chinese Quality Assurance 
Association (U.S.A.), noted that in the past few years, the 
economies on both sides of the Taiwan Straits have logged rapid 
growth and that the Chinese enterprises in Southeast Asia and 
the United States also have recorded remarkable development. 
  The exchanges of enterprise management expertise would help 
to promote the development of these enterprises, he said. 
  In the morning session today, Wu Yufeng, deputy director of 
the Economic System and Management Research Institute under the 
State Commission for Economic Restructuring, made a speech on 
the current economic status of the mainland. 
  Wen-Ching Cheng, counsellor of the Chinese Quality Assurance 
Association, briefed the participants on the development of 
public- run enterprises in Taiwan. 
  The symposium is jointly sponsored by the Association for 
Personnel Exchanges Across the Taiwan Straits and the Economic 
System and Management Research Institute of the State Commission 
for Economic Restructuring. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1817 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_u_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> PRC MEDIA ON TAIWAN AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Taiwan Capital Flows Into Xinjiang Region </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Taiwan Capital Flows Into Xinjiang Region </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104074194 Beijing XINHUA in English 0713 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104074194 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Urumqi, April 1 (XINHUA) -- The Xinjiang Uygur 
Autonomous Region in northwest China has attracted an increasing 
amount of investment from Taiwan over the past four years. 
  The region now has a total of 53 Taiwan-funded enterprises, 
with a total investment of 86.75 million U.S. dollars and a 
registered capital of 33.27 million U.S. dollars. Of the total 
agreed investment, 33 million U.S. dollars have been put into 
actual use. 
  Enterprises involving Taiwan investment are mainly engaged 
in 
real estate, electronics, telecommunications, foodstuffs, 
textiles, garments and shoe making, as well as advertising, 
forestry, agriculture and the service trades. 
  Eight of them each have an investment exceeding two million 
U.S. dollars. 
  The flow of more Taiwan capital has helped boost the 
exploitation of the region's rich natural resources such as oil, 
coal, fruit, cotton and animal husbandry products. 
  They have also contributed to growing exports. Products such 
as textiles, fruit drinks, building materials, arts and crafts 
and computers from the region have entered the world market, 
especially the Commonwealth of Independent States. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1818 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_u_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  23 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> PRC MEDIA ON TAIWAN AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Mainland To Hold Book Fair in Taiwan </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Mainland To Hold Book Fair in Taiwan </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW2303134194 Beijing XINHUA in English 1308 GMT 23 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW2303134194 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Shenzhen, March 23 (XINHUA) -- A delegation 
consisting of 100 representatives from nearly 90 big publishers 
on the Chinese mainland left here today for Taiwan via Hong Kong 
for a book fair, to bolster cultural exchanges across the 
straits. 
  The fair, sponsored by the China Publication Distribution 
Trade Association, is expected to be staged in Taibei [Taipei] 
city from March 29 to April 4. 
  About 26,000 new books in nine categories produced by 181 
publishers on the mainland will be on display at the show. 
  As one of the publications exchanges across the straits 
projected by the China National Publication Import and Export 
Corporation (CNPIEC), the book exhibition will be the mainland's 
first such show in Taiwan. 
  In November 1993, the CNPIEC held the first fair on the 
mainland of books from Taiwan, and more than 20,000 books from 
307 Taiwan publishers were displayed. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1819 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_w_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HONG KONG &amp; MACAO </F>
<F P=101> Hong Kong </F>
<H3> <TI>   Reiterates `One Country, Two Systems' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Reiterates `One Country, Two Systems' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204143494 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 1247 
GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0204143494 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, Apr 2 (XINHUA) -- Premier Li Peng cordially 
met with persons in charge of Hong Kong-based "WEN WEI PO," "TA 
KUNG PAO," "HONG KONG COMMERCIAL DAILY," "NEW EVENING POST," 
"ZIJIN MAGAZINE," and "ECONOMIC INFORMATION AND AGENCY" at 
Zhongnanhai's Ziguangge here this afternoon. They were in 
Beijing for a visit. 
  Premier Li Peng said: The four newspapers and two magazines 
each has its own characteristics. All have done a tremendous 
amount of work and made achievements in promoting mutual 
understanding, cooperation, and exchange between the mainland 
and Hong Kong. He urged them to continue offering correct 
guidance for public opinion, become more creative in substance 
and form, and pay more attention to absorbing and borrowing the 
strong points of other newspapers and magazines. 
  Premier Li Peng said: There will be no change of our 
principle of "one country, two systems" in Hong Kong. The Hong 
Kong-based newspapers and magazines now shoulder an even more 
greater responsibility in the realization of the smooth 
transition of Hong Kong and maintaining long-term prosperity and 
stability there. The situation demands you to make the 
newspapers and magazines more successful. 
  Also present were Ding Guangen and Li Lanqing, as well as Lu 
Ping, Zeng Jianhui, Zhang Junsheng, and Li Bing, persons in 
charge of departments concerned. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1820 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_w_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HONG KONG &amp; MACAO </F>
<F P=101> Hong Kong </F>
<H3> <TI>   Group To Be Established To Study Land Policy </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Group To Be Established To Study Land Policy </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104123094 Beijing XINHUA in English 1154 GMT 1 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104123094 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 1 (XINHUA) -- A new group will be set 
up in Beijing to study policies concerning land and housing in 
Hong Kong. 
  The decision was made during a two-day meeting concluded 
here 
today by the economic subject panel of the preliminary working 
committee for the preparatory committee of the Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region (SAR). 
  Members of the economic subject panel agreed that such a 
group is necessary when exceedingly high housing and land prices 
in Hong Kong have already adversely affected the livelihood of 
local residents and Hong Kong's economic growth. 
  During the meeting, these members heard a report on the 
question of land in Hong Kong and the Chinese Government's 
policy regarding the approval of land there. 
  Zhong Qiquan, secretary-general of the Guangdong Provincial 
Government, briefed the members on the large construction 
projects being undertaken in Guangdong. The members discussed 
how to coordinate large construction projects undertaken in the 
Chinese Mainland and Hong Kong. 
  Moreover, members of the banking and finance panels of the 
preliminary working committee also met here to discuss an 
initial report on how to manage the land fund of the Hong Kong 
Special Administrative Region after 1997. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1821 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_w_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HONG KONG &amp; MACAO </F>
<F P=101> Hong Kong </F>
<H3> <TI>   Survey Shows Support for Amendment to New Territories Law </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Survey Shows Support for Amendment to New Territories Law </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0304062594 Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA SUNDAY MORNING POST in 
English 3 Apr 94 p 2 </F>

<F P=103> HK0304062594 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA SUNDAY MORNING POST </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Quinton Chan] </F>
  [Text] The popularity of Legislative Councillor Christine 
Loh Kung-wai has shot up as a result of her attempts to change 
ancient inheritance laws barring women from inheriting land in 
rural areas, according to a SUNDAY MORNING POST poll. The 
survey of 1,055 people found strong backing for Ms Loh's stance 
on the controversial New Territories laws. She described it as 
an encouraging result and said she would push ahead with her 
amendment. 
  Twenty-four per cent of those surveyed by Hong Kong Polling 
and Business Research (PBR) on Wednesday and Thursday said their 
opinion of Ms Loh had improved as a result of her handling of 
the issue. Only eight per cent said their impressions of the 
legislator had worsened, while 51 per cent said their view of Ms 
Loh had not changed, and 17 per cent expressed no opinion. 
  PBR managing director Citi Hung Ching-tin, who conducted the 
survey said the result showed Ms Loh had became the "champion" 
of the New Territories row. "There is a net gain of 16 per 
cent. She is the single biggest beneficiary of this issue," he 
said. "This is a turning point. People can recognise her after 
this issue. Before this, she had nothing that people could 
identify with. 
  "Her chances of winning in the 1995 Legislative Council 
direct elections are now very high," he added. 
  The appointed Legislative Council member announced in 
January 
she would stand in the 1995 polls. Last week, she resigned as a 
project director from CIM Company Ltd to begin working as a 
full-time legislator. She is undecided over where she will 
stand in the 1995 polls but has said she prefers a seat on Hong 
Kong Island. 
  But Ms Loh declined to express any satisfaction at the rise 
in her personal popularity rating, insisting she had not 
intended to gain any political points from her controversial 
stance. "This is an interesting result. People recognise me 
when they hear about the New Territories issue seven days out of 
10," she said. "I am not working for votes. I put forward the 
issue before I had made up my mind to stand for the direct 
elections." 
  The poll found 64 per cent supported her amendment to end 
discrimination over land inheritance in the New Territories, 
while only 12 per cent were opposed, with 24 per cent unsure. 
The 1,055 sample included 63 indigenous inhabitants of the New 
Territories -- the group that vehemently opposed any changes to 
the inheritance law. Of these, a surprising 32 supported Ms 
Loh's amendment, while only 16 were opposed, with 15 unsure. 
The numbers involved are too small to be statistically 
significant, but Ms Loh said she still took comfort from the 
finding. "It is an encouraging result despite the fact the 
sample was so small," she said. 
  In further poll findings, half of those surveyed still 
believed the Heung Yee Kuk represent the interests of New 
Territories natives, while 23 per cent disagreed, and 27 per 
cent were unsure. The poll -- which had a 62 per cent response 
rate -- also revealed strong opposition to Beijing interfering. 
Seventy-four per cent said China should not be involved in 
resolving the row, while only 11 per cent believed Beijing had a 
role to play, with 15 per cent unsure. 
  China last week continued to support the protests of groups 
in the New Territories against the amendment saying the rights 
of indigenous residents should be protected. It also accused 
the Government of creating conflicts among Hong Kong people and 
undermining the stability of the territory. Beijing also 
defended the issue, saying it was an historical one and should 
not be mixed with sexual equality. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1822 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_w_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HONG KONG &amp; MACAO </F>
<F P=101> Hong Kong </F>
<H3> <TI>   Survey Favors Government Move To Cool Property Prices </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Survey Favors Government Move To Cool Property Prices </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0304060594 Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA SUNDAY MORNING POST in 
English 3 Apr 94 p 1, 2 </F>

<F P=103> HK0304060594 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA SUNDAY MORNING POST </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Political Editor Danny Gittings and Dick Chan] </F>
  [Text] Hong Kong has overwhelmingly thrown its support 
behind Governor Chris Patten's proposed crackdown on property 
speculation. An exclusive SUNDAY MORNING POST opinion poll 
reveals that 79 per cent of those surveyed believe the Governor 
was right last week to identify rising property prices as an 
urgent problem. Only eight per cent disagreed, while 13 per 
cent were unsure. 
  Speculation was almost universally identified as a major 
cause of the soaring prices by the poll's respondents. There 
was strong support for tough new measures to control it, 
including a controversial capital gains tax on speculators. 
  The poll also uncovered startling new evidence of the effect 
rising residential prices is having on ordinary people. Only 
six per cent of those surveyed said they were intending to buy a 
flat at present, in the Hong Kong Polling and Business Research 
(PBR) survey of 1,055 people. Forty-nine per cent were less 
likely to buy a flat because of recent price rises, while only 
four per cent said this had made them more likely to do so. A 
further 43 per cent said recent events had not affected the 
prospect of them buying a flat, while four per cent were unsure. 
  The poll was conducted last Wednesday [30 March] and 
Thursday, immediately after the Government announced the 
establishment of a multi-disciplinary task force charged with 
cooling the property market. The response rate was 62 per cent. 
PBR managing director Citi Hung Ching-tin said the results 
showed the Government had pinpointed the issue of most immediate 
concern to people. "The Governor is reaping the political 
windfall of correctly identifying the issue of the day that is 
hitting the lower classes," he said. 
  Mr Patten last week pledged that "the number one domestic 
issue on my agenda will be property prices". The Financial 
Secretary, Sir Hamish Macleod, and the Acting Secretary for 
Planning, Environment and Lands, Canice Mak Chun-fong, also 
pledged the Government would take action to bring down prices. 
  Ninety-three per cent of those surveyed saw speculation as a 
main cause of the soaring market. But most respondents believed 
Hong Kong property developers and other local purchasers were 
primarily to blame, rather than mainland firms, which had 
recently been accused of fuelling the rising prices. 
Seventy-eight per cent believed speculation by local developers 
was a major factor behind the runaway market, while 76 per cent 
believed the activities of other Hong Kong purchasers were an 
equally important contributing cause. 
  Only 50 per cent identified speculation by Beijing-backed 
enterprises as a major contributor to the increase in prices, 
fewer than the 58 per cent who saw the lack of land in Hong Kong 
as a key factor. Forty-nine per cent saw Government policy as a 
major cause, while 39 per cent identified Hong Kong's booming 
economy. 
  But Mr Hung warned that the support the poll showed for Mr 
Patten's tough stance on property prices could prove to be a 
double- edged sword if he failed to cool the market quickly. 
The survey found 79 per cent of respondents believed the 
Government had waited too long before taking action, while only 
six per cent disagreed with this, with 15 per cent unsure. 
"This could be extremely dangerous for the Governor," Mr Hung 
said. "If he fails to deliver on the issue, then the high 
expectations will backfire." 
  The poll findings suggest the most popular course would be 
immediate action to try to control speculation and begin 
building more public housing. Both options were backed by 85 
per cent of respondents. But there was also strong support for 
a capital gains tax on speculators. Other, less-favoured 
options included discussing an increase in land supply with 
China, backed by 62 per cent, and making it easier for 
redevelopment, which won the support of 45 per cent. 
  The Government has always opposed the introduction of a 
capital gains tax on speculators, although Sir Hamish last week 
said he would consider it if other measures were ineffective. 
The poll's revelation of public support for such a levy came as 
pro-democracy politicians yesterday renewed calls for its 
introduction. 
  Speaking after a panel discussion, United Democrat 
legislator 
James To Kun-sun said the Government's promise to cool the 
market would be worthless unless tough action was taken to stop 
speculation. "The problem cannot be solved only by releasing 
more land. We must also have some taxation measures to punish 
speculation," said Mr To, who described a tax on short-term 
property gains as a vital part of the battle against rocketing 
residential prices. He also pointed the Government could not 
formulate consistent solutions because it did not have a clear 
target. "We still don't know whether the objective is just to 
relax the price increase or to bring it back to a reasonable 
level," he said. 
  Law Cheung-kwok of the Association for Democracy and 
People's 
Livelihood also said a tax on speculators was essential, 
claiming the Government's announcement of other measures would 
have no effect on the overheated market. "Property prices will 
not reach a reasonable level within the next two or three years 
if only those suggestions are acted upon. Taxation measures 
must play a vital role in dealing with the problem," he said. 
  But Liberal Party spokesman Man Tak-chuen opposed the 
introduction of a capital gains tax because "we couldn't easily 
identify those who are speculators and those who are not". 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1823 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_w_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HONG KONG &amp; MACAO </F>
<F P=101> Hong Kong </F>
<H3> <TI>   China To Question Civil Servants on Intentions After 1997 </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    China To Question Civil Servants on Intentions After 1997 </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0104134694 Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 1 
Apr 94 p 3 </F>

<F P=103> HK0104134694 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Doreen Cheung in Beijing] </F>
  [Text] China made clear yesterday it would follow the 
advice of its preparatory panel for the post-1997 government and 
ask all civil servants to indicate whether they would remain in 
the Government after 1997. 
  The comment, from the Foreign Ministry, came despite 
reservations in Hong Kong about the proposal from the 
Preliminary Working Committee (PWC). 
  Ministry spokesman Wu Jianfan also confirmed Britain would 
be 
denied a say in choosing the leadership of the first Special 
Administrative Region (SAR) government. 
  "It is clear that the right to nominate and appoint the 
principal officials of the Hong Kong SAR government rests with 
the SAR chief executive and the central Government, 
respectively, rather than a case in which the candidates for 
principal officials will be nominated by the British side and 
then submitted for consultation with the Chinese side," Mr Wu 
said. 
  He called on civil servants to put their hearts at ease, 
saying China would abide by the Joint Declaration and the Basic 
Law. 
  "The Chinese side sincerely hopes that the civil servants 
working in the various departments of the Hong Kong Government 
will rest assured and perform their duties, and will continue to 
render service for the Hong Kong SAR government and for the Hong 
Kong people after 1997," the spokesman said. 
  But in Hong Kong, the Deputy to the Governor, Anson Chan 
Fang 
On- sang, said civil servants did not need to declare whether 
they wanted to stay beyond 1997: She said both the Joint 
Declaration and the Basic Law made clear that civil servants 
could expect to remain in the service after 1997. 
  Mrs Chan said the Government stood ready "at any time" to 
discuss civil service matters with China and hoped the 
discussions would take place "sooner rather than later". 
  Secretary for Constitutional Affairs, Michael Sze 
Cho-cheung, 
said that if China chose not to discuss a "through-train" for 
the civil service, the Government could not force Beijing to do 
so. 
  However, he said the Government would not give up persuading 
China to enter into talks simply because of the statement by the 
Foreign Ministry. 
  "Consultation on the subject must be in the interest of Hong 
Kong," he said. 
  "Just as when we consult them, we don't necessarily have to 
accept their view. The final say rests with us. By the same 
token, the boot is on their foot. Even if they discuss with us, 
they don't have to accept what we say." 
  Notwithstanding the Foreign Ministry's statement, Mr Sze 
said 
his plan for preparing the new senior-level line-up would go 
ahead. 
  "If there is a vacancy, I will still have to fill the post. 
We will do our best to find the best person for the job," he 
said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1824 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_w_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HONG KONG &amp; MACAO </F>
<F P=101> Hong Kong </F>
<H3> <TI>   Recruiting Efforts Increase </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Recruiting Efforts Increase </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0404065294 Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 4 
Apr 94 p 1 </F>

<F P=103> HK0404065294 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By S.Y. Yue] </F>
  [Text] The Chinese Government has stepped up its efforts 
to find potential candidates to fill the principal positions in 
the first government of the Special Administrative Region (SAR). 
Headhunting by Xinhua (the New China News Agency), which 
represents the Beijing Government in the territory, began in 
earnest after the collapse of talks between Britain and China on 
Hong Kong's political development. 
  Xinhua has been inviting senior Chinese civil servants at 
and 
above the staff grade B (D3) -- deputy secretaries and principal 
assistants -- to dinner. It is known that former civil servants 
such as Wilfred Wong Ying-wai are acting as middlemen in 
arranging the meetings. Mr. Wong, who had served in the 
government for 17 years, resigned several years ago and is now 
the deputy chief executive of the K Wah Group. He has been 
acting as a Hong Kong Affairs Adviser to the Chinese Government. 
  Xinhua officials attending the dinner parties are said to be 
quite plain about their intentions, urging senior civil servants 
to prepare for the fact that they will no longer work for the 
British administration. One staff member said he felt 
humiliated when the Xinhua officials he met described his role 
as having "served the British Government" for all his years in 
the administration. 
  "When I joined the Government, I only considered it as a 
good 
and secure job. I have never considered myself as serving the 
British administration. I serve the Hong Kong people," he said. 
He said he and his colleagues were asked over dinner where 
their loyalty lay. The easy -- and truthful -- answer had been 
that they supported the Joint Declaration and the Basic Law, he 
said. 
  Under the Basic Law, the 22 principal officials should not 
have a foreign passport. Senior civil servants, however, are 
among those given passports under the British Nationality 
package as an inducement for them to stay with the Government. 
  During their dinners, Xinhua officials give civil servants 
the residential number of vice-director Mao Junnian and tell 
them to call if they have any "queries". It is understood that 
one of the "queries" is what to do about their British passports. 
  Another senior civil servant said he perceived the dinner 
meetings as a way for both sides to get to know each other. One 
of those who knew of the meetings but had not yet been invited 
said he did not need such people as Mr. Wong to give him the 
chance to prove himself capable of being promoted to senior 
positions. 
  "I have worked for the Government for more than 20 years. 
Isn't that track record sufficient to show my ability and 
potential? Why should I need somebody like him to arrange 
meetings with Xinhua officials? It is just ridiculous," he said. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1825 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_w_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HONG KONG &amp; MACAO </F>
<F P=101> Hong Kong </F>
<H3> <TI>   Article Urges Democratic Election </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Article Urges Democratic Election </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0204062894 Hong Kong HONGKONG STANDARD in English 2 Apr 94 
p 2 </F>

<F P=103> HK0204062894 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong HONGKONG STANDARD </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article from the "Opinion" page by Francis Lun, Hong Kong </F>
Democratic Foundation Central Committee member: "Selection 
Process for First SAR Chief Executive Lacks Credibility"] 
  [Text] The recent elevation of Mr Tsang Hin-chi, a local 
businessman, to the Standing Committee of China's National 
People's Congress gives us a glimpse of what we can expect in 
the post-1997 Hong Kong political arena. 
  The selection of Mr Tsang drew heavy criticism even from 
China's own-appointed Hong Kong people's deputies. Actually, 
Hong Kong deputies wanted to elect another person to the 
Standing Committee rather than Mr Tsang. The Chinese government 
chose to ignore the opinions of the Hong Kong deputies. If the 
Chinese now ride roughshod over the opinions of its own rubber 
stamp parliament, what hope is there that the Chinese government 
will even pretend to listen to the people of Hong Kong and 
respect Hong Kong's democratic institutions and the rule of law. 
  In a recent RTHK television program on the Basic Law, the 
host asked me what was the most important article in the Basic 
Law. I answered instinctively, that article 45 on the selection 
of the first SAR chief executive was by far the most important. 
  There are two reasons for this choice. One, under the 
existing Hong Kong political structure, all the powers of 
government are concentrated in the hands of the Governor. He 
is, in fact, a potential dictator with no effective 
constitutional checks and balances and does not have to be 
responsible to anyone or any political organisation. The 
Executive Council is entirely appointed by the Governor. 
  The partly-elected Legislative Council has very limited 
powers. The Legislative Council can exercise some form of 
restraint on the government only through the finance committee. 
Otherwise, the Legislative Council is an advisory body in fact. 
Fortunately, the Governor has not resorted to dictatorial 
powers to govern Hong Kong, up to now. 
  On 1 July 1997, the existing dictatorial powers of the 
Governor will automatically pass to the first SAR Chief 
Executive. If the first chief executive was to be 
democratically elected, Hong Kong would have some control over 
the first chief executive. Unfortunately, under Appendix I of 
the Basic Law, the election of the first Chief Executive is by a 
very undemocratic process. 
  The first chief executive is to be selected by an election 
committee of 800 members, selected by the Chinese government 
through the Preparatory Committee. Out of the 800 members, 200 
members are selected from the business and finance sector; 200 
from the professional ranks; 200 from organised labour and 
social welfare groups, and 200 from Hong Kong's people's 
deputies to the NPC and local members of the Chinese People's 
Political Consultative Conference. 
  These 800 members will be selected by the Chinese government 
and not elected by the people of Hong Kong, directly or 
indirectly. In the first group, all businessmen for their own 
self-interests bend toward Beijing. In the second group of 
professionals, we can be sure that Martin Lee will not be among 
them. In the third group of labour leaders, we can be sure that 
Lau Chin-shek and Lee Cheuk-yan will not be among them. In the 
final group of rubber-stamp Chinese parliamentarians, even the 
so-called democrat Law Cheung-kwok, voted against his own 
democratic principles. 
  What credibility is there that the election committee will 
respect and reflect the wishes of Hong Kong people, and defend 
democracy and the rule of law in Hong Kong? From Mr Tsang's 
selection, we now have a pretty clear idea of what 
qualifications the first SAR Chief Executive must have to suit 
the Chinese government. First of all, he/she must be a business 
tycoon. Second, he must have enormous investments in China. 
Third, he must donate huge sums to the Chinese government. 
Fourth, he must be obedient to the dictates of the Chinese 
government. 
  Anyone can tell you that all tycoons are dictators because 
democracy does not exist in corporations. The Chinese 
government will get a dictator in line with their thinking. In 
fact, Mr Tsang got selected right after he donated $100 million 
to the Chinese government. I believe maybe there is a better 
method of selecting the first chief executive. 
  Why don't we hold a public auction in June 1997, to see 
which 
tycoon will pay the highest price to be Hong Kong SAR's first 
chief executive? The reward is enormous. The Hong Kong 
government's annual expenditure is now over $170 billion. 
Including the exchange fund, retained earnings, Hong Kong's 
reserves by 1997 are likely to exceed $400 billion. The Hong 
Kong government is one of the world's richest. Any person who 
can get his hands on this huge reserve can do a great many 
things. The temptation is just too great. 
  I often think of Hong Kong as a financial Bosnia, just 
waiting to be carved up in 1997. When the international 
community starts to take note of what is happening, I fear that 
Hong Kong will be like Bosnia now, with very little of anything 
left. The Tsang Hin-chi saga tells us that, like Bosnia, Hong 
Kong is just waiting to be pilfered, pillaged and carved-up. 
This scenario could be avoided if the chief executive was 
democratically-elected as provided by the Joint Declaration and 
accountable to the people of Hong Kong. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1826 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_w_94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HONG KONG &amp; MACAO </F>
<F P=101> Hong Kong </F>
<H3> <TI>   CPC Hong Kong Policy `Increasingly Leftist' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    CPC Hong Kong Policy `Increasingly Leftist' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK1603033094 Hong Kong CHENG MING in Chinese No 197, 1 Mar 
94 pp 17-18 </F>

<F P=103> HK1603033094 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong CHENG MING </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Fan Chun (5400 0689): "CPC's Hong Kong Policy </F>
Becomes Increasingly `Leftist'"] 
  [Text]Jiang Zemin Faces Criticism From Veteran 
Cadres, Army Officials 
  "Even without an agreement with the British, we are capable 
of and confident amount maintaining Hong Kong's smooth 
transition." 
  "Hong Kong's economy will not be affected by politics." 
  These are the assurances given by Chinese officials to Hong 
Kong people on different occasions. When China and Britain 
suspended talks on Hong Kong's constitutional reform, however, 
Hong Kong's stock and real estate market remained brisk, 
presenting bright prospects. 
  However, the author heard something quite different in 
Beijing: "The central authorities have made a rightist mistake 
on the policy toward Hong Kong." 
  "We cannot barter away our principles." 
  "We should resolutely take over Hong Kong." 
  In the face of overbearing criticism from the top CPC 
levels, 
Jiang Zemin had to make some "clarifications." 
  While meeting with and feting veteran Army officials and 
cadres in Beijing in early February, Jiang Zemin explained the 
policies of the CPC Central Committee and answered their 
questions. For a long time, these veteran army officials and 
cadres had had misgivings about certain matters. Taking the 
rare opportunity of their meeting with the party general 
secretary, they sharply raised a wide range of questions, 
including Army building, hegemonism, current social reality, 
understanding of Marxism, and Hong Kong's transition. Of these, 
the Hong Kong question was full of gunpowder. One person asked 
Jiang Zemin: "Did the CPC Central Committee commit a mistake of 
rightism in dealing with Britain over the question of Hong Kong? 
Did economic interests override state sovereignty and dignity?" 
<H5>  "Never Before Has the Policy Toward the British Hong Kong </H5>
Government Been So Identical as Today"] 
  In the face of the question that regarded "left" as "right," 
Jiang Zemin replied: "This criticism is not correct. We are 
fully prepared, as we had estimated the political and economic 
challenges deliberately made by Britain during Hong Kong's 
transition period. I hope the comrades present will rest 
assured. The CPC Central Committee will never make any 
compromise on questions of principle!" 
  Another person asked: "Is it true that the central 
departments do not have a unified policy in dealing with the 
Hong Kong question?" 
  Jiang Zemin raised his tone in the reply: "We can guarantee 
you that the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee, the 
State Council, and the Standing Committee of the National 
People's Congress [NPC] share identical views on the Hong Kong 
question." He especially quoted Deng Xiaoping's latest 
instruction: "Since the founding of the PRC, the policies of 
the CPC Central Committee regarding the British Hong Kong 
Government and the U.S. hegemonists' interference in China's 
internal affairs have never been so identical as today." 
<H5>  The Problem Can Be Resolved Easily When the British Side Has </H5>
Further "Gone Off the Rails" 
  Regarding the question of Hong Kong's early recovery, Jiang 
Zemin also conducted "ideological work." Of course, he stood by 
some comrades who criticized Britain, saying: "As Britain has 
violated and undermined the Sino-British Joint Declaration; 
openly negated the agreements reached between the two 
governments; incited hostile forces in Hong Kong to launch 
anti-Chinese Government activities; and brazenly interfered in 
the Basic Law, which is purely an internal Chinese affair; 
comrades within the party, the Army, people's organizations, and 
basic levels have urged the central government to adopt resolute 
measures to recover Hong Kong at an early date. We have legal 
grounds for such a move, as well as the political environment, 
economic strength, and the backing of the 1.2 billion Chinese 
people." Jiang then gave an account of the central committee's 
policy: "However, a decision can be made only after judging the 
development and changes of events. We are fully prepared 
against the turbulence during the transition period and at the 
initial period of the establishment of the Special 
Administrative Region [SAR] Government. It is definite that the 
British colonialists will create trouble politically, 
economically, and socially. We should let the British 
colonialists fully perform at the stage. Only when they have 
fully exposed themselves and have gone off the rails will it be 
easier to resolve the problem." 
  Jiang Zemin reiterated his position to the veteran Army 
officials and cadres: The Chinese Government and the Chinese 
people will never forget the base action of British perfidy; we 
will never forget British plunder, slaughter, and aggression 
against China during the Opium War; we will never forget the 
British support and participation in China's civil war; and we 
will never forget the British participation in the economic 
sanctions imposed against New China for over 30 years. I can 
assure you that after 1 July 1997, we will never allow the 
remnants of the British colonialists to remain, we will not 
allow the British colonialists to enjoy privileges, and we will 
never allow foreign forces to meddle in Hong Kong's affairs. 
The British authorities were informed long ago of our position 
and principled stand. 
<H5>  Li Peng Backs With Clear-Cut Stand the Leftist Line Pursued </H5>
by the XINHUA Hong Kong Branch 
  Moreover, Premier Li Peng took the opportunity of his 
participation in the inaguration of the Daya Bay nuclear power 
station to brief relevant departments. In Shenzhen on the 
afternoon of 5 February, Li Peng listened to an account of Hong 
Kong given by Zhou Nan, director of XINHUA Hong Kong Branch. 
Present on the occasion were Zou Jiahua, Ding Guangeng, Xie 
Fei, Lu Ping, and Lie Minqiu. 
  News of the meeting was blacked out. While meeting with 
reporters, Zhou Nan refused to disclose that he had discussed 
the question of Hong Kong with Li Peng. He simply told the 
reporters to ask Li Peng. 
  It has been reported that Li Peng gave a five-point 
instruction at the meeting: 
  First, the central authorities have highly appraised the 
work 
of the State Council's Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office and 
the XINHUA Hong Kong Branch, which have implemented the central 
policies in a comprehensive manner; 
  Second, the rule of the British colonialists will end on 30 
June 1997; if any drastic changes take place during this period, 
the central government will take over Hong Kong earlier in light 
of the established principle and policies. This is China's 
national policy; 
  Third, the central government is capable of maintaining Hong 
Kong's economic prosperity following the establishment of the 
SAR Government on 1 July 1997 so that Hong Kong can continue to 
serve as an international financial, industrial and commercial, 
and transportation center; 
  Fourth, regarding the political, economic, and social 
troubles created by the British colonialists during the 
transition period in an attempt to sow the seeds of turmoil and 
confusion for the future, it is necessary to continue to 
heighten vigilance, expose the plot, and adopt countermeasures 
to protect the interests of the vast number of Hong Kong 
compatriots; and 
  Fifth, under the principles and policies of the central 
government, it is necessary to continue to unite all Hong Kong 
figures who love the country and Hong Kong, and who are willing 
to take part in Hong Kong's construction, including foreign 
figures in Hong Kong who support the Basic Law and who are 
willing to contribute to Hong Kong's prosperity. 
  In his speech, Li Peng straightforwardly expressed his 
support for the XINHUA Hong Kong Branch, which was aimed at the 
criticism made by certain figures with foresight that the XINHUA 
Hong Kong Branch was taking an increasingly "leftist" line. 
This gives people much food for thought: Is it tantamount to 
bureaucrats' shielding one another or has the XINHUA Hong Kong 
Branch simply followed the line of Li Peng? 
<H5>  Assuming the Posture of "Political Examination" of Hong Kong </H5>
Civil Servants 
  Zou Jiahua also delivered a speech. He made the following 
two main points: First, how should we deal with the British 
unilateral constitutional reform? Second, can the 
department-level civil servants take the through train? Zhou 
continued: "Without the blessing of the Chinese side, we will 
not recognize or undertake any responsibility for the political 
system, economic matters, and things introduced unilaterally by 
the British side which transcend 1 July 1997. All Hong Kong 
civil servants now in office may continue their service after 
1997 and the conditions may be more preferential. However, 
there definitely will be changes in the department-level chiefs. 
The Chinese Government and the Chinese people will never 
recognize or accept the continued occupation of senior posts by 
British agents after 30 June 1997. The three-tier council 
elections introduced by Britain can last only until 30 June 
1997.... How can the Chinese Government accept and inherit the 
elections introduced by the British colonialists after the 
change of sovereignty and administration?" 
  Following the breakdown of Sino-British talks, there are 
indications that Beijing is taking the highly efficient 
contingent of civil servants of the Hong Kong Government as the 
target of attack. Now they have openly assumed the posture of 
"political examination," and even have intimidated some 
senior-level civil servants, which is bound to exert an adverse 
influence. No wonder a conscientious senior-level cadre in 
Beijing said indignantly: "In this way, they are undermining 
the basic framework of the Hong Kong Government. How can the 
concept of Hong Kong people ruling Hong Kong be realized in a 
state of anxiety?" 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1827 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_w_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HONG KONG &amp; MACAO </F>
<F P=101> Hong Kong </F>
<H3> <TI>   Police Paper on Triad Societies Presented to Legislators </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Police Paper on Triad Societies Presented to Legislators </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0104115194 Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 1 
Apr 94 pp 1, 4 </F>

<F P=103> HK0104115194 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Louis Ng] </F>
  [Text] The Sun Yee On is considered to be by far "the most 
prominent" gang among the 57 triad societies on the official 
police list. 
  In their first official detailed account of the existence of 
triads and their involvement in crime, the police ranking of 
most- active gangs put the Sun Yee On, part of the Chiu Chow 
group, ahead of the Wo groups and the 14K triad. 
  The 14K, which has 20 sub-groups, including the 14K Baai Lo, 
14K Kim and others, was found to be the largest. 
  Other major gangs include the Wo group with 10 sub-groups, 
six Chiu Chow groups and four gangs under the Luen umbrella. 
  The police paper presented to legislators yesterday revealed 
that 10,842 crime cases between 1991 and the end of last year 
were triad- related. This equated to 301 cases per month or 10 
a day. 
  Crimes either known or suspected to have been carried out by 
triads represented 4.2 per cent of the total number of crimes 
recorded in this period. 
  Of these, the most frequently committed offences were 
wounding and serious assault, blackmail and intimidation. 
  The triads were linked to 3,870 cases of being members of an 
unlawful society, 1,813 of blackmail and intimidation and 1,869 
of wounding and serious assault. 
  Last year, a total of 3,487 cases were known or suspected to 
be triad-related compared with 4,015 in 1992. 
  The paper said triad societies perpetrated extortion in 
places such as wholesale fish and vegetable markets, public 
light bus terminuses, mahjong parlours, construction sites, and 
film and decoration industries. 
  It did not disclose police estimates of the total population 
of the triad gangs. 
  "Triad societies are secret fraternities and, as such, some 
particulars are difficult to ascertain with certainty," it said. 
  "This is especially so when it comes to estimating either 
the 
number of triads in Hong Kong, or the total number in any given 
triad society." 
  But a police triad expert told a District Court trial in 
January that the Sun Yee On alone was estimated to have a 
membership of up to 56,000. 
  The police warned there was an emerging trend among triads 
to 
veer away from illegal activities and use their money and 
influence in legitimate enterprises. 
  Many leading triad members were now part of Hong Kong's 
social scene. 
  "They have attained an air of respectability and some are 
consciously seeking a high social profile through regular 
contact with persons of importance in the community," the paper 
said. 
  It said a growing number of women were being admitted to 
triad societies, though men were still predominant. 
  There was also an evolution of more sophisticated triad 
members involved in white-collar crime. 
  Police said these were second-generation triads, who had 
received the best education with money generated through illegal 
means. 
  The police said it was imperative that the Organised and 
Serious Crimes Bill, which has been under consideration by the 
Legislative Council since July 1992, be enacted as soon as 
possible. 
  The paper said the bill could provide additional powers of 
investigation to counter organised crime including triads, as 
well as the authority to seize assets obtained through criminal 
activities. 
  The police listed the known triad societies at the end of 
1993 as: 
  14K -- 20 factions: 14K Baai Lo, 14K Hau, 14K Kim, 14K Kin, 
14K Lai, 14K Lun, 14K Mui, 14K Ngai, 14K Sai Kong, 14K Sai Shing 
Tong, 14K Sat, 14K Shing, 14K Shun, 14K Tai Huen, 14K Tak, 14K 
Tung, 14K Yan, 14K Yee, 14K Yee Shing Tong, 14K Yung. 
  Wo -- 12: Wo Hop To, Wo Kwan Lok, Wo Kwan Ying, Wo Lee Kwan, 
Wo Lee Wo, Wo On Lok, Wo Shing Tong, Wo Shing Wo, Wo Shing Yee, 
Wo Yee Tong, Wo Yung Yee, Wo Hung Shing. 
  Chiu Chow -- 6: Chiu Kwong Sh'e, Fuk Yee Hing, King Yee, Sun 
Yee On, Tai Ho Choi, Yee Kwan. 
  Luen - 5: Luen Fei Ying, Luen Hung Ying, Luen Shun Tong, 
Luen To Ying, Luen Ying Sh'e. 
  Tung -- 4: Luen Lok Tong, Luen Kung Lok, Tung Kwan Ying, 
Tung San Wo. 
  Tung (East) -- 3: Tung Luen Sh'e, Tung On, Tung On Wo. 
  Kwong -- 2: Kwong Hung, Kwong Luen Shing. 
  Ching -- 2: Ching Nin Sh'e, Ching Wat Sh'e. 
  Others: Chuen Yat Chi, Yuet Tong, Chuk Luen Bong. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1828 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_w_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HONG KONG &amp; MACAO </F>
<F P=101> Hong Kong </F>
<H3> <TI>   Missing Cargo Ship Found Moored at PRC Naval Base </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Missing Cargo Ship Found Moored at PRC Naval Base </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK0204061894 Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 2 
Apr 94 p 1 </F>

<F P=103> HK0204061894 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Greg Torode] </F>
  [Text] The crew of a ship seized by armed boarders in Hong 
Kong waters are now trapped aboard while the vessel sits 
anchored outside a Chinese naval base in Zhuhai. The [Hong 
Kong] Government and the agents of the Tequila have had no 
official word on the fate of the Indonesian and Filipino crew 
members since the Taiwan-bound ship was taken while at anchor in 
the Tathong Channel a fortnight ago. And China is refusing to 
say where it is holding another ship seized just as it left Hong 
Kong waters last week on its way to South Korea. 
  The Post found the Tequila lying in restricted waters off 
Zhuhai this week, kept about 500 metres off shore from naval, 
Customs and Coast Guard gunboats. Local craft were prevented 
from approaching. One armed Customs vessel held on its stern two 
small unmarked jet boats, similar to descriptions of those used 
to intercept the Tequila. Zhuhai Port authorities said the 
565-tonne vessel was under constant land and radar surveillance. 
Crew could be seen wandering about the decks of the ship, 
cleared of its cargo of 46 second-hand cars manifested in Hong 
Kong for Keelung. 
  Senior government sources said a series of requests by Hong 
Kong's Political Adviser's Office to counterparts in XINHUA (the 
New China News Agency) had gone unanswered, but Public Security 
Bureau officials had unofficially confirmed the ship's 
detention. They had, however, denied the Honduran-registered 
vessel was taken in Hong Kong, despite Marine Department radar 
print-outs proving the opposite. XINHUA has not responded to 
requests for further clarification, and it is understood a 
formal protest could be lodged next week. 
  "We are very concerned," one official close to the case 
said. 
"China seems uninterested in talking to us yet it does appear 
that (Chinese) officials were involved in Hong Kong waters, and 
we are giving them the chance to clarify the matter before 
lodging a protest." 
  Leung Kam-hung, managing director of agents Fitter Marine, 
said yesterday he was working with Zhuhai contacts but still had 
no word on exactly why the ship was taken, or by whom. He said 
he had no idea what was happening to his 14 crew members and 
added that no receipts had been issued by the Chinese for the 
cargo. "We just have no idea what is going on, no information 
at all," Mr Leung said. 
  Meanwhile, agents for the 3,566-tonne Shun Ping, seized off 
Waglan Island last Sunday [27 March], were yesterday summoned to 
Guangzhou with all documents relating to the ship. A spokesman 
for Dong Woo agencies -- a prominent Hong Kong firm -- said the 
company did not know with whom it would be dealing, where the 
ship was or why it was being held. 
  "All that we are being told is that the crew are safe and 
that it was seized on leaving Hong Kong because it was not 
flying its flag of registration, Panama," he said. "This is 
clearly nonsense, but it shows what we are up against." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1829 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_v_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> TAIWAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Officials on U.S. Trade Sanctions Over Wildlife </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Officials on U.S. Trade Sanctions Over Wildlife </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0304095794 Taipei Voice of Free China in English 0200 GMT 
2 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0304095794 </F>
<F P=104>  Taipei Voice of Free China </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "News" program] </F>
  [Text] U.S. President Bill Clinton is yet to impose trade 
sanctions on Taiwan by invoking the Pelly amendment over the 
island's failure in wildlife conservation. Board of Foreign 
Trade Director General Hunag Jen-chao said Friday [1 April] that 
Taiwan will have no way to avert trade sanctions from the U.S. 
once President Clinton decides to proceed. Anyway, he said, the 
result in damage cannot be determined until Washington announces 
how such sanctions are to be enforced. 
  On the other hand, Economics Minister P.K. Chiang [Chiang 
Ping-kun] said when he attends a ministerial meeting under the 
General Agreement on Tariff and Trade in north Africa next week, 
he will explain to other participating countries Taiwan's 
accomplishments and resolve in protecting wildlife. Chiang 
stressed it is unquestionable that the ROC [Republic of China] 
Government and people are determined to protect endangered 
species. He said the U.S. Government is moving to slap trade 
sanctions on Taiwan merely because of slandering the island by 
international conservation groups. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1830 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_v_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> TAIWAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Group Praises Country's Conservation Efforts </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Group Praises Country's Conservation Efforts </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204085694 Taipei CNA in English 0730 GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0204085694 </F>
<F P=104>  Taipei CNA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By P.C. Tang and Y.C. Tsai] </F>
  [Text] Brussels, April 1 (CNA) -- Taiwan's wildlife 
conservation efforts have won recognition from a prestigious 
conservation group in Belgium. 
  The Royal League for the Protection of Birds, or Ligue Royal 
Pour la Protection des Oiseaus (LRPO), introduced Taiwan's 
protective measures for endangered species in its "HUMAN BEINGS 
AND BIRDS" (L'HOMME ET L'OISEAUX) quarterly. 
  The quarterly, which was published Thursday in French and 
Dutch, devoted nine pages to the report on Taiwan. 
  Although Taiwan has been blamed by some international 
conservation groups for its failure to crack down on the illegal 
trade of rhino horn and tiger bone, the island has taken a 
series of concrete measures to better protect wild animals in 
the past few years, the LRPO report said. 
  The measures include intensifying crackdowns on the illicit 
rhino horn and tiger bone trade and amendments to the wildlife 
conservation law which substantially increase punishments for 
violators, the report elaborated. 
  The report cited the arrest in Taipei of a Bhutan princess 
for smuggling rhino horns and the repatriation of orangutan to 
Indonesian jungles as solid evidence of Taiwan's sincerity in 
following international conservation practices. 
  Established in 1922, LRPO maintains a number of branch 
offices in Belgium. In addition to the publication of the 
quarterly to advocate wildlife conservation and environmental 
protection, the league also cooperates with other international 
groups to promote protection for endangered animals. 
  The league has expressed its hope to work with Taiwan on 
bird 
conservation and to exchange information on environmental 
protection. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1831 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_v_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> TAIWAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Further Reportage on Cross-Strait Talks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Further Reportage on Cross-Strait Talks </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Talks End Without Agreement </H4>

<F P=102> OW0204140994 Taipei Voice of Free China in English 0200 GMT 
1 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0204140994 </F>
<F P=104>  Taipei Voice of Free China </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "News" program] </F>
  [Text] Negotiators from Taiwan and Mainland China 
Wednesday [30 March] ended their current round of talks in 
Peking without an agreement. Taiwan's chief negotiator Hsu 
Hui-yu and his mainland counterpart Sun Ya-fu [Sun Yafu] both 
expressed regrets as soon as they ended the talks. The talks 
were the fourth effort since last April to settle technical 
issues between the two sides. 
  Sun said: Although the results were predictable, the two 
sides did improve mutual understanding. Hsu and Sun all agreed 
that the next round of talks should be held as soon as possible 
to solve the problems at hand. 
  The Peking talks, which began last Friday, were originally 
expected to conclude agreements on repatriation of mainland 
hijackers and illegal immigrants, and resolve cross-strait 
fishing disputes. Taiwan wants the rights to exclude some 
hijackers from repatriation if it is determined they have their 
political or religious motives. Peking has said Taiwan does not 
have the legal rights to make such a decision. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1832 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_v_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> TAIWAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Further Reportage on Cross-Strait Talks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Further Reportage on Cross-Strait Talks </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Official Issues Statement on Return </H4>

<F P=102> OW0304114994 Taipei Voice of Free China in English 0200 GMT 
2 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0304114994 </F>
<F P=104>  Taipei Voice of Free China </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "News" program] </F>
  [Text] A so-called consensus reached between the leaders 
of two semiofficial organizations in February [words indistinct] 
impasse for the latest round of talks Taiwan and Mainland China. 
Taiwan's chief negotiator Hsu Hui-yu, deputy secretary general 
of the Strait Exchange Foundation, made a statement Thursday [31 
March] upon his return from Peking. While there, he failed to 
reach agreement on any topic with his Mainland Chinese 
counterpart Sun Yafu. Sun is deputy secretary general of the 
Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits. Both 
organizations are literally private and authorized by Taipei and 
Peking, respectively, to tackle bilateral affairs in absence of 
official links. The consensus Hsu referred to was the one 
reached between his superior Chiao Jen-ho and mainland's Tang 
Shubei during their meeting in Peking earlier this year on the 
repatriation of hijackers and illegal stowaways and cross-strait 
fishing disputes. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1833 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_v_94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> TAIWAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Further Reportage on Cross-Strait Talks </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Further Reportage on Cross-Strait Talks </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    `Senior Negotiator' Cited </H4>

<F P=102> HK0404065394 Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 4 
Apr 94 p 5 </F>

<F P=103> HK0404065394 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chris Yeung] </F>
  [Text] Taiwan is considering allowing mainland officials 
to visit the Kuomintang-ruled (KMT) stronghold to enhance mutual 
understanding, as deep mistrust bogged down talks over issues 
such as hijacking. 
  Chiao Jen-ho, vice-chairman of Taiwan's Straits Exchange 
Foundation (SEF) and senior negotiator on non-government issues 
across the Strait said officials were conducting internal 
studies on whether the time was ripe for being "more aggressive" 
in inviting officials from the communist regime to visit the 
island. 
  Mr. Chiao was speaking, to a group of Hong Kong journalists 
and commentators who were visiting Taipei last week. His top 
aides ended the fourth round of talks with their mainland 
counterparts in Beijing last week with no accord on sensitive 
issues such as aircraft hijacking. 
  The former close aide to President Lee Teng-hui admitted 
that 
the quasi-official body was "in a difficult position" after the 
fruitless four rounds of working-level talks plus a more 
senior-level meeting between him and his Beijing counterpart 
Tang Shubei of the Association for Relations Across the Taiwan 
Strait. "The lack of mutual trust between the two sides remains 
serious.... The mainland side does not really understand 
Taiwan," said Mr. Chiao. 
  The SEF leader was critical of what he said was Beijing's 
lack of understanding of Taiwan, as well as mixing legal matters 
with politics. "Political issues cannot be solved through 
negotiation. One will only be able to keep power if they win 
public support. Beijing has to seek backing from the Taiwan 
community if it wants to pursue political talks," he said. 
  "But the present gap is so large that any talks on political 
issues are doomed to fail. The mainland authorities fail to 
understand Taiwan when they say they are putting out hopes on 
the KMT. They have overestimated the KMT. It's not powerful 
enough to swing public opinion," said Mr. Chiao. 
  "The attitude of Beijing in treating links with Taiwan as a 
relationship between father and son will not be acceptable to 
the people in Taiwan. We are not asking for recognition of our 
status. But they have to respect reality." 
  Mr. Chiao admitted that the KMT Government has banned visits 
by mainland officials to the island in the past because of fears 
of their "adverse influence" within the community and the 
bureaucracy. 
  "Our policy is more conservative and defensive. Whether we 
should be more aggressive now and try to influence mainland 
officials is a matter under consideration," he said. 
  "As our confidence (regarding dealing with Beijing) grows, 
we 
might readjust our policy correspondingly," the SEF vice 
chairman said. 
  Mr. Chiao, however urged Beijing to be more pragmatic and 
not 
to overreact. "There will be enormous scope for the 
development of relations between the two sides if Beijing can 
understand that. On any mainland-Taiwan matters, we have no 
deadline." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1834 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_v_94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> TAIWAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Premier Rejects Mainland Investment Protection Law </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Premier Rejects Mainland Investment Protection Law </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104135294 Taipei China Broadcasting Corporation News 
Network in Mandarin 2300 GMT 11 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW0104135294 </F>
<F P=104>  Taipei China Broadcasting Corporation News 
Network </F>

<F P=105>  Mandarin </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Hookup" program] </F>
  [Text] At the Legislative Yuan today, Premier Lien Chan 
commented for the first time on the law of investment protection 
for Taiwan compatriots adopted by the Chinese Communists. He 
pointed out: Basically, the law shows that the Chinese 
Communists are still playing the trick of one country, two 
systems. If they truly want to protect investment from outside, 
they should sign agreements that meet international 
requirements. We cannot rashly enter into all-around, in-depth 
economic contact with the mainland simply because the Chinese 
Communists passed an incomprehensive, nonspecific law. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1835 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_v_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> TAIWAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Spokesman Wants PRC To Explain Boating Accident </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Spokesman Wants PRC To Explain Boating Accident </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0404080194 Taipei CNA in English 0710 GMT 4 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0404080194 </F>
<F P=104>  Taipei CNA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Debbie Kuo] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, April 4 (CNA) -- A government spokesman 
here Monday [4 April] called on mainland Chinese authorities to 
reveal the cause of a mysterious boat accident in which 24 
Taiwan tourists perished. 
  Government Information Office director-general Jason Hu 
urged 
mainland authorities to face the accident "honestly" and 
"responsibly." 
  The charred corpses of 24 Taiwan tourists, two mainland 
Chinese guides and six crewmen were found piled in one room of a 
tourist boat on March 31. The boat was on a cruise of Thousand 
Island Lake in Zhejiang Province when the still unexplained 
deaths occurred. 
  News of the accident was not released until two days after 
the event occurred, and all Taiwan reporters were barred from 
examining the boat or any of the 32 corpses after the boat was 
removed to a shipyard in Chunan, Zhejiang. 
  Zhejiang security officials also destroyed film of the site 
taken by a TV reporter from Taipei's China Television Co. 
  The Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF), Taipei's non-official 
conduit for mainland-Taiwan relations, Monday urged mainland 
authorities to reconsider a Sunday decision to bar SEF officials 
from even visiting the site. 
  SEF counterpart, the Association for Relations Across the 
Taiwan Straits (ARATS), in a fax Sunday to the SEF, made only 
perfunctory reference to the incident and did not detail reasons 
for the fire and death of the tourists. 
  The deaths are widely believed to be the result of foul 
play, 
possibly the work of thieves who took advantage of lax police 
presence on the lake. 
  Meanwhile, about 50 family members of the victims arrived 
Monday in Chunan to help police identify the corpses. 
  Angered with the mainland's handling of the case, the family 
members have demanded the mainland authorities make public the 
true cause of the accident, allow SEF personnel to the site, and 
respect the relatives' wishes regarding the handling and 
transport of victims to Taiwan. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1836 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_v_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> TAIWAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Taipei Protests Name-Change Move by Film Festival </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Taipei Protests Name-Change Move by Film Festival </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204140094 Taipei CNA in English 1310 GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0204140094 </F>
<F P=104>  Taipei CNA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Danielle Yang] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, April 2 (CNA) -- The Government Information 
Office (GIO) Saturday [2 April] expressed its strong 
dissatisfaction over the Cannes TV Festival's changing the 
Republic of China [ROC] delegation's title. 
  Cannes organizers demanded that the ROC delegation change 
its 
name to "Taiwan, China," under pressure from Beijing, a GIO 
spokesman said. 
  The GIO strongly condemned the move and said the organizers 
are politicizing the TV industry, which it said should remain a 
commercial activity. 
  The GIO in turn has decided to dispatch only representatives 
of the three local TV stations to participate in the 1994 
festival, because they are "civilian" operators. In the past, 
the ROC delegation has been comprised of representatives from 
the GIO, from Taiwan's public television station, and from the 
mass media. 
  Beijing in the last several years has intensified efforts to 
downgrade the ROC at the festival. Last year, Beijing demanded 
that the organizers remove the ROC flag representing the Taiwan 
delegation. 
  In mid-March, the Cannes organizers demanded that the ROC 
change its promotional pamphlet title from "Taipei TV Group, 
ROC" to "Taiwan." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1837 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_v_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> TAIWAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   High-Tech Exports Decline Despite Incentives </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    High-Tech Exports Decline Despite Incentives </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0404090594 Taipei CNA in English 0700 GMT 4 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0404090594 </F>
<F P=104>  Taipei CNA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Sofia Wu] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, April 4 (CNA) -- Taiwan has enjoyed an 
aggregate trade surplus for the past 18 years, but its annual 
trade in high-technology products has remained in the red since 
1988, Ministry of Finance statisticians reported Monday [4 
April]. 
  The officials said that although the government has offered 
tax and other financial incentives to encourage investment in 
high-tech industries, the imbalance in state-of-the-art products 
trade continues to grow. 
  High-tech imports reached U.S.$37 billion in 1993, while 
exports totaled about U.S.$29.1 billion. The U.S.$7.9 billion 
imbalance, roughly equal to Taiwan's total trade surplus for the 
year, was the largest gap since 1988 when the high-tech trade 
deficit stood at U.S.$2 billion, the officials said. 
  And last year, Taiwan's high-tech exports even suffered a 
year-on-year 5.27 percent decline, reversing the steady upward 
trend recorded over the previous five years, the officials noted. 
  They blamed the phenomenon on high demand for high-tech 
products here and slow progress in upgrading local industries. 
  Shih Chin-tai, key components development project chief at 
the government-funded Industrial Technology Research Institute, 
said local high-tech companies have not yet established 
comprehensive overseas distribution networks, which has hindered 
Taiwan's export expansion. 
  But Taiwan will soon be able to mass produce such key 
electronic and machinery parts as liquid crystal displays, data 
compressors and memory chips, Shih said. "These products will 
help increase Taiwan's high-tech production by an estimated 
U.S.$3.49 billion by 1997, and cut reliance on high-tech 
imports," he explained. 
  Some economists suggested that the government offer even 
more 
incentives to encourage development of certain "strategic" 
industries, such as telecommunications, machinery and key 
electronic parts. 
  Computers, machinery and chemicals are Taiwan's major 
high-tech exports, while electronic components and parts, 
sophisticated machinery and car engines form the bulk of 
Taiwan's high-tech imports, according to government tallies. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1838 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_v_94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> TAIWAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Adjustment of Government Agencies Planned </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Adjustment of Government Agencies Planned </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204153694 Taipei CNA in English 1317 GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0204153694 </F>
<F P=104>  Taipei CNA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Lilian Wu] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, April 2 (CNA) -- Some operations of 
government agencies may be enlarged or cut under a revision of a 
statute covering the organization of the Executive Yuan, the 
Research, Development and Evaluation Commission (RDEC) of the 
Executive Yuan said Saturday [2 April]. 
  According to the RDEC, an immigration and a firefighter 
administration may be added to the Ministry of Interior, while 
social affairs, which are now managed by the Social Department 
under the Ministry of Interior, may be turned over to a newly 
created ministry. 
  The RDEC also said aborigines affairs, which are now part of 
Ministry of Interior operations, may be turned over to the 
Tibetan and Mongolian Affairs Commission, which will be enlarged 
to include minority affairs. 
  RDEC officials said that some environmentalists have 
suggested that wildlife conservation operations be turned over 
to the Environmental Protection Administration (EPA), but added 
that the Executive Yuan would have to carefully evaluate such a 
switch before a final decision is made because of complicated 
underlying issues. 
  Whether the Executive Yuan's Council for Cultural Planning 
and Development will be upgraded to become a Cultural Ministry 
has not been finalized, the officials said. Many legislators 
have appealed for such a change to put more emphasis on cultural 
development in Taiwan, which has been called an island of greed 
after its rapid economic development. 
  Regardless of whether it is upgraded to a ministry, the 
council will now be the chief agency responsible for the 
protection of copyrights and the maintenance and restoration of 
cultural relics, RDEC officials added. 
  The officials said that they are also studying whether the 
council should take charge of motion picture and television 
affairs, which are currently under the management of the 
government information office. 
  Each government agency has submitted proposals and 
suggestions concerning what adjustments should be made to their 
agencies, they said, and added that they are studying ways to 
curtail overlapping operations of the agencies. 
  The RDEC will submit its findings to a task force 
considering 
the Executive Yuan's reorganization. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1839 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_v_94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> TAIWAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Decline in Foreign Investment Reported </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Decline in Foreign Investment Reported </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204153594 Taipei CNA in English 1322 GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0204153594 </F>
<F P=104>  Taipei CNA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Danielle Yang] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, April 2 (CNA) -- Foreign investment in 
Taiwan totaled only US$130 million during the first two months 
of 1994, down 24 percent over the same period of 1993, according 
to statistics released by the Industrial Development Bureau 
(IDB) Saturday [2 April]. 
  Investment from Japan showed the largest decline of 51 
percent, followed by an [number indistinct] percent decline in 
US investments and an 8 percent decline in European investments, 
the statistics showed. 
  Investment in Taiwan's manufacturing industry totaled US$90 
million, down 36 percent, with most of that going toward 
manufacturers of electronics, electric goods, and chemicals. 
  Meanwhile, approved Taiwan investment in foreign countries 
other than Mainland China totaled US$90 million during the 
January-February period, up 130 percent from a year earlier. 
  US$10 million in investment went to the manufacturing 
industry, a decrease on 50 percent from a year earlier, with 
most of that going toward manufacturers of electronics, electric 
goods, and garments, the statistics showed. 
  In terms of Taiwan investment to Southeast Asian countries, 
both Thailand and Vietnam absorbed US$ [number indistinct] 
million, and Indonesia absorbed US$1 million during the period. 
  In addition, Taiwan businesses invested some US$120 million 
in Mainland China, up 37.5 percent over the same period of 1993. 
The mainland's manufacturing industry -- mostly basic metal and 
electronics makers -- absorbed US$110 million of the total. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1840 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_v_94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  4 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> TAIWAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Foreign Labor Shortage Concerns Contractors </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Foreign Labor Shortage Concerns Contractors </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0404091094 Taipei CNA in English 0727 GMT 4 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0404091094 </F>
<F P=104>  Taipei CNA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Lilian Wu] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, April 4 (CNA) -- Many public and private 
construction contractors are worried about the possibility of a 
serious labor shortage beginning in April as two-year contracts 
for foreign workers expire. 
  Although the Council of Labor Affairs (COLA) has revised its 
regulations to allow foreign laborers to remain in Taiwan for 
three years, the regulations have not yet been approved by the 
Legislative Yuan, so the contractors say they will be unable to 
overcome the growing shortage. 
  COLA first allowed the import of foreign workers to assist 
with major public works, manufacturing and construction 
industries in October 1991. The first wave of foreign laborers 
have already begun to leave Taiwan, with the exodus expected to 
peak in April. 
  And as COLA has not yet announced any measures to fill the 
coming labor gap, contractors are worried that progress on the 
Hsinchu and Taoyuan sections of the second freeway will lag 
behind schedule, resulting in the suspension or downscaling of 
work. 
  The contractors have expressed their hope that the 
Legislative Yuan can approve the COLA revisions soon and also 
suggested that COLA shorten the time it takes to process foreign 
worker applications. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1841 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064_v_94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> TAIWAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Enterprises Urged To Improve Product Quality </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Enterprises Urged To Improve Product Quality </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0204084694 Taipei CNA in English 0739 GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> OW0204084694 </F>
<F P=104>  Taipei CNA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Benjamin Yeh] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, April 2 (CNA) -- Vice Economic Affairs 
Minister Sheu Ke-sheng Saturday [2 April] told local enterprises 
they must further improve their product quality if they hope to 
win a greater share of the highly competitive international 
market. 
  "Taiwan was once known for its exports of low-end 
products...but with rising wages and costs, those days are gone 
forever. Today, only high-quality products can provide Taiwan 
enterprises with new niches," Sheu said at the opening of the 
second annual "Celebration of Excellence" product fair. 
  The five-day fair, sponsored by the Ministry of Economic 
Affairs, features 625 high-quality products manufactured by 336 
companies. 
  A screening committee has awarded 194 of the products the 
"Symbol of Excellence." 
  Eight companies, including Philips, a semiconductor producer 
and two bike manufacturers, won the top honors awarded by the 
ministry during a ceremony Friday night. 
  The award, dubbed the "Gold National Award of Excellence," 
is 
part of the government's effort to help local enterprises polish 
the image of their products. 
  The winners of the gold award were each given NT$2 million 
(US$757,575) in cash. Winners include Kuannan Enterprise, 
United Microelectronics Corp., Giant Co., Merida Co. and 
Philips Taiwan. Sixteen other firms won silver awards. 
  Vice Premier Hsu Li-the and Economic Affairs Minister P.K. 
Chiang attended the award ceremony at the Taipei World Trade 
Center. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1842 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064__s94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064-S </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  28 Feb 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL WORK REPORTS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Shanghai People's Procuratorial Work Report </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Shanghai People's Procuratorial Work Report </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW0104122994 Shanghai JIEFANG RIBAO in Chinese 28 Feb 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> OW0104122994 </F>
<F P=104>  Shanghai JIEFANG RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> ["Excerpts" of Work Report of the Shanghai Municipal </F>
People's Procuratorate, submitted by Ni Hongfu, chief procurator 
of the Shanghai People's Procuratorate, to the Second Session of 
the 10th Shanghai Municipal People's Congress in Shanghai on 21 
February] 
  [Text] In 1993, guided by Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory 
of building socialism with Chinese characteristics, focusing on 
the central task of economic construction, and following the 
policy of "grasping two links at the same time, attaching equal 
importance to both," procuratorial organs in Shanghai actively 
implemented the party Central Committee's plan on combating 
corruption and the Supreme People's Procuratorate's instructions 
on strictly enforcing the law and vigorously investigating 
cases. They earnestly fulfilled their responsibility of legal 
supervision; fully exercised their procuratorial functions of 
investigation, arrest, and prosecution; relentlessly cracked 
down on embezzlement, bribery, and other types of economic 
crimes; dealt heavy blows to serious criminal offenses; 
strengthened the fight against infringement of people's rights 
and dereliction of duty; and stepped up law enforcement. As a 
result, new progress was made in procuratorial work and in 
building the ranks of procurators. 
<H5>  1. Resolutely Cracking Down on Embezzlement, Bribery, and </H5>
Economic Crimes and Promoting In-Depth Progress of the 
Anti-Corruption Struggle 
  During the past year, relying heavily on party and 
government 
organizations at all levels and on the broad masses of people, 
procuratorial organs in the municipality successfully deepened 
their struggle against embezzlement and bribery. A total of 
1,189 cases of embezzlement, bribery, and other economic crimes 
were uncovered last year. Of the total, 935 were major and 
important cases, an increase of 69.7 percent. The total amount 
of money involved in all the cases reached 253 million yuan, 4.3 
times the amount in the previous year. Some 92.09 million yuan 
of illicit money and goods were recovered, and some 89.77 
million yuan of economic losses were avoided, representing an 
increase of 200 percent and 230 percent, respectively, over the 
previous year. 
  Last year's struggle against corruption had the following 
major characteristics: 
  First, the masses became more and more enthusiastic about 
informing on crimes. Taking advantage of the good 
opportunities, procuratorial organs at all levels strengthened 
the work of informing on crimes by actively carrying out 
propaganda work to mobilize the masses. A total of 11,544 cases 
were reported by the masses, of which 2,730 were reported in the 
first half of 1993, averaging 455 cases a month; 8,814 were 
reported in the second half, averaging 1,469 cases a month, and 
3.2 times that of the first half of the year. Cases of 
embezzlement and bribery cracked by procuratorial organs based 
on information provided by units and the masses accounted for 60 
percent of the total number of cases on file, a percentage 
higher than the previous year. 
  Second, the number of major and important embezzlement and 
bribery cases notably increased. For the whole year, 
procuratorial organs cracked 900 major cases -- cases involving 
bribery of more than 10,000 yuan and embezzlement of more than 
50,000 yuan -- and 35 important cases -- cases involving cadres 
at the departmental level. Major cases accounted for 78.6 
percent of the total number of cases on file, an increase of 
27.7 percent. Of this number, 280 were mammoth cases involving 
more than 50,000 yuan in bribes and more than 100,000 yuan of 
embezzled funds, an increase of 300 times that of the previous 
year. Three of the mammoth cases involved bribery from 500,000 
yuan to 1 million yuan; seven involved bribery of more than 1 
million; and five involved embezzlement of more than 10 million 
yuan. 
  Third, a number of cases were uncovered inside party and 
government organs, and judicial, administrative law enforcement, 
and economic management departments. The number of such cases 
on file reached 143 for the year, accounting for 12 percent of 
the total number of cases on file. Of the 143 cases, seven 
involved party and government organs, nine involved judicial 
departments, 40 involved administrative law enforcement 
departments, and 87 involved economic management departments. 
After review, it was decided to arrest 75 people. Using his 
position in charge of urban construction, real estate 
management, and housing construction, Zhu Wenqing, Luwan 
District's former deputy head, accepted 140,000 yuan in bribes 
in the course of approving joint land development projects and 
in connection with commercial housing purchases by units inside 
and outside Shanghai. His case topped the list of uncovered 
crimes committed by Shanghai's bureau-level cadres in terms of 
the amount of money involved. Although people committing such 
crimes accounted for only a very small percentage of state 
functionaries, they seriously damaged party and government 
images, disrupted the normal work order of state organs, and 
seriously endangered society. Seriously investigating and 
sternly handling such cases are very important to promoting the 
building of clean and honest government and forging closer ties 
between the party and government and the masses of people. 
  Fourth, we investigated a number of embezzlement and 
bribery cases in some fast-growing economic sectors. In the 
process of establishing a socialist market economic structure, 
Shanghai's markets of such production factors as banking, 
stocks, foreign exchange, and housing and real estate have 
developed rapidly. In order to ensure normal operations and 
healthy development of these markets, procuratorial organs 
earnestly investigated and handled in good time economic crimes 
of embezzlement and bribery in these sectors. Last year, they 
uncovered 87 cases involving 59.91 million yuan in banking and 
stock departments; 67 cases involving 15 million yuan in foreign 
exchange regulation markets; and 54 cases involving 5.97 million 
yuan in housing and real estate markets. Timely efforts to 
crack down on economic crimes and to stop them from spreading in 
these sectors was conducive to improving Shanghai's investment 
environment, protecting and expanding the fruits of reform and 
opening up, and establishing a sound socialist market economic 
structure. 
  Fifth, we pursued and captured a number of perverse 
criminals 
who absconded with big sums of money. Last year, we arrested 21 
criminals on the wanted list who absconded with a total of 18.34 
million yuan. 
  Sixth, we stepped up investigation and prosecution of 
embezzlement and bribery cases. Throughout the year, we 
indicted in courts a total of 614 economic cases involving 680 
criminals. Of these, 487 were major and serious cases, 
accounting for 70.6 percent of the total. Especially since last 
August, in conjunction with the central and municipal party 
committees' strategic arrangements for the anticorruption drive, 
we concentrated efforts to indict, in four groups, 262 serious 
embezzlement and bribery criminals involving 46.98 million yuan. 
Through publicity by the mass media, we kept the masses and 
various quarters of society informed of the results of 
anticorruption work, thereby expanding the social effects of the 
anticorruption drive. 
  Seventh, we strengthened the prevention of criminal offenses 
in embezzlement and bribery. We established and perfected 
special bodies for preventing embezzlement and bribery, and set 
up 38 grass-roots preventive networks of all kinds. Based on 
investigations of some 40 major cases, we made proposals for 
supervision, and urged and assisted the relevant departments to 
plug loopholes, and enforce preventive measures. 
<H5>  2. Striking Severely at Serious Criminal Offenders To </H5>
Maintain Public Order and Social Stability 
  In the past year, procuratorial organs at all levels in 
Shanghai closely coordinated with judicial and public security 
departments in launching preemptive strikes at, and swiftly and 
harshly punishing serious criminal offenders for murder, 
robbery, rape, explosion, and theft and robbery of guns; and 
criminal gangs of the nature of underground societies. Last 
year we handled a total of 12,302 criminal suspects whom public 
security organs had requested approval for their arrest. Of 
these, we completed investigations on 11,597, and approved the 
arrest of 10,897, including 4,437, or 40.7 percent of the total, 
on wanted lists. We also handled a total of 11,580 suspects 
forwarded by public security organs for investigation and 
prosecution; of these, we completed investigations of 10,957, 
and prosecuted 10,245. We actively cooperated with judicial and 
public security departments in launching special campaigns to 
tackle such social maladies as taxi robbery, unlawful growing of 
poppies, destruction of telecommunications equipment, and 
prostitution, which were rather serious during a given period of 
time. Under the municipality's unified arrangements, we took 
part in concerted campaigns to crack down on theft, train 
robbery, criminals on the run, and pornography, approving the 
arrest of 6,841 suspects, and prosecuting 832 cases involving 
1,265 suspects. All of this had a positive impact on deterring 
crimes and maintaining public order and social stability. 
Procuratorates at various levels seriously implemented the 
guidelines of the party Central Committee and the NPC Standing 
Committee's "Decision on Strengthening the Comprehensive 
Management of Public Security," and further strengthened 
procuratorial work related to comprehensive management of public 
security. Over the past year, procuratorates at various levels 
used legal cases to publicize the legal system more than 300 
times. In light of loopholes in the management of public 
security and prevention of crimes, those organizations put 
forward 419 suggestions. According to special characteristics 
of crimes committed by juveniles, procuratorates at various 
levels adopted effective measures to improve work, and increase 
results in handling those cases. They formulated rules for 
supervising and controlling reform activities for juveniles; and 
strengthened education and helped juvenile law offenders change 
their behavior by persuasion. They revisited 1,400 people who 
were exempted from prosecution, and inspected the situation of 
more than 3,900 people whose sentences were executed outside 
prison. Various procuratorates supervised the work of helping 
those people improve themselves. They unfolded activities of 
"joint construction of civilized units" with enterprises and 
other business undertakings by providing legal consultations, 
and urging them to administer in accordance with the law. In 
coordination with concerned departments, various procuratorates 
laid stress on improving the situation of some places and units 
with conspicuous problems of public security, and worked hard to 
ensure social stability and reduce crimes. 
<H5>  3. Seriously Investigate and Handle Cases of "Violation of </H5>
Lawful Rights" and Crime of Dereliction of Duty To Protect 
Citizen's Lawful Rights and Benefits and the Normal Operation of 
State Organs 
  Over the past year, procuratorates in the municipality 
handled 645 cases of "violation of lawful rights" and 
dereliction of duty, and filed 279 cases for investigation, an 
increase of 64.1 percent compared with the previous year, and 
recovered 9.38 million yuan's economic losses for the state and 
collectives. Among those cases filed for investigation, the 
five major categories of self-seeking misconduct, using torture 
to coerce statements, unlawful detention, dereliction of duty 
and responsibility for major accidents increased by 63.3 percent 
compared with the previous year. Of these, 25 cases were 
"hostage type" unlawful detentions, eight cases were dereliction 
of duty by financial workers, six cases were crimes committed by 
public security cadres and policemen to seek self-interest by 
misconduct and to coerce confessions by using torture, and 94 
cases were related to responsibility for major accidents. In 
investigating various cases, procuratorates paid attention to 
using legal cases to publicize the legal system. This has 
enhanced citizens' consciousness of law and self-protection, and 
played a positive role in improving public security and 
preventing crimes. 
<H5>  4. Actively Investigate and Handle Crimes of Evading Tax and </H5>
Resisting the Payment of Tax and Imitating Trade Marks To 
Protect State Tax Income and Economic Order on the Market 
  Over the past year, procuratorates in the municipality 
further strengthened their work of cracking down on crimes of 
tax evasion, and resisting the payment of tax, and imitating 
trade marks. Over the past year, various procuratorates 
investigated and handled 473 cases of tax evasion and resisting 
payment of tax, and recovered 20.86 million yuan for the state. 
First, various procuratorates attached importance to handling 
major cases. Over the past year, they discovered 50 especially 
serious cases of tax evasion each involving an amount of more 
than 100,000 yuan, an increase of 72.4 percent compared with the 
previous year. The biggest personal tax evasion case involved 
2.27 million yuan of tax money. Second, various procuratorates 
firmly investigated and handled tax evasion by legal persons. 
They handled 14 such cases in the past year, or 470 percent 
more than in the previous year. Third, various procuratorates 
struggled against specific crimes in light of special 
characteristics of different trades. They publicized education 
on the tax law 63 times while investigating cases of tax fraud. 
Meanwhile, they helped concerned units establish and improve 
operational and tax management systems. Fourth, various 
procuratorates worked in coordination with taxation 
organizations to improve tax collection. They ordered some 
"stubborn" units to pay taxes and fines for delaying payment. 
Procuratorates at various levels strengthened their efforts to 
"crack down on fake and shoddy products." They stressed 
handling major and serious cases of imitating trade marks, and 
producing and selling fake and shoddy products, which involve 
large volumes and have a very bad impact on society. They also 
seriously investigated and handled criminal groups which 
manufactured and sold fake and shoddy commodities. Over the past 
year, they filed 80 cases of imitating trade marks, an increase 
of 60 percent compared with the previous year. Of these, 48 
were serious cases, accounting for 60 percent of cases. The 
total amount of illegal operations reached more than 29 million 
yuan. They cracked down on and destroyed 56 "criminal nests" 
which manufactured fake commodities. Cases of imitating trade 
marks discovered by procuratorates involved 20 categories and 39 
kinds of commodities, including automobiles, auto parts, 
household appliances, bicycles, medicine, beverages, and medical 
apparatus. Investigating and cracking down on those cases played 
a positive role in protecting consumers' lawful rights, and 
maintaining economic order in the market. 
<H5>  5. Strengthening Law Enforcement Supervision, Vigorously </H5>
Launching Inspection of Investigation and Trial Activities and 
Law-Enforcement Activities of Prisons, Detention Centers, and 
Reeducation-Through-Labor Camps 
  During the past year, procuratorial organs paid closer 
attention to law-enforcement supervision. First, they 
strengthened supervision over investigation and trial work. 
They arrested and prosecuted 182 criminals who had slipped 
through the net, turned down 776 cases for further investigation 
on the ground of insufficient evidence, and gave verbal or 
written comments to public security organs and courts on 88 
cases rectifying violations of law. They also decided not to 
approve the arrests of a total of 700 people and not to 
prosecute 14 others on the grounds that their actions did not 
constitute crimes, or because there was no need to hold them for 
criminal responsibility. In addition, they protested court 
judgment on 22 cases on the grounds that the judgment was 
inappropriate. Second, they strengthened inspection of prisons 
and detention centers. They gave their views on 391 cases of 
violation of law by prisons, detention centers, and 
reeducation-through-labor camps [jian guan gai zhao chang suo 
4148 4619 2395 6644 1034 2076]. They organized special task 
forces to conduct special investigation into law-enforcement 
activities and prominent problems in enforcing criminal verdicts 
and judgments. They presented views to rectify action on a 
timely basis, and pressed law-enforcement departments to 
strictly enforce the law and conduct business in accordance with 
the law. Third, they vigorously conducted inspection into civil 
action and administrative cases. During the year, they set up 
files on 88 civil action and administrative cases following the 
parties's appeal, protested verdicts and judgments on six cases 
which appeared inappropriate, and presented views to rectify 
mistakes on eight cases. Fourth, they made earnest efforts to 
investigate charges and appeals. They accepted 29 appeals over 
verdicts and judgment on criminal cases, and presented views to 
courts in six cases to rectify mistakes. In addition, they 
accepted appeals over 111 non-prosecution decisions and reversed 
decisions on 29 cases out of 61 concluded cases. Fifth, they 
strengthened internal checkups in case handling work. They 
improved the system of separating arrest from prosecution, and 
strengthened checkups on cases investigated by procuratorial 
organs themselves. Following the review process, they decided 
not to arrest a total of 45 people after the cases were 
investigated and forwarded to them by their own criminal 
departments. They also issued orders to arrest and prosecute 
seven suspects after the criminal departments decided not to 
arrest and prosecute them. 
<H5>  6. Strengthening the Ranks of Procurators and Promoting </H5>
Efficiency and Integrity Among Procuratorial Organs 
  A contingent of procurators who are politically conscious, 
professionally competent, highly disciplined, and superior in 
workstyle serves as an important organizational safeguard to the 
fulfillment of procuratorial organs' responsibilities in 
supervising law enforcement. Over the past year, upholding the 
policy of "strictly managing procuratorial personnel and 
operating procuratorial offices in accordance with the law," 
procuratorial organs simultaneously attended to procuratorial 
work and the building of procuratorial ranks, and worked hard to 
push the work of building a procuratorial contingent to a new 
stage. 
  Procuratorial organs strengthened education in political 
theory and persisted in using Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of 
building socialism with Chinese characteristics to arm 
procuratorial officers and men. They regarded using Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping's theory to arm procuratorial officers and men as 
the central link of their ideological-political work and the 
paramount task of education in political theory. They worked 
hard to raise procuratorial personnel's political integrity and 
theoretical standards so that they would be more conscientious 
and determined in implementing the party's basic line. 
  They took further steps to promote spiritual civilization, 
beginning with building civilized units. They launched 
emulation activities in a down-to-earth manner and deep-going 
way to inspire vast numbers of officers and men to make 
progress, take the overall situation into consideration, fight 
with an indomitable spirit, and make selfless dedication. 
During the year, the municipal procuratorial system selected 85 
advanced collectives and 115 individuals for performing 
meritorious services. In addition, 30 collectives and 42 
individuals received commendations. Four collectives and four 
individuals received commendation and awards from the Higher 
People's Procuratorate while 18 of the 20 district and county 
procuratorial offices were commended as "civilized units." 
Among them, Zhabei district procuratorial office and a branch 
of the municipal procuratorate were commended as municipal- 
level "civilized units." 
  Study on reforming the cadre personnel management system 
has been actively carried out with a responsibility goal-setting 
system being adopted in procuratorates at the municipal, 
district, and county levels, under which scientific management 
was introduced to enhance work efficiency. Eleven 
procuratorates at district and county levels experimented with 
the system of "exchanging, waiting for, and experimenting with 
duty points." Some district and county procuratorates even 
studied such things as the "chief investigator's responsibility 
system" and the "system of accounting for wrongly investigated 
cases." 
  Work on promoting clean administration among officers and 
men 
has been intensified. While following arrangements made and 
meeting demands put forward by the central authorities, the 
municipal party committee, and the Supreme People's 
Procuratorate, and taking into consideration the reality of 
procuratorial work, procuratorial organs at various levels in 
the municipality held meetings on democratic life, and appraisal 
meetings for office level and above, during which officers and 
men would seriously screen their own actions against relevant 
central stipulations and make necessary self correction. The 
municipal procuratorate has formulated and promulgated the "Code 
of Clean Administration for Police Officers and Men of the 
Shanghai Municipal Procuratorate;" republished telephone numbers 
on clean administration supervision, enhanced clean 
administration awareness among officers and men; and conducted 
massive inspections on law and discipline enforcement where 
wrongdoers would be seriously dealt with. 
<H5>  Voluntarily Submit to Leadership of the Party Committee; </H5>
Accept Supervision of the People's Congresses 
  In performing our duties, we persisted in making timely 
reports to the party committees on serious conditions and major 
cases, and sought their support and guidance. We have been 
conscientiously implementing the "Regulations on Judicial Work 
Supervision" adopted by the Standing Committee of the municipal 
people's congress and adhered to the system of submitting work 
reports to the people's congresses and their standing 
committees. We have been seriously handling cases handed over 
or assigned by the people's congresses and their standing 
committees, and relevant motions and proposals put forward, and 
criticisms made by the people's deputies with prompt replies on 
their outcomes. We took the initiative to invite the people's 
deputies and members of the Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference to inspect the procuratorates and 
conscientiously heard their appraisals and opinions on 
effectively improving work and enhancing the law-enforcement 
level. 
  The major tasks for Shanghai's procuratorates this year will 
be: To persist in being guided by Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory 
on establishing socialism with Chinese characteristics, and 
conscientiously implement the guidelines set by both the Third 
Plenum of the 14th CPC Central Committee and the Second Plenum 
of the Sixth Shanghai Municipal Party Committee; to unshakenly 
uphold the party's basic line of "one center and two basic 
points;" to unswervingly implement the guiding principle of 
making procuratorial work serve economic construction; to uphold 
the principle of "being firm in attending to both material 
progress, and cultural and ideological progress;" to strengthen 
the functions of law supervision through stricter 
law-enforcement and thorough investigations into all cases; to 
persist in waging struggle against corruption and bribery; to 
severely crack down on serious criminal activities; to 
conscientiously investigate cases involving "infringement of 
rights" and dereliction of duty; to conduct inspections on all 
fronts to preserve political and social stability and protect 
the on-going reform, opening up, and economic construction; and 
to make new efforts to promote the establishment and perfection 
of a socialist market economic system. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-1843 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi064__s94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-064-S </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  1 Feb 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> REGIONAL WORK REPORTS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Sichuan Governor's Government Work Report </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Sichuan Governor's Government Work Report </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   HK1003010094 Chengdu SICHUAN RIBAO in Chinese 1 Feb 94 pp 1-3 </F>
<F P=103> HK1003010094 </F>
<F P=104>  Chengdu SICHUAN RIBAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Sichuan provincial government work report delivered by </F>
Sichuan Governor Xiao Yang before the Second Session of the 
Eighth Provincial People's Congress on 18 January: "Government 
Work Report"] 
  [Text] Fellow deputies, 
  On behalf of the provincial people's government, I now 
submit 
to the Second Session of the Eighth Provincial People's Congress 
the report on the work of the government for your examination 
and approval, and also for suggestions and comments from members 
of the Provincial Committee of the Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference [CPPCC] and other observers. 
<H5>  Review of Our Work in 1993 </H5>
  In 1993, under the guidance of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's 
remarks during his trip to southern China as well as the spirit 
of the 14th party congress, under the leadership of the Sichuan 
Provincial CPC Committee, and under the supervision and with the 
support of the provincial people's congress and the provincial 
CPPCC, the provincial people's government mobilized and 
organized the people of the entire province to uphold the 
party's basic line, further emancipate their minds, seize the 
favorable opportunity, intensify reform and opening up, and 
speed up economic development. As a result, we basically 
fulfilled the targets and tasks assigned by the First Session of 
the Eighth Provincial People's Congress. At present, the entire 
province is enjoying a sound economic growth, a stable political 
situation, general unity among nationalities, and social 
progress. Sichuan's reform, opening up, and modernization drive 
have now entered a new phase of accelerated development. 
  1. Center around economic construction, speed up the 
pace of economic development 
  With the aim of implementing the spirit of Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's remarks during his trip to southern China, seizing 
the favorable opportunity, and expediting Sichuan's economic 
growth, the provincial people's government submitted to the 
provincial people's congress a grand program on realizing the 
second-step strategic goal three years in advance, which was 
adopted by the latter. Since then, an economic strategy which 
is characterized by the practice of "relying on science and 
education, readjusting the structure, integrating the Army with 
the people and urban areas with rural areas, being based on the 
Sichuan Basin, and developing two flanks" has been carried out 
in a comprehensive way; while a regional development arrangement 
which is characterized by "relying on two cities, paying 
attention to two lines, developing two flanks, and bringing 
along the development of the entire province" has also been 
worked out. In accordance with the principle of giving guidance 
to different types of areas, the provincial government has 
established different development plans, pillar industries, and 
policies and measures for different localities. The economy of 
the "one line" area, which spans Jiangyou to Emei Shan, is 
enjoying a rapid development; resettlement of residents in the 
Three Gorges Reservoir area has entered the stage of 
comprehensive action after undergoing successful experiments; 
and the Panxi area in southern Sichuan ranks among areas with 
the largest numbers of construction projects and the biggest 
amounts of investment. With the arduous efforts of the entire 
society and the people of the whole province, and also with the 
support of the People's Liberation Army troops stationed in the 
province, Sichuan has seen a rapid growth in its national 
economy, and its economic strength has been enhanced remarkably. 
The province's GDP in 1993 is estimated to reach 186 billion 
yuan, up by 12.8 percent over the previous year. 
  Persistent efforts were made to strengthen agriculture and 
rural work. Regarding agriculture as the foundation of our 
work, we conscientiously put into effect major policy decisions 
of the central authorities on strengthening agriculture; 
comprehensively carried out the principle of "never relaxing our 
efforts in grain production, actively promoting a diversified 
economy, and vigorously developing township and town 
enterprises"; unswervingly engaged in farmland capital 
construction; fought bravely against natural disasters; and 
strived to realize the goal of "stabilizing and increasing grain 
production and reducing burdens." The annual agricultural 
output value totaled 84.59 billion yuan in 1993, registering a 
1.5 percent increase; while the total output of grain reached 43 
million tonnes, which is slightly lower than the figure for the 
previous year. Animal husbandry, aquatic production, and 
forestry are all enjoying a good development momentum. The 
total annual output of pork, beef, and mutton reached 4.681 
million tonnes, an increase of 4.2 percent. Remarkable results 
have also been attained in building shelter-forest systems at 
the middle and upper reaches of the Chang Jiang, in building 
water-soil conservation works at the upper reaches of the Chang 
Jiang, in transforming low-yield farmland in central and eastern 
Sichuan, and in building production bases for quick-growing 
high-yield forests. Township and town enterprises are growing at 
a high speed. With a total output value of 191.87 billion yuan, 
which is 95 percent higher than that of the previous year, 
township and town enterprises have seen simultaneous growth in 
both sales revenue and total profits and taxes. Over 10 million 
peasants have left their homelands to seek employment or do 
business, among whom 5 million are working outside Sichuan, 
bringing back a great deal of experience and technology 
regarding developing a commodity economy as well as a big income 
from labor services. The rural cooperation foundation has 
undergone stable development, and the statutory burden of 
peasants across the province was controlled to within 5 percent 
of the net per capita income of the previous year. 
  Industrial production grew rapidly and economic efficiency 
increased. Sichuan seized the favorable development opportunity 
to readjust the product mix in light of market demand and to 
place the development of the pillar industries and leading 
production in an important position, stepped up production and 
development of marketable goods and new products, offered 
preferential policies to 152 efficient key enterprises which had 
sources of raw materials and whose products were marketable, and 
ensured the supply of working capital and energy. However, 
production of poorly managed enterprises whose products were 
unmarketable was limited. Relying on technical transformation 
and scientific and technological progress, Sichuan upgraded 
products and improved quality, opened up markets for products 
through various channels, made strenuous efforts to turn 
deficits into profits, alleviated the burdens on enterprises, 
and maintained sustained and rapid industrial growth. Output 
value of industry at and above the township level totaled 212.61 
billion yuan, an increase of 20.9 percent. Output value of 
sales totaled 204.28 billion yuan, up 21.2 percent. The 
production-sale rate topped 96.1 percent. Profits and taxes 
delivered by the budgetary industrial enterprises rose 43.7 
percent and the profit rate on costs went up 0.5 percentage 
points. The major industrial products increased by a wide 
margin. The ordnance enterprises accelerated the pace of their 
readjustment and transformation, increased the proportion of 
civilian goods, and produced a number of competitive leading 
products. 
  Investment in infrastructure rose normally and construction 
of key projects proceeded satisfactorily. Priority was given to 
transportation and communications building and efforts were made 
to open channels from Sichuan to other provinces. A framework 
of trunk lines gradually took shape within the province, 
presenting a favorable trend of comprehensive development of 
railway, highway, water, and air transportation. Construction 
of the Chengdu- Chongqing expressway, the Dacheng railway, and 
the double-track southern section of the Baoji-Chengdu railway, 
and electrification of the Chengdu-Kunming railway was smooth. 
The Longlu railway went into operation and progress in the 
expansion of the Shuangliu airport was smooth. Preparations 
were made for the Mianle high- grade highway. The Northern 
Sichuan and Southern Sichuan High-Grade Highways Shareholding 
Companies were established, and worked out plans for a number of 
transportation and communications projects. Focusing on 
transmission lines and programmed exchanges, we accelerated the 
pace of "building the framework and setting up the network" in 
communications and connected the Xian-Chengdu, Chengdu- Kunming, 
and Chengdu-Fanzhihua optical fiber lines. More than 200 cities 
at or above county level throughout the province had dialing 
telephones, of which 139 had direct long-distance call services 
and 66 had international long-distance call services. The 
second stage of the digital network project was completed. 
Energy construction was further strengthened. The Ertan Power 
Station smoothly dammed the river. The Tongjiezi, 
Huangjiaozhuan, and Fangang power stations went into operation 
on schedule. With the new installed capacity of 950,000 kw, 
Sichuan's total installed capacity exceeded 100 million kw. We 
accelerated the building of the Moqi gas field and development 
of the Junlian coal field. The province stepped up efforts to 
build the bases for essential raw materials. The 60,000- tonne 
polyester-sectioning project in Zigong, the 60,000-tonne sodium 
chloride project in east Sichuan, and the preparations for the 
240,000-tonne phosphate-ammonium fertilizer project in south 
Sichuan were developing in full swing. New headway was made in 
urban construction and building of towns. Output value of the 
building industry at and above township level totaled 30 billion 
yuan, an increase of 23 percent. The area of housing space 
completed was 52 million square meters, up 9 percent. 
  Sichuan vigorously developed tertiary industry and 
accelerated the building of the market system. Based on the 
principle of whoever makes the investment will benefit, the 
enthusiasm of all fields was aroused for running tertiary 
industry. The province implemented the policy of encouraging 
foreign investors in running tertiary industry. The development 
of Sino-foreign joint commercial and catering services showed a 
good momentum. A number of multifunctional wholesale markets 
and markets for production factors, which had large capacities 
and covered large areas, were built. The Sichuan Grain and 
Edible Oil Wholesale Market, Chongqing Means of Production 
Exchange, and Chengdu Metals Exchange started operation. The 
circulation channels were further widened. The volume of retail 
sales totaled 85.46 billion yuan, a rise of 18.8 percent. 
  The economy of the nationality areas developed healthily and 
new steps were taken in supporting the poor. Focused on the 
tasks of helping the poverty-stricken areas take the road to 
prosperity, Sichuan vigorously explored new roads for economic 
development of the nationality areas and the old bases and 
border regions, which were in straitened circumstances. Sichuan 
organized the relevant provincial departments to hold 
on-the-spot meetings to help the nationality areas resolve their 
difficulties in economic development. By relying on their own 
efforts and aid offered by various localities, the GNP, the 
total industrial output value and the total agricultural output 
value of the nationality areas increased by 9.6 percent, 20.8 
percent, and 5.5 percent respectively over the previous year. 
  Thanks to measures adopted to rectify the financial order, 
revenue increased. Sichuan strictly enforced the examination 
and approval procedures for tax exemption and introduced a new 
financial accounting system. Efforts were made to promote 
production, increase income, increase sources of income, levy 
taxes according to law, and prevent drains on revenue. 
Institutional purchases were kept strictly under control and 
nonproductive financial expenses were curtailed. Financial 
reform was deepened and preparations were made for implementing 
the revenue-sharing system. Revenue and expenditure were 
balanced in 1993, with revenue totaling 20.137 billion yuan, up 
37.1 percent from the previous year; and expenditure totaling 
21.4 billion yuan, up 31 percent. 
  Living standards of the urban and rural inhabitants 
continued 
to improve. The average living expenses income of urban 
inhabitants was 2,172.8 yuan, an increase of 20.2 percent over 
the previous year. It is estimated that the net average income 
of the peasants was 695 yuan, an increase of 61 yuan. Urban 
inhabitants had an average living space of 7.2 square meters, up 
0.2 square meters. The balance of inhabitants' savings deposits 
was 71.35 billion yuan, up 22.8 percent. 
  2. Intensify reform and open up wider 
  To meet the needs of the transition to a socialist market 
economy, deepen enterprise reform, and implement the "Enterprise 
Law," the "Regulations for State Industrial Enterprises To 
Effect a Change in Operational Mechanism," and Sichuan's 
"Methods for Implementation," the province paid attention to the 
22 large and medium-sized state enterprises undergoing the 
experiment of a new system and the 2,000 enterprises undergoing 
the experiment of three systems. In light of the state's 
standard opinions for trying out the shareholding system, 
Sichuan established 890 shareholding enterprises, of which 42 
were public utility companies. A good job was done in 
comprehensive rural reform. The Guanhan reform experiment area 
and the Yibin reform experiment invigorated the county-level 
economy and accelerated the growth of the county economy. 
Marked achievements were scored in reform experiments in the 
county organs. The province explored the road of reform in 
light of the principle of separating administration from 
management. 
  Opening up to the outside world was an important measure for 
expediting Sichuan's economic growth. We made friends with 
people all over the world and extended international cooperation 
and exchanges. Sichuan established relations of friendly ties 
with 33 cities of 14 countries and had trade contacts and 
cooperation with more than 120 countries and regions. We 
expanded the sphere for foreign investors, formulated policies 
for attracting foreign investment, did our utmost to improve the 
environment for foreign investment, and successfully held trade 
talks in Hong Kong, Thailand, Macao, and the ROK; sponsored 
Sichuan festivals in Moscow and Sofia; and took an active part 
in trade talks in Shenzhen. The external affairs, foreign 
propaganda, overseas Chinese affairs, Taiwan affairs, ports, 
customs, commercial inspection, border inspection, and civil 
aviation departments did a great deal of work to open Sichuan 
wider to the outside world. Shuangliu Airport was given 
approval to become an international airport. Under the 
conditions of the drastic changes taking place in the domestic 
and international markets, we made unremitting efforts to earn 
more foreign exchange through exports. The volume of Sichuan's 
imports and exports was $2.916 billion, up 32.6 percent. Of 
this, $1.65 billion was earned through exports, up 11 percent. 
There were 1,910 new foreign-funded enterprises during the 
year, involving agreed foreign capital of $2.4 billion. The 
province contracted foreign projects and labor services worth 
$600 million, up 17.6 percent. The volume of border trade 
reached 750 million yuan. Tourist facilities improved 
remarkably and so did services. The province earned $80.4 
million from tourism, up 16.2 percent. Inter-province economic 
and technical coordination further expanded. 3. Implement 
the measures of macroeconomic control and regulation, 
unswervingly uphold development 
  In connection with reality in Sichuan, we earnestly 
implemented the spirit of the "Opinions on the Current Economic 
Situation and Strengthening Macroeconomic Control and 
Regulation" promulgated by the CPC Central Committee and State 
Council; unswervingly adhered to development; switched the focus 
of economic work onto deepening reform, changing the operation 
mechanism, readjusting the structure, and increasing efficiency; 
and resolved prominent problems in economic life, particularly 
in banking work. 
  The province rectified the banking order, enforced banking 
discipline, resolutely implemented the regulations, and ensured 
the funds required for purchasing farm produce, working capital 
for major enterprises, technical transformation funds, funds for 
foreign trade enterprises and key construction projects, and 
funds for normal operation of the banks. As a result, the 
banking order improved remarkably, illegal lending was checked, 
the indiscriminate concentration of funds was curbed, the 
issuing of bonds was gradually standardized, all stock and 
equities were held in trust, and all spontaneous exchange 
markets were banned. The problem of issuing IOU notes was 
basically resolved, the funds for key construction projects were 
ensured, and the strain on working capital for key enterprises 
was eased somewhat. 
  Investment in fixed assets was brought under control and the 
key construction and technical transformation projects were 
ensured. The whole province curtailed 300 million yuan of 
investment in fixed assets. 
  Sichuan screened and rectified the development zones and 
the real estate market and checked the blind occupation of and 
speculation in land. The province reduced the development zones 
by 114, which involved a planned area of 481 square km and 
construction of 129 square km that had already started. Now the 
province has 52 development zones, of which four are 
state-level, 14 are provincial- level, and 34 are general-level 
development zones. Standard and legal management is exercised 
in these development zones. 
  We exercised strict control over price adjustment, 
established price adjustment funds and necessary reserves for 
sought-after commodities, made proper use of financial 
subsidies, adhered to the examination and approval system for 
the prices of essential means of production and consumer goods, 
and made efforts to curb spiraling prices. Initial results were 
achieved in checking the indiscriminate exaction of charges. 
The province abolished 1,740 kinds of irrational charges, 
suspended 64 kinds, and reduced 114 kinds of charges. 
  4. The strategy of revitalizing Sichuan with science 
was smoothly implemented and all kinds of social undertakings 
developed vigorously 
  The province studied, publicized, and implemented the "PRC 
Law on Scientific and Technological Progress" and vigorously 
implemented the 50 articles and supporting measures for 
revitalizing Sichuan with science and technology. The social 
mood of respecting qualified personnel and knowledge took shape. 
We implemented the principle of "stability and opening up" and 
deepened reform of the scientific and technological system. The 
province ran 6,890 various kinds of scientific and technological 
enterprises and implemented 168 scientific research projects, 
which turned out an output value of 7.51 billion yuan. Besides 
tackling key problems in a number of scientific and 
technological projects and importing technology, the province 
registered 745 major natural scientific and technological 
achievements during the year. Agricultural and rural science 
and technology were placed in the primary position in the 
province's scientific and technological work by tackling 25 key 
problems, trying out comprehensive technological development in 
55 townships, and implementing 23 spark projects. The 
agricultural popularization system developed in the direction of 
offering services in the entire course of production. Sichuan 
enhanced the technological development and assimilation capacity 
of enterprises, promoted enterprise technological progress, and 
developed 3,016 new products during the year. We vigorously 
developed high-tech industries; accelerated the building of the 
four high-tech technological development zones in Chengdu, 
Chongqing, Mianyang, and Zigong; and invested 1.575 billion 
yuan, which is estimated to add new capacity for turning out 
1.38 billion yuan of output value. The province nurtured and 
developed technological markets, and successfully held the 
Sichuan cross-strait economic and technological trade talks, the 
Macao new technology and new products fair, the new technology 
and new products trade talks of five provinces and seven sides 
along the Chang Jiang Valley, and the Sichuan youth scientific 
and technological achievements exposition. We attached 
importance to the scientific nature of policy decisions and the 
study of social science, upgraded the scientific policy 
decisionmaking level of the government, and prevented serious 
mistakes in policy decisionmaking. The protection of 
intellectual property rights was strengthened somewhat. 
  Earnestly implementing the "Outline for Chinese Education 
Reform and Development," Sichuan upheld the socialist 
orientation for running schools and improved education quality 
and school efficiency. Priority was given to basic education, 
with the stress on running well nine-year compulsory education. 
The provincial government issued a series of documents on 
continuously maintaining the ranks of primary school teachers, 
further improving management over levying surcharges on rural 
education, strengthening management over education funds in the 
remote border and nationality regions, and imposing education 
charges on guesthouses and hotels, and adopted resolute measures 
to resolve the problems of arrears in paying teachers, improving 
the conditions of schools and teachers' remuneration, 
maintaining the ranks of teachers, and arousing enthusiasm for 
teaching and educating students. There were 11 counties which 
passed the inspection on popularizing nine-year compulsory 
education. Sichuan reformed and developed higher education and 
readjusted the curriculum. Enrollment in ordinary institutions 
of higher learning rose 17 percent. The province deepened 
comprehensive reform of rural education and vigorously explored 
comprehensive reform of urban education. We paid attention to 
vocational and technical education, adult education, and 
education in areas inhabited by minority nationalities. 
  Sichuan continued the deepened reform of the cultural 
system, 
caused culture and art to flourish, raised the main theme of the 
times, and vigorously carried forward the outstanding culture of 
the Chinese nation. We sponsored the performance of national 
local operas (of southern areas), introduced the classical 
Chinese music concerts of the 20th century (in Chengdu and 
Chongqing), and organized literary and art performances to mark 
the centenary of Mao Zedong's birth. The province set up the 
Sichuan Cable Television Station, built the satellite receiving 
station, started broadcasting of the securities station, 
completed the radio project for the minority nationalities, and 
successfully sponsored the 1993 China Sichuan International 
Television Festival. We strengthened management over the 
cultural market and achieved results in the special struggle to 
wipe out pornography. We successfully sponsored the events of 
the Seventh National Games held in Sichuan. Sichuan's athletes 
scored good results at the Seventh National Games, ranking 
fifth, one grade higher than the previous year. 
  Upholding the policy of putting prevention first in medical 
work, the province improved the health of its people. We 
enormously enhanced rural health building and attained 
achievements in primary health care there. The occurrence and 
spread of diseases were brought under control and the rate of 
infectious and endemic diseases dropped. Thanks to the 
extensive activities of building health cities, Chengdu won the 
state health city title and Luzhou and Yibin won "10 best" 
national prefectural- and county-level health city titles. 
  The implementation of the three basic national policies of 
land protection, environmental protection, and family planning 
and the deepened reform of the land-use system brought about a 
halt in indiscriminate occupation and use of cultivated land, a 
rise in afforestation coverage, and improvement in the quality 
of the environment in some regions. The birth rate was 16.77 
per thousand and the natural growth rate 9.57 per thousand. 
  New headway was also made in press, publication, 
meteorology, 
mining, surveying, seismic, air defense, personnel, the elderly, 
statistics, archives, confidentiality, people's complaints, 
culture and history, and annals work. 
  5. Efforts were made to enhance social stability and 
the building of democracy and the legal system 
  Proceeding from the high plane of long-term stability, 
Sichuan strengthened the building of socialist democracy and the 
legal system. Thanks to the establishment and improvement of 
the democratic supervisory system and the system of making 
policy decisions democratically and scientifically, we 
implemented the regulations and resolutions of the provincial 
people's congress and its standing committee and consciously 
accepted the legal supervision by the provincial people's 
congress, its standing committee, and the people's deputies. 
Taking the initiative to maintain contacts with the CPPCC, 
democratic parties, figures without party affiliation, and 
people's organizations, we fully respected their right to 
participate in the deliberation and administration of state 
affairs and to exercise democratic supervision. While 
formulating our major policies or reform measures, we solicited 
the opinions of the provincial people's congress standing 
committee and the provincial CPPCC standing committee in 
advance. Government leaders went deep into the grass- roots 
level to attentively listen to criticism of government work and 
proposals made by the people's deputies and CPPCC members. We 
also took note of giving full play to the role of advisers and 
scientific and technical advisory groups. 
  Focused on economic construction, deepened reform, and 
opening up, we strengthened administrative legislation work. We 
organized the drafting of 11 local regulations and 21 provincial 
government regulations and submitted them to the provincial 
people's congress for examination and approval. At the same 
time, the government strengthened supervision over the 
enforcement of law and punished major lawless behavior. Focused 
on delegating powers to enterprises and alleviating the 
peasants' burden, the governments at all levels seized upon the 
complaints made by the masses, examined themselves, and boldly 
corrected lawless behavior. The measures adopted to check the 
8,985 cases of indiscriminate exaction of charges and pooling of 
funds not only safeguarded the legitimate rights and interests 
of enterprises and the masses but also impelled the 
administrative organs to exercise administration according to 
law. To promptly discover, correct, and check administrative 
interference by administrative organs in enterprises, the Legal 
System Bureau of the provincial government set up check posts in 
368 enterprises to monitor conditions in administrative law 
enforcement. The province enhanced auditing and economic 
supervision, administrative reconsideration and litigation work. 
Thanks to the drive to popularize law and enhance the sense of 
law, solicitor, notary, and other legal service work developed 
somewhat. 
  The province comprehensively tackled social order, did a 
good 
job of people's mediation work, mitigated social contradictions, 
and appropriately handled sudden events. Giving full play to 
the role of the public security and judicial organs and 
cooperating closely with the procuratorial organs, the province 
launched special struggles against highway robbers, production 
and trading of fake and counterfeit goods, and prostitution; 
sternly cracked down on criminal and economic offenses; smashed 
criminal gangs seriously endangering social order; and arrested 
and sentenced a number of criminals who had done all kinds of 
evil. As a consequence, social order gradually took a turn for 
the better. Safety and fire prevention work was also stepped up. 
  Building of the organs of power at the basic level and the 
mass autonomy organizations was enhanced. Centered on relief 
work, full play was given to the steady mechanism role of the 
civil administrative departments. 
  Thanks to the earnest implementation of the party's 
religious 
policies, the province ensured freedom of belief, effectively 
resisted infiltration by foreign hostile forces, and safeguarded 
nationality unity and social stability. 
  The province seriously implemented the "Sichuan Regulations 
for Conducting Education in National Defense," carried out the 
activities of supporting the Army and giving preferential 
treatment to families of revolutionary armymen and martyrs and 
supporting the Army and cherishing the people, enhanced the 
unity between Army and government and between the Army and the 
people, strengthened Army building, and did a good job of the 
militia reserve force. 
  6. The running of clean administration was 
strengthened and the building of spiritual civilization 
developed healthily 
  In light of the plan of the CPC Central Committee, the State 
Council, and the provincial party committee, anticorruption 
struggles were launched in a deep-going manner. Resolutely 
implementing the "three do not's" for state functionaries and 
five- point regulations for government working personnel at 
above county (department) level, measures were adopted for them 
to examine and correct their problems. A large number of major 
and important cases were investigated and handled, a number of 
corrupt elements were punished, and all this was made public to 
society. There were phased achievements in specially dealing 
with unhealthy tendencies in the taxation, public security, 
state land, education, public health, transportation, railway, 
electricity, post and telecommunications, and banking trades. 
Indiscriminate charges collected by administrative institutions 
were screened and rectified. The province resolutely 
implemented the stipulation of the central authorities banning 
administrative law enforcement organs and offices from engaging 
in business and running enterprises. The economic entities run 
by governments were separated from the former organs in terms of 
functions, finance, personnel, and titles. A system of running 
clean administration was established and improved. Target 
management was exercised and assessment of political 
achievements was strengthened for the work of provincial organs. 
  Centered on the general goal of the modernization program 
and 
the building of spiritual civilization in the nineties, Sichuan 
brought the building of spiritual civilization into line with 
the economic and social development plan; unswervingly launched 
education in building socialism with Chinese characteristics and 
the four cardinal principles, patriotism and national 
conditions, and socialist market economy; extensively carried 
out mass activities of building spiritual civilization, and 
initially fostered the ideological guarantees, spiritual forces, 
intellectual support, and media environment favorable to reform, 
opening up, and economic construction. 
  We owe the achievements attained in national economic and 
social development over the past year to the guidance of Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics, the correct leadership of the CPC Central 
Committee, the State Council, and Sichuan CPC Committee, the 
vigorous support of the troops stationed in Sichuan, and the 
concerted efforts of the Army and the people of the whole 
province. On behalf of the provincial government, I would like 
to extend my heartfelt thanks and regards to the people of all 
nationalities throughout the province, people's deputies, CPPCC 
members, cadres at all levels, the armed forces stationed in 
Sichuan, the officers and men of the armed police and public 
security organs, democratic parties, figures from various 
circles, and friends abroad! 
  Amid rapid economic growth and social progress, we also 
encountered a series of outstanding problems: The prominent 
problems in infrastructure and the "bottlenecks" in basic 
industries; the slow progress in structural readjustment; the 
lack of staying power in agriculture and low comparable 
interests; state enterprises lacking vitality and suffering from 
huge deficits; the great demand for but short supply of capital; 
economic relations which are not yet straightened out; the low 
efficiency of the national economy as a whole; the relatively 
high level of retail prices; and the factors of instability in 
society. These problems are due to our failure to go deep into 
the realities of life to conduct investigations; arouse the 
masses to offer suggestions for the outstanding problems in our 
work; implement the major policy decisions regarding economic 
development; open up wider to the outside world; and promptly 
handle the problems complained of by the masses. The provincial 
government, which attaches great importance to these problems, 
is now studying ways to gradually resolve them. 
<H5>  Opinions on the Work for 1994 </H5>
  The year 1994 will be a crucial one for establishing a 
socialist market economic system as well as an important one for 
Sichuan to attain the second-step strategic objective three 
years ahead of schedule. With Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of 
building Chinese- style socialism as the guide, we should 
conscientiously implement the spirit of the 14th party congress 
and the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, 
unswervingly adhere to the party's basic line, firmly stick to 
the central task of economic construction, and continue the 
policy of deepened reform and opening up. We should do two 
types of work simultaneously and attach equal importance to 
both; carry forward the fine tradition of self- reliance, hard 
struggle, and building the country thriftily; properly handle 
the relations between reform, development and stability; arouse 
the enthusiasm of all fields in speeding up the establishment of 
a socialist market economic system; open up wider to the outside 
world; readjust the economic structure and increase efficiency; 
maintain sustained, rapid, and healthy [shi xu kuai su jian kang 
fa zhan 2170 4958 1816 6643 0256 1660 4099 1455] economic 
growth; promote comprehensive social progress; and safeguard and 
develop the political situation of stability and unity. 
  The country's economy is at the stage of high growth. The 
state has placed the development of the central and western 
regions and the exploitation of the western resources on the 
agenda. Thanks to the favorable trend of Sichuan's economy, a 
number of large foreign firms are optimistic about the Sichuan 
market. In the face of such a golden opportunity, we must seize 
the opportunity to expedite development. Firmly bearing in mind 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping's teaching that "development is the last 
word" and upholding the criteria of "three advantages," we 
should further emancipate our minds, seek truth from facts, make 
bold explorations, and forge ahead with a high sense of 
historical responsibility and mission. We should continue to 
follow the development strategy of "relying on science and 
technology, structural readjustment, combining the Army with the 
people, urban-rural integration, having a foothold in the basin, 
and developing the two flanks" and the regional development plan 
of "relying on the two cities, grasping the two lines, 
developing the two flanks, and bringing along development of the 
whole province." 
  In light of these guidelines, the main targets of Sichuan's 
1994 economic development will be set initially at: GNP--220.8 
billion yuan, up 9.6 percent; total industrial and agricultural 
output value--376.8 billion yuan (calculated in terms of 1990 
constant prices), up 12.8 percent from 1993; of this amount, 
agriculture-- 84.3 billion yuan, up 4 percent; industry--292.5 
billion yuan, up 15.6 percent; and local revenue--12.24 billion 
yuan, up 9.7 percent. 
  The task to attain the 1994 targets is extremely arduous, 
requiring the concerted efforts of the people of the whole 
province and the focusing of attention on doing well work in the 
following 10 fields: 
  1. Promote the overall situation, make breakthroughs 
in special points, and adopt supporting measures to accelerate 
the pace of reform 
  Centered on establishing a modern enterprise system, 
nurturing and setting up a market system, and accelerating the 
pace of comprehensive county-level economic structural reform, 
we should promote reform of the taxation, banking, investment, 
planning, foreign trade, social insurance, housing, and 
scientific and technological systems; gradually introduce 
structural reform of local organs; and lay a sound foundation 
for establishing a socialist market economy system in Sichuan. 
  With the central task of running large and medium-sizes 
state 
enterprises well and with the objective of establishing a modern 
enterprise system, it is necessary to accelerate enterprise 
reform and structural readjustment. We should continue to 
implement the "Enterprise Law," the "Regulations for Enterprises 
To Effect a Change in Their Operation Mechanism," and the 
"Regulations for Exercising Supervision and Management Over 
State Enterprise Property"; carry out well the modern enterprise 
system experiment in four enterprises selected by the state and 
22 enterprises chosen by the province (all localities also may 
select a small number of enterprises to undergo the experiment); 
continue the experiment of 2,000 state enterprises changing 
their operation mechanisms; and ensure a smooth transition from 
the contract system to the practice of a unified income tax. We 
should speed up reform of the enterprise property rights system, 
strengthen and improve the operation and management of state 
assets, clearly define property rights relations, and gradually 
explore the establishment of a modern enterprise system based on 
the enterprise corporation property system, so that enterprises 
will undertake the responsibility for f preserving and 
increasing the value of state assets. It is necessary to push 
forward the transformation, transfer of production, leasing, and 
selling of small and medium- sized state enterprises. In light 
of the standard requirements, we should introduce various forms 
of shareholding experiments, select for the formation of large 
public utility groups those energy and communications projects 
and key enterprises that have conditions enabling them to have 
an impact on Sichuan's economic construction, advocate and 
encourage enterprises under different forms of ownership to 
become shareholding companies, vigorously develop corporate 
limited companies and shareholding limited companies, and 
steadily develop directional collection companies where workers 
are shareholders. Focusing on the development of key 
industries, the formation of key enterprises, and the 
development of essential products, it is necessary, through 
market guidance and government promotion to encourage enterprise 
reorganization by means of mergers, the shareholding system, 
enterprise groups, and joint ventures with foreign firms. 
  While upholding the principle of common development of 
various economic sectors, based on the predominance of the 
public sector, we must vigorously readjust the ownership 
structure, and promote both the state and collective economies. 
It is necessary to encourage the economic development of the 
individual, private, and exclusively foreign-funded sectors, and 
to increase the proportion of the nonstate and nonpublic sectors 
in Sichuan's economic setup. We should transform the system of 
the small and medium-sized state enterprises, sell them, or let 
them be run by the people under state ownership, and gradually 
reorganize urban and rural collective enterprises into 
shareholding enterprises or exercise private operation under 
public ownership. It is necessary to create conditions for 
various economic sectors to participate in market competition on 
an equal footing and to treat all kinds of enterprises equally 
and without discrimination. 
  The county-level comprehensive economic structural reform 
must be strengthened, and the county-level economic development 
must be accelerated. In light of the requirements for 
establishing a socialist market economy system and in light of 
the outstanding problems that have cropped up in county economic 
development and that demand prompt solutions, it is necessary to 
nurture various forms of market systems that are composed of 
diverse sectors, to introduce the experiments of township 
enterprise shareholding and the shareholding cooperative system, 
to straighten out enterprise property rights relations, to 
practice various forms of asset-operation forms, and to 
comprehensively invigorate the enterprise operational mechanism. 
To resolve the difficulties in selling farm produce and the 
peasants' difficulties in buying materials, it is necessary to 
establish a spot wholesale market for farm produce and a 
wholesale market for manufactured goods. We should break with 
the demarcation line between administrative regions, trades, and 
ownership, and should vigorously develop trade- 
industry-agriculture integration, as well as production- 
transportation-marketing economic organizations. 
  The reform of the banking system must be deepened. In 
compliance with the diverse trend of banking organizations, 
channels, and services, we should adopt more flexible measures, 
develop local banking organizations, and support the branch 
offices set up in Sichuan by the national banking organizations 
and financial organizations of other provinces and regions. We 
should set up an exchange center for treasury bonds. Conditions 
should be laid down for the newly established State Agricultural 
Development Bank and the Import and Export Credit Bank to set up 
representative offices or branches in Sichuan as early as 
possible. Based on the existing urban and rural credit 
cooperatives, we should establish on a trial basis an urban 
cooperative bank and a rural cooperative bank. It is necessary 
to develop the range of operation and business means of the 
insurance and trust investment companies, and to enhance the 
existing nonbanking financial organizations. We should 
vigorously import foreign capital and create conditions for one 
or two foreign banks to set up branches in Sichuan. 
  We should deepen reform of the taxation system and ensure 
that the revenue-sharing system will be implemented smoothly in 
Sichuan. It is necessary to stabilize the financial system 
between the province and all localities, step up the building of 
state and local taxation organs, enhance management over 
taxation and finance, and strengthen the province's macrocontrol 
and regulation over finance. To increase revenue, it is 
necessary to vigorously open new financial resources. We should 
earnestly study and enforce the Taxation Law and improve the 
methods for levying taxes. In accordance with the Rules for 
Financial Affairs and the Rules for Accounting, the distribution 
of interests between the government and enterprises should be 
standardized. We also should vigorously raise funds and support 
economic development. 
  Reform of the investment system: Construction projects will 
be divided into competitive investment, infrastructure 
investment, and public utility investment projects. It is 
necessary to strengthen market regulation of the capital 
accommodation and investment of the competitive projects, expand 
the channels for capital accommodation and investment of the 
basic projects, and improve the system of capital accommodation 
and investment of the public utility projects. We should 
establish an investment risk-binding mechanism; affirm the main 
investment status of enterprises; put the legal person first, 
then determine the project; replace the system of examination 
and approval with the system of application and record; and 
extend the investment decision-making right of enterprises. It 
is necessary to reform the management method for investment 
plans, and no longer merely rely on the overall planned targets 
to control the total investment, but start from the sources of 
capital instead, mainly apply economic means, and exercise 
indirect control over the formation and use of investment 
capital. 
  Reform of the planning system: To transform the functions of 
planned management, the fundamental point is to transform the 
traditional mandatory planning system and to establish a 
guidance planning system that meets the needs of a socialist 
market economy, is advantageous to comprehensive control over 
major issues, and is also favorable to flexibility in minor 
affairs. The method of planned management should be changed 
from direct to indirect regulation and control and to applying 
economic policies, regulations, and levers to regulate economic 
operation. We should establish a scientific planning system and 
a national economic accounting system, and should improve the 
alarm system for exercising macroeconomic supervision. With the 
stress gradually put on medium- and long-term planning, the 
system of annual planning should be reformed. Attention should 
be given to the formulation and implementation of industrial 
policies, the regulations of a trade or profession, and special 
planning. 
  Reform of the circulation system: In light of the principle 
of "he who makes investment owns and benefits," it is necessary 
to make full use of the advantages of communications, to develop 
the market, and to promote commerce. We should focus attention 
on building a number of large-scale functional and influential 
markets for means of production, and for farm and sideline 
produce, and to build a wholesale market; vigorously nurture and 
develop markets for finance, science and technology, qualified 
personnel, labor, information, real estate, and other essential 
factors; and promote the rational flow of essential factors for 
production. Efforts should be made to vigorously and steadily 
develop a commodity exchange; organize and build several futures 
markets; nurture the rural market; and gradually establish a 
unified, open, standard, competitive, and controllable market 
system that is suited to economic growth and the people's living 
standards. The barriers between regions and markets, between 
urban and rural areas, and between trades should be removed, and 
reform of the supply and market cooperatives, state commerce, 
and material supply enterprise system should be promoted. 
Practicing the competition and elimination mechanism, the small 
retail shops and material supply enterprises can be sold by 
means of auctions. Based on handling enterprise credit and 
liabilities well and on resettling staff, the funds should be 
withdrawn and put into large-scale market-building in the form 
of holdings. 
  The building of the social insurance system should be 
focused on improving the retirement, medical, and unemployment 
insurance systems. Where conditions permit, the retirement 
system also may be tried out in rural areas. It is necessary to 
comprehensively introduce reform of the housing system, to put 
the funds for housing reform into building residential houses, 
and to implement the "Housing Project." 
  On the premise of the state rationally dividing the economic 
management powers of the central and localities, the provincial- 
level economic regulation-and-control and management mechanism 
should be improved. Through legislation, policies, planning, 
budget, and local taxation, the province's economic activities 
should be readjusted to maintain the basic balance of the 
economy and to bring about optimization of the economic set-up. 
<H5>  2. Open up wider and in all directions </H5>
  Opening up wider constitutes a major measure for deepened 
reform, economic development, and social progress. The 
government, as well as departments at all levels and the people 
throughout the province, should further emancipate their minds; 
fully understand the special importance of the measures adopted 
by Sichuan to give prominence to opening up, to strengthen 
foreign economic, trade, and external affairs, enhance external 
cooperation, and import foreign capital; get rid of the 
seclusion mentality and increase a sense of opening up; improve 
the software investment environment and simplify procedures for 
handling affairs; and improve the quality of services. We 
should make the most of the preferential policies enjoyed by 
Chengdu and Chongqing, and should strive to turn a number of 
cities with appropriate conditions along Chang Jiang or along 
the railways into inland open cities. The four state-level 
development zones and province-designated development zones must 
be run well, and we should build a number of state-endorsed 
development zones. To implement the "economy and trade" 
development strategy, it is necessary to further expand the 
sphere of cooperation with other countries. 
  We should vigorously develop foreign trade and exports, and 
should expand the scale of foreign exchange earning. The role 
of vital force of various types of foreign trade companies 
throughout the province should be brought into full play. While 
consolidating and developing the existing market, we should step 
up the opening of the East European, South American, African, 
CIS, and Southeast Asian markets; expand export channels; and 
introduce more Sichuan products to the international market. 
The foreign trade enterprise operation structural reform should 
be deepened and an operational mechanism should be established 
which is suited to international economic operation rules and 
unified policies, fair competition, independent operation, and 
sole assumption of responsibility for profits and losses. To 
increase foreign exchange from exports, the state foreign trade 
enterprises should be reorganized in light of the requirements 
of the modern enterprise system. Plans should be worked out to 
set up 10 large international export consortia. We encourage 
enterprises with appropriate conditions to increase their 
foreign exchange earning through exports. The powers of import 
and export operation should be delegated and 
province-prefecture-county trade entities should be established 
to carry out various forms of foreign trade businesses through 
various channels and levels. The strategic position of 
developing export commodities should be determined, and a number 
of unique and prospective enterprises with sound financial 
strength should be selected to serve as the commodity production 
bases and upgrade Sichuan's export commodities. It is 
particularly necessary to expedite the development of value- 
added, technical-intensive electromechanical equipment and other 
high-tech products. Meanwhile, it is necessary to pay attention 
to the precision processing of silk fabrics, leather goods, 
garments, meat, food, and medicines; improve their quality; and 
develop a series of leading products with Sichuan 
characteristics. We should develop transnational operation, 
support the companies abroad, increase their role as windows and 
bridges, and strive to attain an export volume of $2 billion. 
  We should expand the sphere of inviting and importing 
foreign 
investment, and should make the most of foreign capital. 
Efforts should be made to run well the existing three types of 
foreign- funded enterprises and to newly set up another 2,000 
foreign-funded enterprises through expanding the channels for 
attracting foreign investment. It is particularly necessary to 
attract well-known transnational companies, large consortia, and 
first-rate scientific and technological enterprises to Sichuan 
to develop cooperation. With a foothold on Sichuan's advantages 
in resources, infrastructural building, readjustment of 
industries and products, and technical transformation of old 
enterprises, various forms should be adopted to import foreign 
capital, technology, equipment, and managerial experience. A 
number of backbone enterprises and large and medium-sized 
enterprises or workshops should be offered to attract technical- 
and value-added projects through joint venture, cooperation, 
leasing, transfer, and other means, and to develop a number of 
large-scale foreign-funded enterprises. While ensuring that $1 
billion will be attracted, we should strive for a higher figure 
of $1.5 billion. 
  We should develop foreign economic, technological, and labor 
cooperation; make use of various channels to strive for all 
kinds of bidding abroad; and particularly take note of promoting 
labor cooperation and transactions in contracting engineering 
projects with the export of full sets of equipment. Meanwhile, 
it is necessary to develop non-commodity trade, which includes 
international tourism. 
  We should strengthen foreign affairs and foreign propaganda 
work; further expand international friendly contacts, as well as 
economic, scientific and technological, and cultural exchanges; 
and increase mutual understanding and cooperation. A good job 
should be done in work concerning nationals residing abroad and 
in Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macao affairs. The customs, 
commercial inspection, and border inspection departments should 
deepen reform, strengthen management, and perform service work 
well. 
  We should enhance lateral ties and develop economic and 
technological cooperation with neighboring provinces and cities, 
particularly the provinces and cities along the Chang Jiang, the 
coast, and the border. Policies and measures similar to those 
for foreign investors will apply to investment from other 
provinces, and further preferential policies will be offered to 
those investing in the Three Gorges Project. We should 
strengthen management over Sichuan's "window" enterprises abroad 
and in other provinces. 
<H5>  3. Enhance the foundation of agriculture and accelerate </H5>
rural economic development 
  The questions of agriculture, rural areas, and the peasants 
have always been a fundamental issue related to the overall 
situation of our party and state. The more we speed up reform 
and opening up, the more attention and protection should be 
given to agriculture. As a big agricultural province, Sichuan's 
task of developing agriculture, particularly increasing 
peasants' incomes, is extraordinarily arduous. Governments at 
all levels should earnestly implement the spirit of the central 
rural work conference; comprehensively implement the 
"Agricultural Law" and the "Law on Popularizing Agrotechniques"; 
firmly bear in the mind that agriculture is the foundation; 
regard agriculture as the foundation of economic work at all 
times; earnestly strengthen leadership over agriculture and 
rural work; further stabilize and improve rural policies; deepen 
rural reform; perform the functions of guidance, support, 
protection, regulation, and control; and promote comprehensive 
rural economic development. 
  The current deepened rural reform should be focused on 
nurturing the market, perfecting the market system, 
strengthening macroeconomic regulation and control, protecting 
agriculture, and speeding up the establishment of a rural 
economic operational mechanism and management system that meet 
the needs of a socialist market economy. It is necessary to 
continuously stabilize and improve the system of contracted 
responsibility with payment linked to output and the management 
system in which unified management is combined with separate 
management. We should stabilize property rights relations, 
resolve the problem of compensated transfer of land use, and 
improve and strengthen the functions of production services, 
coordinated management, and capital accumulation of the social 
cooperative economic organizations. The shareholding 
cooperative system should be applied to run all types of 
economic entities and should accelerate the growth of the 
village collective economy. 
  Centered on the objective of "stabilizing grain production, 
increasing output, and attaining the comparatively well-off 
level," this year's task should be focused on "stabilizing grain 
production, increasing output, and readjusting the setup"; 
combating natural disasters; and reaping bumper harvests. As 
grain is the foundation for Sichuan's stability and development, 
we should ensure an average of 400 kg per capita possession of 
grain. On the premise of stabilizing grain production and 
speeding up structural readjustment, we should try by every 
means to increase the peasants' per capita income by 80 yuan and 
try to raise the figure to 100 yuan. With the market as the 
guide and with the backing of science and technology, we should 
further readjust the agricultural structure, optimize the 
distribution of resources, and develop high- yield, 
fine-quality, and efficient agriculture. With increasing the 
peasants' income as the objective, it is necessary to open up 
new sources for production and to go all-out to develop 
value-added industries and products with a high commodity rate 
and capacity to earn foreign exchange. throughout the rural 
economy, it is necessary to vigorously develop the secondary and 
tertiary industries on the basis of stabilizing agriculture, and 
to increase their proportion in total rural production. In 
overall agriculture, we should take note of using uncultivated 
land, of comprehensively developing agricultural resources, and 
of diverse operations. We should give prominence to animal 
husbandry and to fruit and aquatic farming, and should increase 
their proportion in total rural production. In farming, it is 
necessary to develop cash crops and fodder on the premise of 
stabilizing grain production. 
  Investment in agriculture should be increased through 
various 
channels. An agricultural input system thth combines the state 
with the collective and with individual peasants should be 
established to ensure a gradual increase in agricultural input. 
The increase in agricultural input by financial departments at 
all levels should be higher than that in revenue. The province 
has allocated 40 million yuan this year to support agriculture. 
The increase in loans granted to agriculture by the 
Agricultural Bank should be higher than the average increase in 
loans granted to other fields. On the premise of independent 
operation, more loans for more deposits, and ensuring the needs 
of credit for production, the rural credit cooperatives should 
expand the fields for capital investment. We should continue to 
consolidate, improve, develop, and expand the rural cooperative 
fund; guide the peasants to increase their capital and labor 
accumulation; strengthen management over agricultural funds and 
the funds for special purposes; and ensure the allocation of 
agricultural funds. We should properly use the funds for farm 
purposes and should increase the efficiency of investment in 
agriculture. 
  We should rely on science and technology to boost 
agriculture. Effective measures should be adopted to carry out 
farming, breeding, and introducing fine breeds. We should 
extensively popularize new farm and animal products and 
techniques, and extend advanced and applicable techniques in 
suitable areas. Rural science and education should be upgraded 
to a new level. The "Spark Plan" and the "Harvest Plan" should 
continue to be developed in the high-tech and 
technology-intensive areas. Attention should be given to the 
comprehensive rural technological development experiment 
conducted in counties and townships. 
  We should strengthen agricultural production, 
transportation, storage, and other infrastructural building, and 
should increase the comprehensive production capacity of 
agriculture. Efforts should be made to build irrigation works 
and carry out farmland capital construction, promote 
agricultural mechanization, and continuously improve the 
conditions for agricultural production. While paying attention 
to the maintenance and overhaul of existing water works and 
electrical irrigation facilities, it is necessary to concentrate 
forces to build well the Wudu, Shengzhong, and Daqiao 
reservoirs; the 16 medium-sized reservoirs; and a number of 
major water works. We should continue to transform the 
low-yield land in central and east Sichuan, maintain water and 
soil conservation in the upper reaches of Chang Jiang, build the 
shelter forest in the middle and upper reaches of the Chang 
Jiang, and carry out the key projects to provide work and grain 
as a form of relief. During the year, Sichuan will transform 2 
million mu of medium- and low-yield land, resolve the problem of 
water shortages for 200,000 people and 250,000 head of animals, 
and afforest 4.64 million mu of land. 
  Agricultural protection should be enhanced. In light of the 
state's grain policy of "ensuring quantity and lifting price 
restrictions," we should work out and adopt protective measures 
for agriculture, improve the grain production-purchase-marketing 
system, establish a scientific and rational price system for 
grain which helps arouse the enthusiasm of various sectors, duly 
increase the protection price of grain, set up a grain risk 
fund, and improve the grain reserve system. Continued efforts 
should be made to alleviate the unreasonable burdens on 
peasants, and no IOUs should be issued when purchasing farm 
produce. We should implement the "Land Management Law," 
earnestly protect cultivated land, exercise strict control over 
land for nonfarming purposes, establish a farmland protection 
system, and adopt effective land reclamation and compensation 
methods. Agricultural insurance should be introduced gradually 
and the agricultural risk compensation mechanism should be 
improved. We should effectively organize production, storage, 
and supply of the means of production; strengthen management 
over the market for farm materials; and ensure agricultural 
needs. 
  We should seize the opportunity to accelerate the 
development 
of township enterprises, which constitute the essential mainstay 
of the rural economy and the hope for Sichuan's peasants to take 
the road to prosperity. The areas that have started late should 
put accelerated growth in the first place. Areas that already 
have a sound foundation should tap potentials, improve their 
operational mechanism, speed up their technical transformation, 
make efforts to readjust the structure and expand their scale of 
operations, and strive to occupy a position in the market both 
inside and outside the province. The areas that have developed 
rapidly should combine themselves with the building of small 
towns, bring about the growth of the tertiary industry, expedite 
the transfer of surplus rural labor, and promote the process of 
agricultural modernization. Township enterprises may become 
shareholders in, cooperate with, and lease or buy state 
enterprises. It is necessary to consolidate and develop the 
comparatively well-off demonstration villages. We should try by 
every means to ensure that the total output value of Sichuan's 
township enterprises will reach 250 billion yuan, and that their 
sales, profits, and taxes will increase simultaneously. 
  The agricultural socialized service system must be improved. 
It is necessary to strengthen the building of the township and 
village agrotechnique popularization service organizations, and 
to determine the size of their establishment. The 
agrotechnique, forestry, animal husbandry, veterinary, water 
conservancy, farm machinery, meteorology, and other service 
organizations should be run well. We should combine technical 
services with material supply, and should offer services for the 
entire process of production. In addition to encouraging 
peasants to set up associations, special cooperatives, and other 
self service organizations, we should guide and assist peasants 
in entering the circulation field. 
<H5>  4. Strengthen infrastructure building and readjust the </H5>
industrial structure 
  To maintain a rational scale of investment, it is necessary 
to readjust the investment set-up and increase efficiency. 
Fixed-asset investment should be within the framework of 58.8 
billion yuan. To improve the investment environment and speed 
up economic growth, we should concentrate forces on expediting 
the construction of transportation, communications, energy, and 
other basic facilities. 
  With the railways and highways as the key point, we should 
enormously develop aviation, step up the building of ports along 
the Chang Jiang, and gradually establish a rationally 
distributed and comprehensive transportation network. With the 
stress on opening up a channel from Sichuan to other provinces, 
we should step up the double tracking of the southern section of 
the Baoji-Chengdu railway and the electrification of the 
Chengdu-Kunming railway and the Yuda section of the 
Xiangfan-Chongqing railway, accelerate the construction of the 
Dacheng railway and the railway project in the western suburbs 
of Chengdu, resume construction of the Anbian-Shushe section of 
the Neikung railway, and make preparations for the Dawang 
railway. Attention should be paid to the transformation and 
construction of the Cheng-Xian, Chongqing-Guiyang, 
Zigong-Kunming, and other trunk lines. The building of the 
Chengdu-Chongqing, Mianle, and Neiyi expressways should be 
accelerated. We also should speed up construction of the second 
Chang Jiang bridge in Chongqing and of the Chang Jiang bridges 
in Wanxian and Buling. In addition to dredging the inland 
rivers, it is necessary to expand the main ports along the Chang 
Jiang and to upgrade the technical level of ships. We should 
develop aviation, expand the Shuangliu International Airport in 
Chengdu, and build medium-sized airports in key cities. We 
should launch the third stage of the digital communications 
project, continue to develop optical fiber lines, increase the 
number of digital telephones, set up the Sichuan mobile 
communications network and paging network as early as possible, 
improve Sichuan's long-distance exchange network, and increase 
the capacity of the satellite ground receiving stations in 
Chengdu and Chongqing. 
  Energy resources should be exploited on a large scale. The 
pace of building the Ertan, Baozhuzhi, and other large power 
projects should be accelerated and we should strive for the 
construction of the Guangan power plant and the 
Nanyaezhile-Yaohe dam power station, and for the technical 
transformation of the Chengdu thermal power plant, the planning 
of the Zipingpu reservoir and Pubugou power station, the 
exploitation of the valleys, and the acceleration of power 
construction in the localities. Attention should be paid to the 
technical transformation of coal mines. We should tap 
potentials and effectively carry out the coal-power operation of 
the Junlian coal mine and the preparatory work for the Guxu 
mine. We should enhance the exploitation and production 
capacity of gas fields, and ensure steady growth in the gas 
industry. 
  Mineral resources should be exploited and the raw materials 
industry developed. We should make the most of the Panxi 
mineral resources, comprehensively utilize titanium coulsonite, 
and study and develop new materials. We should step up 
construction of the second stage of the Pangang steel works and 
make preparations for planning the second base of the Sichuan 
iron and steel plant. Sichuan should develop the chemical 
industry, step up construction of the Zigong polyester project, 
exploit stone resources, and do precision processing well. 
  To push forward urban infrastructural building, a good job 
must be done in urban planning. The stress should be placed on 
building urban facilities in Chengdu and Chongqing and in the 
functional and satellite cities, as well as on creating 
conditions for turning them into international metropolises. We 
should gradually develop a number of new large and medium-sized 
cities and distinctive regional economic centers with the 
backing of these cities. The pace of building small towns 
should be accelerated, and special attention should be given to 
the planning and construction of 100 small towns that will serve 
as links between the urban and rural economies, and gradually 
will narrow the gap between cities and the countryside. 
  Sichuan should readjust the industrial setup, develop its 
pillar industries, and increase investment in technical 
transformation and technological progress. Great efforts should 
be made to transform old enterprises and traditional industries. 
A plan should be worked out to develop Sichuan's pillar 
industries and leading products. In light of the principle of a 
high starting point, specialized division of labor, mass 
production, and making breakthroughs one by one, we should 
concentrate financial, material, and human resources to run the 
following well: the automobile, motorcycle, electronics, 
electromechanical equipment, crane, building machinery, 
metallurgy, building materials, chemical, food, pharmacy, and 
other pillar industries, and to develop economies of scale. 
Attention should be paid to applicability, creativity, and 
progress in the development of new products. We should focus 
attention on the technical transformation of 100 major 
enterprises, eight trades, and 50 leading products, and should 
ensure the development of 2,000 new products and the upgrading 
of 10 major products. All enterprises should cater to the 
market, carry out technical innovation, update their equipment, 
and use new materials. We should strengthen comprehensive 
quality control, enhance the state's sample quality inspection, 
and strive to attain a quality rate of over 92 percent. 
  Special efforts should be made to turn deficits into profits 
and to increase industrial economic efficiency. We should 
enhance basic management over enterprise technology, equipment, 
and costs, and should regard energy consumption, cost reduction, 
turning deficits into profits, and increasing efficiency as the 
main criteria for evaluating enterprise operators. 
  Sichuan should make the most of the ordnance industry and 
speed up the development of civilian products. We should make 
full use of ordnance technology to accelerate the pace of 
developing civilian products and should make proper use of the 
assets of ordnance enterprises. In addition to consolidating 
the existing automobile, motorcycle, chemical, machinery, 
electronics, and other competitive industries, it is necessary 
to develop a number of leading products on the premise of 
ensuring Army supplies; to complete a number of major technical 
transformation projects; and to build a number of production 
bases for quality and brandname products. 

<H5>    5. Developing tertiary industries and doing a good job </H5>
in financial, taxation, and monetary sectors 
  Vigorous efforts should be taken to develop tertiary 
industries. Both state-owned and cooperative enterprises should 
take the road of intensive management by grouping enterprises, 
as well as the road of modernization in line with the concept of 
generalized commerce, general market, and general circulation; 
give full play to their overall superiorities in personnel, 
technology, and equipment; and actively carry out step-by-step 
experiments with the joint-stock system. Qualified enterprises 
may organize and develop enterprise groups in such forms as 
merger and mutual share-holding. It is imperative to encourage 
the introduction and utilization of foreign funds to renovate 
commercial facilities and equipment. Supply and marketing 
cooperatives should practice comprehensive management, improve 
their service facilities and means, strengthen technological 
service functions, and set up a relatively stable service and 
management system that integrates agriculture, industry, and 
commerce. A good job needs to be done in the building of 
service networks, as well as commercial networks in small towns 
and townships. Productive enterprises need to be encouraged to 
shift their surplus means of production toward tertiary 
industries. Efforts should be taken to develop chartered 
accounting and auditing firms. Overall planning should be made 
and comprehensive measures taken to make full use of tourist 
resources, to increase input into tourism, to promote tourist 
and scenic spots, to improve the quality of tourist services, to 
make a success of the 1994 Tours of Cultural Relic and Historic 
Sites, to boost the development of the tourist and related 
industries, and to create conditions to build Leshan and 
Dujianyan into national-level tourist and holiday resorts. 
  We should do a good job in financial accommodation and in 
the 
collection of funds through various financing channels and 
means. Efforts should be made to further standardize and develop 
the loans and securities markets, increase the varieties of 
bonds, and do a good job in the issuance and transfer of various 
stocks and bonds. More flexible forms should be adopted to 
increase savings deposits in urban and rural areas. We should 
persistently take the development of pillar industries, 
competitive products, and foreign exchange-earning products as 
the guiding factor in economic development; rationalize the 
distribution of credit funds according to the principle of 
supporting the superior and limiting the inferior; bring about 
the best possible coordination between banks and enterprises in 
the use of funds through readjustments of reserves and 
increments of funds; and bring about an efficient readjustment 
in both the industrial structure and the product mix. We need to 
grant more agricultural loans to guarantee purchases of 
agricultural products. We should support industrial and 
commercial enterprises in their efforts to increase effective 
supply and expand the market. Strides should be taken to 
support major constructions and key projects of technological 
renovation, to enhance the domestic adaptive capacity for funds 
of foreign-invested enterprises, and to boost the production of 
major export products. The management structures of foreign 
exchange and foreign bonds need to be reformed, and vigorous 
efforts should be made to develop the insurance industry. It is 
necessary to continue implementing the rural credit policy, 
which features "more credits for more deposits," with a view to 
enlivening the financial sector in rural areas. Rural 
cooperative funds should be consolidated and developed so that 
we can exercise sound management over and make flexible use of 
various funds. 
  It is important to increase market supply and tighten 
control 
over commodity prices. A good job needs to be done in 
production and transportation, as well as in ensuring market 
supplies of people's daily necessities, including grain, cooking 
oil, meat, vegetables, and industrial items for daily use. 
Efforts should be made to intensify market management, and 
technological and commodity-price supervision. We should deal 
severe blows at the manufacture and sale of counterfeit and 
inferior-quality products, and should protect consumers' 
legitimate rights and interests. Efforts should be made to 
implement and digest the price reform according to the 
arrangements of the state. We should pay special attention to 
the supervision and control of the market; set up an alarm 
system for price increases; establish reserve systems for major 
commodities such as grain, pork, chemical fertilizer, gasoline, 
and essential building materials; and perfect the collection and 
utilization of price regulation funds. Vigorous efforts should 
be made to bring price increases under control and to keep the 
growth rate at around 10 percent. We must attach importance to 
the life of the masses -- especially the life of those in 
disaster-stricken areas, where food and clothing are 
insufficient -- to the life of workers and staff in enterprises 
that have totally or partially suspended production, and to the 
life of low-income families. 
  We should do a good job in financial and taxation work, and 
should help localities increase financial revenue. Since the 
system of tax division was put into practice, localities have 
relied mainly on enterprises' income tax and sales tax for their 
financial revenue. Therefore, more attention should be paid to 
the profit- making capability of enterprises. Continued strides 
should be taken to rectify the "three disorders," to lighten 
enterprises' financial burdens, and to help them prevent profit 
losses. Efforts should be made to intensify the functions of 
financial departments, and to make good use of the tools of 
finance and credit. New financial sources need to be opened up 
through vigorous efforts. It is imperative to strengthen tax 
collection and tax management so that all financial revenues can 
be put into the treasury promptly. Reform of state-owned 
enterprises' profit-distribution system should be implemented 
successfully, and new applicable tax rates should be implemented 
strictly. We should exercise control over financial 
expenditures and group consumption, and shold ensure the payment 
of salaries to cadres, workers, and staff members, and 
especially to teachers. We also should impose sound management 
over and make flexible use of extra-budgetary funds. 
  Sichuan Province is vast in territory, and there exist 
considerable gaps between different regions. Under such 
circumstances, we need to provide different guidance to 
different types of areas, and help them achieve progress at 
different levels. Efforts should be made to perfect the economic 
development program, development policies, and work arrangements 
for the Three Gorges Economic Zone, the Comprehensive Resources 
Development Zone to the west of Panzhihua in southern Sichuan, 
the Northern Sichuan Economic Zone, as well as regions inhabited 
by minority nationalities. 
  With the aim of building Chengdu and Chongqing into modern 
international metropolises, we will reinforce the economic 
strength of these two cities, give better play to their 
functions in bringing along other cities, make full use of the 
preferential open policies they already enjoy, continuously 
accelerate the development of the "one-line" area from Youjiang 
to the Emei Shan, push forward the development and opening up of 
the "one-line" area between Chengdu and Chongqing, and link 
advanced areas with backward ones so that all can head for 
common prosperity. 
  Basing on the city of Chengdu, we will develop mainly such 
pillar industries as electronics, automobiles, and heavy 
machinery; bring about rapid development in the Northern Sichuan 
Economic Zone; and gradually turn Chengdu into a technological 
center, commercial and trade center, financial center, 
communications and transport hub, and a stable production base 
for agricultural and sideline products of the southwestern 
region. 
  Based on the city of Chongqing, we will focus mainly on the 
development of such pillar industries as automobiles, 
motorcycles, machinery, metallurgy, industrial chemicals, and 
building materials; seize the opportunities provided by the 
development and opening up of the Chang Jiang, as well as by the 
Three Gorges Project, which has entered the phase of substantive 
preparation; accelerate the development of the Three Gorges 
Economic Zone; and gradually turn Chongqing into an economic 
center, scientific and technological center, communications hub, 
and an automobile, motorcycle, and energy production base of the 
southwestern region. Efforts should be made to implement the 
resettlement principle marked by development and opening up, 
closely integrate the resettlement of residents with the 
economic development of areas around the reservoir, increase 
input into the resettlement work, and expedite the pace of 
resettlement. We also will make full use of policies granted to 
open cities along the Chang Jiang, including Wanxian and Fuling, 
and will accelerate the pace in constructing ports and support 
facilities, as well as the salification and chlorine- alkaline 
projects in eastern Sichuan. 
  Taking energy, chemicals, metallurgy and other pillar 
industries as a leading factor, the province will vigorously 
improve its communications and transport facilities, strive to 
obtain more open and more flexible policies, introduce funds and 
technology from abroad, pay close attention to the construction 
and preparation of a number of major projects, speed up the 
comprehensive development of natural resources, and bring about 
the development of the economic zone to the west of Panzhihua, 
in southern Sichuan. 
  Areas inhabited by minority nationalities should vigorously 
develop the tobacco and mining industries, forestry, fruit 
production, animal husbandry, and the production of traditional 
Chinese medicine; should set up a number of bases for the 
production of minerals, forests and fruit, animal husbandry, and 
traditional Chinese medicine; develop and utilize hydroelectric 
resources and key tourist resources; give shape to new economic 
growth points; and speed up the pace of economic development. 
  It is imperative to accelerate the economic development of 
old revolutionary bases and the Panzhou Shan area. Efforts will 
be taken to further relax policies; increase scientific and 
capital input into these areas; and expedite the development of 
transport, telecommunications, energy construction, and resource 
exploration. Town and township enterprises, as well as the 
individual and privately owned economies, will undergo 
considerable development. 
<H5>  7. Pay close attention to science and technology, as well as </H5>
education, and bring about development of all social undertakings 
  Continued efforts will be made to carry out the strategy of 
rejuvenating Sichuan through the application of science and 
technology; to further implement the policy on intellectuals; to 
closely integrate science and technology with education and 
economic development; to give vigorous play to the roles of 
science, technology, and education in guiding and pushing 
forward both economic and social development. 
  It is necessary to uphold the concept that science and 
technology are the primary productive forces, and to arm all 
trades and industries with modern science and technology. The 
"Law on Scientific and Technological Progress" should be put 
into effect so as to perfect the system of policies, rules, and 
regulations on science and technology. Strides will be taken to 
put into comprehensive practice Sichuan's plan for accelerating 
reform of the scientific and technological system, and to bring 
about well- coordinated development in the economic, social, and 
scientific and technological fields. Special attention will be 
paid to the 180 key technical projects and experimental 
industrial projects assigned by the state, as well as to 60 
projects for the commercialization of major scientific and 
technological results. It is imperative to bring up a number of 
leading scholars in different academic subjects who can continue 
to render services in the next century; vigorously introduce, 
digest, and transplant advanced science and technology from 
foreign countries; accelerate the development of new and high 
technologies, as well as related industries; and do a better job 
in running new- and high-tech industrial development zones. 
Efforts will be made to accelerate the commercialization of 
scientific and technological results, to boost scientific and 
technological progress, to develop scientific and technological 
industries, and to enhance the proportion of scientific and 
technological progress in the national economic growth. 
Continued efforts will be made to increase input into 
scientific and technological work. By placing the focus of our 
attention on deepening reform as well as on the building of the 
two civilizations, we will vigorously carry out social and 
scientific research, and especially research into policy-making 
sciences. Scientific and technological personnel who have made 
outstanding contributions should be awarded, and intellectuals 
should be encouraged to enter the major battlefield of economic 
development. It is necessary to run well the provincial 
conference on scientific and technological work, and to set off 
a new upsurge of people throughout the country learning, loving, 
and using science. Efforts should be taken to reinforce the 
protection of intellectual property rights. 
  Conscientious work should be done to carry out the "Outline 
on Education Reform and Development," as well as the "Teachers' 
Law"; to place education in a strategic position and give 
priority to educational development in real terms; and to strive 
to enhance the ideological, moral, scientific, and cultural 
levels of the entire nation. We should carry out the party's 
education principle in a comprehensive way, uphold the socialist 
orientation of education, enhance the quality of education, and 
put in a great deal of work into bringing up useful, talented 
people who are well-adapted to the needs of building the 
socialist market economy. Earnest efforts should be made to 
strengthen basic education, reinforce compulsory education, and 
prevent the loss of middle and primary school students, 
especially those in rural areas. With a view to finding a 
fundamental solution to the problem of the arbitrary collection 
of fees and of adding to the heavy burdens of middle and primary 
school students, we must adopt resolute measures to check the 
arbitrary editing, printing, and issuing of various kinds of 
review materials and exercise books. We should persistently 
take the road of running both government and non-government 
schools, and of integrating production with education; 
vigorously develop vocational and adult education; bring up 
technical personnel at both the intermediate and preliminary 
levels; and wipe out illiteracy among the young and middle-aged. 
Continued attention should be paid to the comprehensive reform 
of both the rural and urban educational systems. To do a good 
job in higher education, we should deepen reform, readjust the 
structure, and take the road of intense development. Efforts 
will be made to strengthen the building of the contingent of 
teachers, and to attract more outstanding talents to work as 
teachers. We will continue to increase input into education and 
to check the diversion of educational funds. All social forces 
should be encouraged to run schools in various forms and at 
different levels according to the law. 
  Cultural organs, press and publications, as well as radios, 
films, and television should publicize the main theme of our 
times, and should provide sound services for the building of the 
two socialist civilizations. Efforts will be made to reform the 
cultural structure (especially the structure of art ensembles), 
pay major attention to the cultural building of rural areas, 
bring about the further development of cultural undertakings, 
control culture through the law, and improve people with 
culture. It is imperative to uphold the principle of "serving 
the party and the people" and the principle of "letting a 
hundred flowers blossom and a hundred schools of thought to 
contend"; to carry out and perfect cultural and economic 
policies; to place the social efficiency of spiritual products 
in a primary position; and to publish more good books, create 
more good works, and perform more outstanding plays so as to 
boost the socialist new culture of the Chinese nation and bring 
a new culture to Sichuan. We will extensively carry out mass 
sports activities in both urban and rural areas, strengthen 
physical education in schools, and pay attention to the 
development of athletic sports. 
  Strides will be taken to comprehensively deepen reform of 
health and sanitation work; to earnestly strengthen preventive 
health care, improve health care services in rural areas, and 
push forward public health work in nationality areas; to 
rejuvenate traditional Chinese medicine; and to bring about the 
sound development of health and medical undertakings. It is 
necessary to uphold the principle of relying mainly on 
prevention; to pay attention to preventing and curing serious 
diseases that endanger the lives of the masses; and to strive to 
bring down the general incidence rate of various contagious, 
endemic, and pediatric and gynecological diseases. We will 
carry out in depth the patriotic health campaign in urban areas, 
and push forward the building of cities and counties that are 
outstanding in health care. By carrying out the "three 
constructions," we will make vigorous efforts to strengthen 
rural health and sanitary work, especially primary health care 
in rural areas. 
  We will unswervingly pay attention to family planning, 
comprehensively carry out the "Sichuan Province Regulations on 
Family Planning," stabilize population control policies, 
strengthen management over birth control among the migrant 
population, and bring both the birth rate and the natural growth 
rate of the population well below 18.69 and 11.66 per thousand, 
respectively. It is imperative to manage land resources 
according to the law, to accelerate the pace of reform in the 
land use system, and gradually to standardize and develop the 
real estate market. We need to do a good job in environmental 
protection, and to try to harness the environment of such 
regions as the Tuo Jiang Valley and the mainstream of the Chang 
Jiang. 
  In accordance with the requirements of building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics, we will conscientiously make 
greater contributions to bringing out economic development and 
social progress by attaining success in such fields as 
personnel, care for the elderly, statistics, meteorology, 
seismology, survey and mapping, civil air defense, archives, 
annals complilation, literature, history, and security. 

<H5>    8. Promote unity among all nationalities; accelerate </H5>
the economic development of old revolutionary bases, areas 
inhabited by minority nationalities, border areas, and 
poverty-stricken areas. 
  Efforts will be made to carry out the party's nationality 
policy in a comprehensive manner, to uphold and perfect the 
system of regional autonomy for minority nationalities, and to 
augment unity among all nationalities. Work will be done to 
vigorously explore and develop the economy of nationality 
regions by accelerating the growth rate of general supply and 
demand, paying major attention to the structure of dominant 
industries, granting preferential policies, and by providing 
them with greater capital support. It is necessary to 
accelerate infrastructure construction, including transport and 
telecommunications, and to do a good job in the supply of 
commodities to meet special needs. Continued efforts will be 
made to help nationality regions promote such social 
undertakings as education, science and technology, culture, 
radio and television, and public health, and to enhance the 
cultural, scientific and technological, and health levels of 
peasants and herdsmen. 
  It is imperative to continue carrying out the aid-the-poor 
work, and to expedite the economic development of old 
revolutionary bases, nationality regions, border areas, and 
poverty-stricken areas. Efforts will be taken to implement the 
"1987" [ba qi 0360 0003] Aid-the-Poor Program, pool aid-the-poor 
funds, grant special preferential policies to extremely 
difficult townships in poor areas, and change aid-the-poor work 
from social relief into production-based development. We should 
do a good job in giving unit-to-unit mutual support, and in 
expanding the economic and technological coordination between 
poor areas and cities, including Chengdu and Chongqing. It is 
necessary to carry out policies and measures aiming at promoting 
development in different areas, mutual complementarity, and 
benefit sharing, and to pay simultaneous attention to projects 
to "bring about a better life than one with merely sufficient 
food and clothing," to work to extricate our people from poverty 
through production and development, and to work to make people 
and counties rich. 
  Efforts will be made to carry out comprehensively the 
party's 
policy toward religions, to strengthen management over religious 
affairs according to the law, to firmly oppose hostile forces 
and splittists who attempt to use religion to carry out 
infiltration and sabotage, and to safeguard the national unity 
and unification of our motherland. 
<H5>  9. Reinforce democracy and legal system, strengthen the </H5>
building of spiritual civilization, and safeguard social 
stability. 
  A high degree of democracy and a perfect legal system are 
fundamental guarantees for the long-term peace and stability of 
a country. We should unremittingly strengthen socialist 
democracy and the building of the legal system under the 
leadership of the Communist Party. As the executive organs of 
the people's congresses at all levels, governments at all levels 
should respect the functions of the people's congresses, 
implement resolutions adopted by them, and subject themselves to 
their supervision. We should consolidate and promote the 
patriotic united front during the new period; uphold and perfect 
multiparty cooperation and the system of political consultation 
under the leadership of the Communist Party; take the initiative 
to consult and discuss with the CPPCC, as well as with 
democratic parties, non-party figures, and mass bodies; 
conscientiously receive their supervision; and systematize and 
regularize the practice. We need to handle promptly the 
opinions, suggestions, motions, and bills submitted by people's 
deputies and CPPCC members, and to heed carefully the opinions 
of the masses. It is necessary to bring into full play the 
roles and functions of advisers, counselors, and advisory 
bodies, and to attach importance to handling the letters and 
visits of the masses. 
  The establishment of a socialist market economy structure 
urgently requires the guidance, standards, guarantees, and 
restrictions of a perfect socialist legal system. Therefore, we 
should regard the government's legal building as the foundation 
of its work, fulfill all the responsibilities entrusted to our 
government by the law, handle official business in strict 
accordance with the law, and ensure that the government can 
function with a high efficiency within the orbit of a legal 
system. It is imperative to coordinate the standing committee 
of the provincial people's congress in local legislation, 
especially economic legislation. We should promptly adopt local 
economic regulations and administrative rules urgently needed by 
the development of the market economy, amend and abolish 
outdated local rules and regulations, and ensure consistency 
between the legal system and government orders. Efforts will be 
taken to strengthen the enforcement of administrative laws, to 
rectify the contingent of administrative law-enforcement 
personnel, to standardize the administrative law-enforcing 
behavior of major administrative law- enforcement bodies, to 
crack down on major law-breaking administrative behaviors, and 
to safeguard the fairness and truthfulness of administrative 
law-enforcement organs. Continued strides will be taken to 
carry out the second five-year plan on universal legal 
education; to study, obey, use, and enforce laws; and to 
reinforce the legal concepts of the vast cadres and masses. It 
is imperative to accelerate reform in the system of legal 
practitioners and notaries, and to provide the public with 
satisfactory legal services. 
  Earnest efforts should be made to strengthen comprehensive 
control over social security. It is necessary to act in 
accordance with the principle that "whoever takes charge should 
take responsibility"; to encourage all social sectors to impose 
concerted control over public security; to carry out 
comprehensive control measures down to the level of villages, 
neighborhoods, enterprises, schools, administrative 
institutions, and residential quarters, as well as to take 
precautions against possible troubles. Work should be done to 
give full play to the role and functions of public security and 
judicial administrative organs, to act in close coordination 
with procuratorial and judicial organs, to focus our attention 
on special-purpose campaigns, to strike relentless blows at 
various crimes and at major economic criminal activities, and to 
hand down severe punishments to a number of lawbreakers 
according to the law. Struggles against pornography and the "six 
evils" should be carried out continuously, with a view to 
resolutely eliminating all evil social phenomena. We should 
handle correctly the contradictions among the people during the 
new period; try to solve these contradictions in a positive way 
through prevention, education, management, and construction; 
stabilize society and popular feelings; and create a sound 
social environment for reform, opening up, and the modernization 
drive. Fire control should be reinforced and safety measures 
adopted. 
  Continued efforts should be made to enhance the 
consciousness 
in "doing two types of work simultaneously, and attaching equal 
importance to both"; to firmly grasp the main theme of 
cultivating people with ideals, morality, culture, and disciple; 
and to carry out our work in a down-to-earth manner. We will 
organize the vast numbers of cadres, especially leading cadres 
at all levels, to conscientiously study the "Selected Works of 
Deng Xiaoping," volume three; to arm our minds with his theory 
of building socialism with Chinese characteristics; and to turn 
this theory into the spiritual pillar of the entire nation. We 
will carry out extensive education on patriotism, collectivism, 
socialism, and the 64-character pioneering spirit advocated by 
Comrade Jiang Zemin, and will guide people -- especially 
teenagers and young people -- to carry forward the traditional 
virtues of the Chinese nation and cultivate correct ideals and 
beliefs, as well as outlooks on the world, life, and values. We 
should have a clear-cut stand on opposing money worship, 
out-and-out egoism, and decadent lifestyles. Work should be 
done to strengthen management over the cultural market through 
legal, economic, and administrative means, as well as through 
media supervision; to maintain sound control over the two links 
of production and circulation; never to allow vulgar things to 
erode the general mood of society; to resolutely ban 
compensatory news coverage, as well as the purchase and sale of 
registered publication serial numbers; to firmly eliminate the 
publication of materials that violate state policies toward 
minority nationalities and religions; and to hand down 
punishment to those who distribute publications that contain 
serious political mistakes, leak state secrets, or include 
pornographic content. Continued efforts will be made to carry 
out the activity of building civilized cities, units, villages, 
and townships, as well as the activities of "three promotions" 
and "three kinds of households" in rural areas. Close attention 
needs to be paid to the protection and utilization of cultural 
relics. 
  Strides should be taken to strengthen education among all 
the 
people on national defense so as to enhance people's national 
defense awareness; to build up more exemplary cities and 
counties in providing "two supports"; to augment unity between 
the Army and the government, and between the Army and the 
people; and to do a good job in resettling ex-servicemen and 
soldiers transferred to civilian work, as well as in the reserve 
service of the militia. 
<H5>  10. Strengthen the building of clean and industrious </H5>
administration, and push forward structural reform of the 
government 
  Our governments at all levels are governments for the 
people, 
and therefore should serve the people, heart and soul. All 
government workers are servants of the people who should be 
clean and self- disciplined, diligent in carrying out their 
official duties, and willing to be dedicated. All our cadres 
should voluntarily subject themselves to the legal supervision 
of the people's congress, the democratic supervision of the 
CPPCC, and supervision by the vast numbers of the masses and the 
media, and should become real servants of the people and real 
pioneers of economic and social construction. 
  Continued efforts should be made to strengthen the building 
of a clean government, and carry out the in-depth struggle 
against corruption. We should strictly enforce laws, administer 
the government in a persistent manner, give education on how to 
fight corruption, advocate clean administration, and urge 
leading cadres at all levels to remain clean and 
self-disciplined in the exercise of their official duties. 
Across the province, leading cadres at and above the county 
(departmental) level should resolutely abide by the five 
requirements on clean administration and self discipline which 
the CPC Central Committee has set for the leading cadres of both 
party and government organs. It is imperative to step up 
supervision by supervisory and auditing departments, continue 
investigations into major and serious cases, and hand down 
severe punishment to degenerates. Continued efforts should be 
made to carry out special-purpose campaigns, and to put an 
absolute end to unhealthy trends that are strongly opposed by 
the people and that have hampered the image of the people's 
government, such as abuse of power for personal gain through the 
arbitrary collection of funds. Administrative discipline needs 
to be reinforced so as to ensure the smooth implementation of 
government orders. 
  Governments at all levels should do their work in accordance 
with the requirements of the party Central Committee and the 
State Council on the structural reform of local government 
organs, draw up implementation plans according to realistic 
local conditions, and put these plans into practice step by 
step. In drawing up and implementing plans for the structural 
reform of government organs, we must fully expound and prove the 
necessity of the reform, extensively heed the opinions of all 
social sectors, conscientiously carry out ideological and 
political work, try our best to resettle surplus personnel 
through various channels, and ensure a normal work order. 
  The structural reform of government organs should be carried 
out in accordance with the principle of separating the roles of 
the government from the functions of enterprises, as well as the 
principles of efficient and simple administration, unity, and 
efficiency, with a view to changing the functions and roles of 
such organs, rationalizing relations, streamlining the 
administrative structure, and enhancing work efficiency. It is 
necessary to reduce the numbers of staff and internal organs, 
and to reinforce the functions of such organs in macroeconomic 
control and regulation, social security, and supervision. This 
year, we will focus our attention on the structural reform of 
administrative organs at the provincial level, while 
experimenting further with the structural reform of organs at 
the county level. Newly established cities and prefectures 
should determine their functions, organizational structures, and 
establishment according to structural reform plans that have 
been approved already. Other prefectures, cities, autonomous 
prefectures, and counties also should make good preparations for 
the structural reform. The logistical services of 
administrative organs should be socialized. It is necessary to 
reinforce the organizational construction of grass-roots organs 
of political power and grass-roots organizations, and to pay 
close attention to the follow-up work in abolishing 
administrative districts, merging townships, and establishing 
towns. 
  The structural reform of government organs has a direct 
bearing on our country's economic development and social 
stability, and also on the immediate interests of the vast 
numbers of cadres and staff. It is imperative, therefore, to 
positively and steadily put into practice the civil service 
system under the prerequisite that governments at all levels 
have determined their functions, organizational structure, and 
establishment. 
  We should carry out persistent investigations and studies 
with the aim of enhancing the scientific level of policy 
decisions made by the government. Government organs at all 
levels should change their work style and methods, advocate the 
practice of carrying out investigations and studies, and remain 
industrious in carrying out official duties in a down-to-earth 
manner. Leading cadres should go down to the grass-roots level 
to acquaint themselves with the real situations there and obtain 
first-hand information; they should discuss with the masses when 
encountering problems, closely integrate the spirit of the 
central authorities with local realistic conditions, and strive 
to attain the goal of seeking truth from facts and of making 
policy decisions in a democratic and scientific way. We should 
attach great importance to the work of consultation organs, 
which help in making policy decisions. It is imperative to 
uphold and perfect the target management system in 
administrative organs, strengthen administrative supervision, 
and try to enhance the efficiency and quality of our work. 
  Comrade Jiang Zemin has pointed out: "Our socialist 
modernization construction still remains at a pioneering stage 
of difficult struggle, and our great pioneering practice still 
requires the support and encouragement of a great pioneering 
spirit." We should give wide publicity among all cadres to the 
spirit of doing pioneering work with arduous efforts, and should 
carry forward all the traditional virtues of the Chinese nation 
in rejuvenating the country through difficult struggle. All 
state workers should follow the example of Mao Zedong, Zhou 
Enlai, and other proletarian revolutionaries of the older 
generation; try to be the first to bear hardships and the last 
to enjoy comforts in the great practice of reform, opening up, 
and the modernization drive; spare no effort in performing their 
duties; and strive to turn themselves into good servants of the 
people. 
  Fellow deputies: 
  Reform and development are the main theme of our times. As 
long as we uphold as our guidance Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory 
of building socialism with Chinese characteristics; persistently 
carry out the party's basic line; conscientiously implement the 
spirit of the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee under the leadership of the party Central Committee, 
the State Council, and the Sichuan Provincial CPC Committee; 
forge ahead in unity; have the courage to open up new paths; and 
carry out our work in a down- to-earth manner, we surely can 
bring to Sichuan sustained, rapid, and healthy economic 
development, as well as comprehensive social progress, and 
surely can realize the goals of our struggle. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
