
<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42401 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94035" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> GENERAL ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> SECURITY SERVICES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Mass Desertions of Kyrgyz Border Troops </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0199A Moscow LESNAYA GAZETA in Russian 21 Jan 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0199A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow LESNAYA GAZETA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Report] </F>
  [Text] Mass desertions have occurred in Russia's group of 
border troops guarding the Kyrgyz-Chinese border. Yesterday more 
than 200 young soldiers conscripted to serve in Kyrgyzstan 
abandoned their subunits. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42402 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> ARMED FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Resolution of CIS OSTO Union </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0167A Moscow VOYENNYYE ZNANIYA in Russian No 9, Sep 1993 
(Signed to press 29 Jul 93) p 6 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0167A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYYE ZNANIYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Under the "Official Department" rubric: "Resolution of the </F>
First Congress of the Union of Defense and Sports/Technical 
Organizations of the Independent States"] 
  [Text] The First Congress of the Union of the Defense and 
Sports/Technical Organizations of the Independent States [OSTO 
NG] was held on 16 June 1993. It was called at the initiative of 
the Council of Chairmen of OSTO of the Commonwealth of 
Independent States [CIS], and supported by the Office of the 
Presidium of the Central Council of the OSTO SG [Sovereign 
States] Union. It became possible after the signing this spring 
in Moscow of an intergovernmental agreement on joint activity by 
the heads of governments of Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, 
Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Ukraine to 
promote the work of defense and sports/technical organizations 
of the CIS member states. 
<H3>  Decree of the First Congress of the Union of Defense and 
Sports/Technical Organizations of the Independent States </H3>
  After hearing and discussing the report of the chairman of 
the Central Council of OSTO SG of Col-Gen Ye.I. Krylov "On the 
Course of Conversion of DOSAAF [Voluntary Society for Assistance 
to the Air Force, Army and Navy] USSR and measures to improve 
the coordination of activity of the defense and sports/technical 
organizations (societies) of the CIS member states under 
present-day conditions," 

  -  noting the change in the political situation associated 
with the ratification of state independence of the republics 
making up the former USSR and following the formation of the 
CIS; 
  -  guided by the legislation and government resolutions of the 
independent states, and also by intergovernmental resolutions 
within the framework of the CIS; 
  -  allowing for the fact that the 
republic organizations of DOSAAF USSR have been converted to 
defense and sports/technical organizations (societies) of the 
independent states; 
  -  expressing the desire of the members of the 
defense society for further strengthening of ties of the defense 
organizations within the framework of a single public 
association in the interests of promoting the defense of our 
states, training specialists for the Armed Forces, industry and 
agriculture, and developing and publicizing technical and 
applied types of sports; 
  -  proceeding from the desire to improve 
the coordination of the activity of the members of the Union of 
OSTO SG at the stage of development of new organizational forms 
and methods of its operation; 

    The first Congress of the Union of OSTO NG resolves: 
  1. To ratify the decree of the 7th Plenum of the Central 
Committee of DOSAAF USSR (October 1991) on question 1, point 2 
regarding the conversion of the All-Union Voluntary Society for 
Assistance to the Army, Air Force and Navy into the 
intergovernmental Union of Social Associations: The Union of 
Defense and Sports/Technical Organizations (Societies) of the 
Sovereign States. 
  2. To ratify the decree of the 7th Plenum of the Central 
Committee of DOSAAF USSR (October 1991) on question 1, point 3 
regarding the conversion of the Central Committee of DOSAAF 
USSR, elected by the 10th All-Union Congress of the Defense 
Society into the Central Council of the Union of OSTO SG. 
  3. To ratify the Charter of the Defense Society, adopted by 
the 7th Plenum of the Central Committee of DOSAAF USSR (October 
1991) and recorded at the Ministry of Justice of the Russian 
Federation on 27 November 1991, No 421. 
  In addition, to introduce changes in the name of the Defense 
Society and its organs, putting forward the preamble of the 
Union Charter in the reading: "The Union of defense and 
sports/technical organizations (societies) of the independent 
(in place of sovereign) states, the Union of OSTO SG is an 
intergovernment (instead of inter-republic) voluntary public 
association of independent public organizations (societies) and 
individual citizens." 
  4. To confirm the legal succession of the defense and 
sports/technical organizations (societies) of the independent 
states in all property and other rights and obligations of the 
corresponding DOSAAF organizations of the former republics of 
the USSR. 
  5. To confirm the succession of the Central Council of the 
Union of OSTO NG in all rights and obligations of the Central 
Committee of DOSAAF USSR, including with respect to the 
resources, buildings and property belonging to it. 
  To ratify the decree of the Office of the Presidium of the 
Central Council of the Union of OSTO SG dated 22 June 1992, 
Protocol No 1 on the division of the balance of property of the 
Union of OSTO SG between the Central Council of the Union of 
OSTO SG and the Council of OSTO of the Russian Federation. 
  6. To confirm the resolution of the leaders of OSTO CIS 
regarding the creation of the Council of Chairman of Defense and 
Sports/Technical Organizations (Societies) of the CIS member 
states, headed by the Chairman of the Central Council of the 
Union of OSTO NG for purposes of devising and ensuring 
coordinated actions of the defense and sports/technical 
organizations (societies) of the independent states, and their 
performance of their tasks as required by charter. 
  7. To approve the Statute on the Council of Chairmen of 
Defense and Sports/Technical Organizations (Societies) of the 
CIS Member States, which puts forward the goals, basic 
directions, working procedures and other questions of its 
activity. 
  8. To assign the Council of Chairmen of OSTO CIS: 

  -  To devise a new concept for the inter-government 
association of defense organizations of CIS and to organize its 
discussion within the defense organizations; 
  -  To synthesize the 
proposals made by the delegates of the congress and to device 
measures to implement them. 

    COPYRIGHT: Izdavatelstvo TsS SOSTO SNG "Patriot", "Voyennyye 
Znaniya", 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42403 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> ARMED FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Early Soviet Efforts on Weapons Grade Uranium </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0170A Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 15 Jan 94 p 6 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0170A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Mikhail Rebrov: "Uranium for the Bomb"] </F>
  [Text] "Special Folder," "Top Secret" -- documents with 
this classification have for many years been treated as the most 
classified. The uranium epic is one of these. In the late 40's 
and early 50's, it grew to be the meaning of work and of life, 
and if you will, even the fate of a whole generation, thousands 
and thousands of people who were later called 
atomshchiki. The story of the production of uranium 
for the atomic bomb preserves the names of talented and brave 
people, victors in a duel with the dangerous unknown and with 
uncertainty. 
  The events and the documents I want to talk about help us to 
understand the times and the task, and along with that, also the 
people who accomplished it. To some this may seem a boring, 
harsh, functional chronicle. So be it. But it is interesting and 
exciting, and it seems to me not just for history, but also for 
today. In general, everything associated with atomic weapons is 
reminiscent of a detective novel: Tension and dynamics of 
action, critical situations, suspicions, mysterious codes, 
puzzles, and questions. 
<H5>  The Starting Point </H5>
  August 17, 1945. On this memorable day for the People's 
Commissar of Munitions, Boris Lvovich Vannikov (a Friday), 
Stalin summoned him and asked how much time was needed to 
develop an atomic bomb. Vannikov was evasive. "I think," he 
began, but then, glancing at the morose face of the 
generalissimo, he continued resolutely, "I can't say." 
  "Yes, you're right," Stalin nodded. "But that means we have 
to hurry." 
  The clock of fortune of many scientists, designers, and 
construction engineers was started that day, and began ticking. 
  But then, purposeful work had been started even earlier at 
Kurchatov's Laboratory No 2 (codename LIPAN -- Laboratory of 
Measurement Instruments of the Academy of Sciences). Before 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki, however, the physicists had no serious 
external incentives. After a talk with Stalin, Vannikov met with 
Kurchatov. The talk lasted for more than three hours, and as 
early as September 5, 6 and 10, "closed" conferences were held 
at the laboratory, to which a narrow circle of scientists was 
invited. I.V. Kurchatov, G.N. Flerov, A.I. Alikhanov, I.K. 
Kikoin, P.L. Kapitsa, L.A. Artsimovich, A.F. Ioffe, and A.P. 
Aleksandrov reported on the "status of scientific research and 
practical work in the field of utilization of atomic energy." At 
that time the number-one task was set, to select the optimal 
method of "separating isotopes" to produce enriched uranium. The 
37-year-old professor Kikoin was appointed project director. 
  Stalin made Vannikov the coordinator for development of the 
new field. By all appearances, there were two reasons. The first 
was that Stalin trusted Vannikov. The second was that the leader 
feared that the methods of Beria in this case might not work. 
For that reason, while making the head of the NKVD the "problem 
chief," he gave a lot of authority to Vannikov. Soon the First 
Main Directorate (PGU), "Atomic," was established in the 
Sovnarkom [Council of People's Commissars]. 
  Today, when possible deadlines for development of something 
new are discussed, they are given in years. Then the count was 
in days, weeks, months. To speed up the design workups and for 
the transition to serial production of special equipment for the 
uranium project, two major defense plants were brought in: The 
Leningrad Kirov (formerly "Putilovskiy") Plant, which in the war 
produced heavy tanks and turbines, and the Gorky 
Machine-Building Plant, where they made artillery weapons. Of 
course these were monster plants, where thousands of highly 
qualified engineers and blue-collar workers toiled. But they did 
not have the slightest idea of gas-diffusion machinery, 
especially since at that time the machines themselves were a 
"complete unknown" for many physicists, as is evident from the 
documents. 
<H5>  An Imported Wind </H5>
  At this point, when a painstaking selection of the way to 
"separate isotopes" was under way, a book by Professor G.D. 
Smith appeared in the U.S., "Atomic Energy for Military 
Purposes." It also had a second, more intriguing name: "Official 
Report on the Development of the Atomic Bomb Under the 
Supervision of the U.S. Government." Via intelligence channels 
the book was immediately sent to Moscow and translated. Interest 
in the unusual publication was even stronger because the author 
was an active participant in the "Manhattan Project." 
  The book was studied most carefully at Laboratory No 2. The 
suspicion arose: Might this be "disinformation?" Before 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki, i.e. before August 1945, all atomic 
matters of the U.S. had been kept in the strictest secrecy, and 
now suddenly there were such revelations in September. 
  By then, there were no special revelations. Professor Smith 
was sly. The scientific and technical details were submerged in 
the laudatory outpourings of the author, and when the logic of 
his discussions demanded specifics, there would be the 
apologetic phrase: "For reasons of secrecy, we cannot say," etc. 
Nonetheless, the "grain" was found, and with it the physicists 
received confirmation that the path they had chosen was the 
right one. It was clear from the text that "serious study of the 
diffusion method had begun in the U.S. in mid-1941," and the 
fact of receipt of secret information from the British was 
recalled, where work had been done on gas-diffusion separation 
in 1941-1942. So there was something behind this, especially 
since the Americans used enriched uranium in their bomb. 
<H5>  Installation D-1 </H5>
  So it was gas diffusion. 
  On 1 December 1 1945, a government decree was signed on the 
development of installation D-1 (this was the designation of the 
gas-diffusion plant). An area close to the village of 
Verkh-Neyvinsk was chosen as the construction site. This was in 
the Northern Urals, comparatively close to the former 
Sverdlovsk. In the 18th century, the famous Demidov had built a 
small metallurgical plant here on the bank of the Neva. There 
was a rail spur nearby, and an electrical transmission line, and 
the incomplete hulk of an aviation plant had an area of fifty 
thousand square meters. Most importantly, the woods concealed 
the then almost unpopulated region from outside eyes. The decree 
strictly defined the deadlines: 1948 for the start of operation 
of installation D-1, and 1949 for operation "of the whole plant 
system." 
  The construction work was directed by General A.N. 
Komarovksiy (his rank was "shock defense" general). The work 
continued around the clock, and around 30 thousand construction 
workers of the MVD's Glavpromstroy [Main Directorate 
of Industrial Production] were involved in building the plant. 
Every day a report on the progress of affairs at the secret 
installation landed on Beria's desk. 
  The Chief Designer of the Special Design Bureau No 1 of the 
Kirov Plant, Nikolay Mikhaylovich Sinev, recalls: "Today the 
technology for producing highly enriched uranium has been 
brought to perfection. But then. . . there were moments when 
some of the managers and designers doubted their success. The 
time factor was pressing. What would the diffusion plant be 
like, what sort of equipment was needed? At the start of 1946, 
no one knew exactly." 
  In April, 1946, A.I. Churin was appointed the director of 
the 
still unbuilt plant. Before this he had worked as the chief 
engineer of Uralenergo [Ural Energy]. Within two 
years he was relieved of his post, and then after a short time 
returned again. But all this was later on. . . 
<H5>  Wandering in the Labyrinth </H5>
  In January 1946, Professor I.N. Voznesenskiy was given the 
task of designing a 24-stage diffusion machine. In parallel a 
30-stage variant was considered (codename "NVK"). The second 
project was transferred to Gorky (plant director Gen. A.S. 
Yelyan), where it was discarded. They began to produce finished 
items, and two aggregates had already been built when it became 
clear that this way was a dead end. 
  Storm clouds gathered. Moscow demanded explanations. And 
what 
could they answer, if no time was given for profound 
development, and the trial and error method was fraught with 
failures? They switched to single-stage machines. But the 
failures kept on. Someone had the idea -- couldn't this be 
economic sabotage? Unable to withstand the stress and the 
nervous tension, Voznesenskiy died suddenly. 
  The machines of the Gorky design bureau were codenamed "LB" 
(Lavrenti Beria), and later were called "OK" (special 
construction), while the Leningrad ones were designated by the 
letter "T." The entire plant complex was supposed to consist of 
56 stages, 1,000 diffusion machines, an automatic control 
system, and auxiliary engineering services. At the start of 
1948, special trains with the first items (called "reserved" 
trains in the traffic schedule) began to arrive at the rail yard 
of installation D-1. Assembly, installation and connecting in 
stages began. 
  I won't try to explain the complexity of the technology for 
producing highly enriched uranium. Special aggregates and 
electrical equipment, sensitive monitors and meters, reliable 
automatic systems, materials resistant to the aggressive media, 
vacuum units, and special bearings and lubricants were required. 
I will only say that to produce one kilogram of uranium of the 
necessary concentration, it was necessary to expend 600 thousand 
kilowatt-hours of electricity. 
  The bearings "broke." On thousands of machines. Their 
replacement required exhausting work, day and night. Suspicion 
of the management section of the laboratories and services 
increased, "voluntary informers" appeared. Work became a 
terrible ordeal -- that was impossible, don't touch, that's not 
permitted. And what was permitted, how correct was it? Everyone 
who was associated with installation D-1 signed non-divulgence 
papers and was deprived of the right to transfer to other work. 
The most unpleasant occurrence was in mid-1948. It was not 
possible to achieve a 90% concentration of uranium. The 
reason 
was decided on at once: there was a shortage of "separating 
potential." And a solution was found: "Finish building the 
technological system, and add another thousand separating 
stages." But how could they do this, if project D-1 had not 
called for such reconstruction? 
<H5>  The Shadow of Trouble </H5>
  The Leningrad design bureau No 1 proposed a variant. On 17 
August it was reported to Vannikov. Boris Lvovich, standing 
behind his people completely (the words of Academician Lt-Gen 
Ye.A. Gegin), approved the project, but with this stipulation: 
"Calculate everything again, with a reserve, we won't give 
additional time to correct mistakes." They calculated again. 
Everything worked out. They began to work, and then. . . 
  At the end of September 1949, a special train traveled down 
the Moscow-Sverdlovsk road. Three passenger cars were unhitched 
and pushed to the Verkh-Neyvinsk region. They were parked on the 
railroad tracks opposite the building which housed the managers 
of the starting installation, who were in agony. 
  Among the arrivals was the "problem chief," L.P. Beria, the 
chief of the PGU B.L. Vannikov, member of the special council 
General A.M. Petrosyants and others. They began to look into the 
causes of failure of an assignment of special state importance. 
Beria kept taking notes and rechecking the names of those who 
spoke. Vannikov's position, and the proposal on "technical 
finishing" from the chief designer Sinev made it possible to 
soften or divert the threat. However, it was not possible to 
avoid "organizational conclusions" and personnel changes. 
  Deep autumn of 1949. Installation D-1 gained productive 
capacity (it was designed to produce just grams of uranium per 
day). All difficulties were seemingly past, but the 
concentration of "output product" did not exceed 75%, and 
they 
had to have 90%! What to do? Again the feverish search. 
They 
decided to do further enrichment at a then already operating 
unit in the Urals, which had been developed under the 
supervision of L.A. Artsimovich. It used the method of 
electromagnetic enrichment. 
<H5>  The Push to the Future </H5>
  All the work on the uranium project was of priority 
importance. It was not possible to discuss every problem, and 
they popped up like mushrooms in the rain, at sessions of the 
Central Committee or Council of Ministers. The necessary decrees 
were prepared by members of the Special Committee, and Beria 
affixed Stalin's signature to them. 
  All the same, installation D-1 did produce uranium for 
atomic 
weapons. Fifty-six stages of 7,040 machines plus other special 
equipment operated without failure. After the first plant, D-3, 
D-4 and D-5 came on line. Science-intensive industry of the 20th 
century was gaining force. 
  Our first atomic bomb was tested on 27 August 1949, at 0230 
hours. It had a plutonium charge. It was called RDS-1. What did 
this number code mean? First I thought of this expansion: 
"Stalin's rocket engine." Actually it was different: "Russia 
does it herself." 
  I named the names of only a few out of many, by no 
means because their merit was any different. All of them, 
privates and generals, technician/trouble-shooters and chief 
designers, laboratory assistants and academicians, were 
accomplishing one task, accomplishing it together, aware that 
their fortunes were uncertain and belonged to the state. They 
had a goal and no illusions. Today, probably, there are many 
people for whom this chronicle will be a first revelation. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42404 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> ARMED FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Problems of CBW Destruction Viewed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  PM1701125394 Moscow ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA in Russian 15 Jan 94 
First Edition p 3 </F>

<F P=103> PM1701125394 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Expert Analysis" article by Igor Vlasov, head of sector of </F>
the Russian Federation President's Committee on Problems of the 
Chemical and Biological Weapons Convention: "Chemical `Thorns' 
in the Country's Side"] 
  [Text] The problem of the destruction of chemical weapons 
has alarmed the country's public. The sociopolitical situation 
has been sharply aggravated in the regions where it is planned 
to site installations for the destruction of the chemical 
weapons arsenal, and certain representatives of social movements 
are trying to exploit the currently fashionable topic of 
chemical disarmament in their own interests. Journalists are 
citing unverified facts, and people weighed down with science 
degrees are now trying to draw attention to themselves by making 
revelatory statements. The press increasingly often carries 
articles in which so-called chemical weapons experts who like to 
pose as major specialists try to intimidate the public with 
reports on the alleged continuation of scientific research into 
chemical weapons, their unauthorized destruction, secret burials 
on land and in water, and so forth. 
  In our view, such activity by "experts" and "selfless 
campaigners" is pursuing an unseemly aim: Using unverified and 
sometimes knowingly false statistics, they juggle this 
information around and impose on the public a distorted and 
unobjective view of the problem of the destruction of chemical 
weapons. 
  That is why I consider it expedient to examine consistently 
the basic stages in the implementation of the 1993 Convention on 
the Banning of Chemical Weapons. 
  First of all, I would recall that the state, which 
signed the Convention, is beginning work on the destruction of 
chemical weapons within a maximum of two years and will complete 
it no more than 10 years after the convention's entry into 
force. In the first stage, that is no more than two years after 
the ratification of the Convention, tests of the first facility 
for the destruction of chemical weapons will be carried out and 
then, no more than three years later, at least one percent of 
the stocks of these weapons is to be destroyed. In Russia's 
case this will mean 400 tonnes of toxic agents. In the 
subsequent stages, which are to be carried out no later than 
five, seven, and 10 years after the convention's entry into 
force, at least 20-45 percent of the weapons are to be 
destroyed, as are eventually all the remaining stocks of 
chemical weapons. Each state will choose its own method of 
destruction independently. It should be noted that the 
destruction process is to correspond to the very latest 
scientific achievements and be carried out at specially equipped 
sites. Meanwhile, the destruction of toxic agents by burial on 
land, underwater, or by incineration in the open air is not 
permitted. 
  According to specialists' estimates, as far as Russia is 
concerned the Convention on Banning Chemical Weapons could come 
into force in 1995 and the operation of the first facility for 
the destruction of toxic agents could begin in 1997. Russian 
President B.N. Yeltsin made a statement in spring last year in 
which he said among other things: "The world has changed, 
Russia's position in the world has changed, and we do not intend 
to attack anyone. The time has come to get rid of chemical 
weapons -- they are the past which we have inherited." Let us 
note that the problem of the destruction of chemical weapons is 
of great sociopolitical and social significance for Russia, due 
first and foremost to the need to lower the level of ecological 
tension in regions where the arsenals of these weapons are 
based. The program for the destruction of chemical weapons that 
the state is elaborating gives priority to the unconditional 
guarantee of safeguarding the life and health of the population 
as well as measures to protect the environment. 
  Social protection is also envisaged for the population 
living 
in zones where enterprises for the destruction of chemical 
weapons are to be sited: The latest technologies will be used 
and the volumes of toxic substances to be shipped across 
Russia's territory will be kept to a minimum. All this will 
involve considerable material expenditure especially since there 
is no special-purpose industrial facility for the destruction of 
chemical weapons in the Russian Federation. 
  The Committee on Problems of the Chemical and Biological 
Weapons Convention has been created to coordinate the 
verification of the fulfillment of international commitments in 
the sphere of the destruction of chemical and biological 
weapons. The policy of chemical disarmament in Russia has long 
needed an agency which would be independent of such powerful 
structures as the Defense Ministry and enterprises in the 
military-industrial complex, could carry out the process of 
disarmament in our country in a highly skilled and objective 
way, and could worthily represent Russia's interests in the 
international arena. Academician A. Kuntsevich, the well known 
scientist, was appointed chairman of this committee. In the 
past a military chemist, he made a major contribution to the 
creation of decontamination procedures which render toxic 
substances harmless and he set up a scientific school. 
  ...Today all Russia's chemical weapons stocks are housed in 
special-purpose arsenals of the Russian Federation Defense 
Ministry -- these are the seven chemical "thorns" in Russia's 
side: The city of Kambarka and the settlement of Kizner 
(Udmurtia), the settlement of Gornyy (Saratov Oblast), the city 
of Shchuchye (Kurgan Oblast), the city of Pochep (Bryansk 
Oblast), the settlement of Leonilovka (Penza Oblast), and the 
settlement of Maradykovskiy (Kirov Oblast). The total quantity 
of chemical weapons is 40,000 tonnes, made up as follows: 
Organophosphorous toxic agents (sarin, zamin [as 
transliterated], and VX) -- 32,300 tonnes; mustard gas, 
lewisite, and their compounds -- 7,700 tonnes; and phosgene -- 
5,000 tonnes. If the Paris convention is ratified, the process 
of the destruction of these weapons should begin in 1997. 
  To enable the Russian Federation to fulfill its 
international 
commitments, the Committee on Problems of the Chemical and 
Biological Weapons Convention under the Russian Federation 
President, in conjunction with the Russian Federation Defense 
Ministry, the Russian Federation Ministry of Ecology, the 
Russian Federation Ministry of Health, the Russian Academy of 
Sciences, and other ministries, elaborated in 1992 the draft 
first stage of the comprehensive program for the destruction of 
chemical weapons. Leaders of local administrations and 
representatives of public organizations in those regions where 
it is planned to site facilities for the destruction of chemical 
weapons took part in the discussion of this program. The draft 
was adopted after comments, amendments, and clarifications. 
  An essential condition of work on the draft is the public 
discussion of proposed decisions, a state ecological feasibility 
study of them, and the elaboration of the corresponding 
legislative acts. It is also recommended that a federal 
targeted program be elaborated to eliminate the consequences of 
the production of chemical weapons on the territory of the 
Russian Federation. 
  The chemical "thorns" can be removed from Russia's side only 
if there is a skilled, comprehensive, and well-balanced approach 
to the problem of the destruction of chemical weapons. Joint 
efforts are needed by scientific specialists, state and public 
organizations, and the local administration and population of 
the regions where the installations for the destruction of 
chemical weapons, one of the most treacherous types of weapon of 
mass destruction, are to be sited. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42405 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> POLICY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Russian Federation Law on State Secrets </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0181A Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 1, Jan 94 
(signed to press 22 Dec 93) pp 5-15 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0181A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text]This Law regulates relations arising in 
connection with defining information as state secrets, and with 
its declassification and protection in the interests of the 
Russian Federation's security. 
<H5>  SECTION I. GENERAL PROVISIONS </H5>
  Article 1. Scope of This Law 
  The provisions of this Law shall be binding in the Russian 
Federation and outside it upon bodies of representative, 
executive and judicial power (henceforth--bodies of state 
power), bodies of local self-management, enterprises, 
institutions and organizations, regardless of their 
organizational and legal form and their form of ownership, and 
upon officials and citizens of the Russian Federation who have 
accepted the obligations or are bound by their status to fulfill 
the requirements of legislation of the Russian Federation on 
state secrets. 
  Article 2. Basic Concepts Used in This Law 
  The following basic concepts shall be used in this Law: 

  -  state secrets--information protected by the 
state and concerned with its military, foreign political, 
economic, intelligence, counterintelligence and operational 
investigative activity, dissemination of which may damage the 
security of the Russian Federation; 
  -  storage media of 
information comprising state secrets--material objects, 
including physical fields, in which information comprising state 
secrets is reflected in the form of symbols, images, signals, 
technical concepts and processes; 
  -  the system of protection 
of state secrets--the sum total of bodies for the 
protection of state secrets, the resources and methods they use 
to protect information comprising state secrets, and their 
storage media, as well as measures implemented for these 
purposes; 
  -  access to state secrets--the procedure of 
granting citizens the right of access to information comprising 
state secrets, and enterprises, institutions and organizations 
the right to do work making use of such 
information; 
  -  access to information comprising state 
secrets--a specific person's familiarization with 
information comprising state secrets that is sanctioned by an 
authorized official; 
  -  security 
classification--requisites attesting to the degree of 
secrecy of information contained in its storage medium, affixed 
to the storage medium itself and (or) its accompanying 
documents; 
  -  information protection 
resources--hardware, cryptographic resources, software and 
other resources intended to protect information comprising state 
secrets, the resources within which this information is 
embodied, and the resources for controlling the effectiveness of 
information protection. 

    Article 3. Legislation of the Russian Federation on 
State Secrets 
  Legislation of the Russian Federation on state secrets shall 
be based on the Constitution of the Russian Federation and the 
Law of the Russian Federation "On Security," and it shall 
include this Law as well as provisions of other legislative acts 
regulating relations pertaining to protection of state secrets. 
  Article 4. Powers of Bodies of State Power and 
Officials Related to Defining Information as State Secrets and 
Protecting It 
  1. The Supreme Soviet of the Russian Federation shall: 

  -  provide for legislative regulation of relations pertaining 
to protection of state secrets; 
  -  approve items of the republican 
budget of the Russian Federation as concerns funds allocated for 
the implementation of state programs in the area of protection 
of state secrets; 
  -  exercise parliamentary control over 
fulfillment of legislation of the Russian Federation on state 
secrets, including when signing international treaties and 
intergovernment agreements; 
  -  determine the authority of officials 
from the administration of the Supreme Soviet of the Russian 
Federation regarding protection of state secrets in the Supreme 
Soviet of the Russian Federation; 
  -  resolve other issues within 
its competency pertaining to defining information as state 
secrets and to protecting it. 

    2. The President of the Russian Federation shall: 

  -  approve state programs in the area of protection of state 
secrets; 
  -  approve, upon submission by the Government of the 
Russian Federation, the composition and structure of the 
interdepartmental commission on protection of state secrets, and 
the statute on it; 
  -  approve, upon submission by the Government of 
the Russian Federation, the List of Officials of Bodies of State 
Power Granted the Authority to Define Information as State 
Secrets, and the List of Information Defined as State 
Secrets; 
  -  sign international treaties of the Russian Federation 
on joint use and protection of information comprising state 
secrets; 
  -  determine the authority of officials in protecting 
state secrets in the administration of the President of the 
Russian Federation; 
  -  resolve other issues in the area of defining 
information as state secrets and protecting it, within the 
limits of his competency. 

    3. The Government of the Russian Federation shall: 

  -  organize execution of the Law of the Russian Federation 
"On State Secrets"; 
  -  submit, to the President of the Russian 
Federation for approval, the composition and structure of the 
interdepartmental commission on protection of state secrets and 
the statute on it; 
  -  submit, to the President of the Russian 
Federation for approval, the List of Officials of Bodies of 
State Power Granted the Authority to Define Information as State 
Secrets; 
  -  establish the procedure of drafting the List of 
Information Defined as State Secrets; 
  -  organize development and 
fulfillment of state programs in the area of protection of state 
secrets; 
  -  determine the authority of officials in protecting 
state secrets in the administration of the Government of the 
Russian Federation; 
  -  establish the scope of privileges granted to 
citizens granted permanent access to state secrets and to 
associates of structural subdivisions for protection of state 
secrets, and the procedure of granting such 
privileges; 
  -  establish the procedure of determining the extent of 
damage ensuing from unsanctioned dissemination of information 
comprising state secrets, as well as the damage done to the 
owner of the information as a result of its 
declassification; 
  -  sign intergovernment agreements, implement 
measures to fulfill international treaties of the Russian 
Federation on joint use and protection of information comprising 
state secrets, and make decisions on the possibility of 
transferring the storage media of such information to other 
states. 

    In coordination with bodies for protection of state secrets 
located within their corresponding territories, bodies of state 
power of the Russian Federation, of republics comprising the 
Russian Federation, of the autonomous oblast, of autonomous 
okrugs, of krays, of oblasts, and of the cities of Moscow and 
St. Petersburg, and bodies of local self-management shall: 

  -  provide for the protection of information comprising state 
secrets transferred to them by other bodies of state power and 
by enterprises, institutions and organizations, and information 
which they have classified themselves; 
  -  provide for protection of 
state secrets at enterprises, institutions and organizations 
under their jurisdiction in accordance with the requirements of 
legislative acts of the Russian Federation; 
  -  make background 
checks on citizens granted access to state secrets, within the 
limits of their competency; 
  -  implement measures foreseen by 
legislation to restrict the rights of citizens and to grant 
privileges to persons who have or had access to information 
comprising state secrets; 
  -  submit proposals to higher bodies of 
state power for improving the system for protection of state 
secrets. 

    5. Bodies of judicial power shall: 

  -  examine criminal and civil cases of violations of 
legislation of the Russian Federation on state secrets; 
  -  provide 
legal protection to citizens, bodies of state power, 
enterprises, institutions and organizations in connection with 
their activity associated with protecting state secrets; 
  -  provide 
for the protection of state secrets in the course of examination 
of the indicated cases; 
  -  determine the authority of officials to 
protect state secrets in bodies of judicial power. 

<H5>    SECTION II. INFORMATION DEFINED AS STATE SECRETS </H5>
  Article 5. Information That May be Defined as State 
Secrets 
  The following information may be defined as state secrets: 
  1) Information in the military area: 

  -  on the content of strategic and operational plans and of 
military command and control documents pertaining to preparation 
and conduct of operations and to strategic, operational and 
mobilizational deployment of forces, on their combat 
effectiveness and mobilizational readiness, and on creation and 
use of mobilizational resources; 
  -  on the directions of 
development of armament and military equipment, and on the 
content and results of specific-purpose programs, scientific 
research and experimental design work aimed at designing and 
modernizing models of armament and military equipment; 
  -  on the 
quantity, design and manufacturing procedures of nuclear and 
special weapons, and the technical resources and methods of 
their protection from unsanctioned use; 
  -  on specification, 
performance characteristics and possibilities for combat use of 
models of armament and military equipment, and the properties, 
recipes or procedures of manufacturing new types of rocket 
propellant or military explosives; 
  -  on the disposition, purpose, 
readiness and degree of protection of high-security and 
especially important facilities, on their planning and 
construction, and on allocation of land, subsoil and water areas 
for these facilities; 
  -  on the disposition, real names, 
organizational structure, armament and numerical strength of 
large strategic formations, combined units and units of the 
Armed Forces of the Russian Federation. 

    2) Information in the areas of economics, science and 
technology: 

  -  on the content of plans for preparation of the Russian 
Federation and its individual regions for possible military 
actions, on the mobilizational capacities of industry for 
manufacturing armament and military equipment, on delivery 
volumes and reserves of strategic raw materials and supplies, 
and on the distribution and actual dimensions of state material 
reserves; 
  -  on use of the infrastructure of the Russian Federation 
in the interests of providing for its defense capability and 
security; 
  -  on civil defense forces and resources, on the 
disposition, purpose and degree of protection of administrative 
and public safety facilities, and on the functions of industry, 
transportation and communications in the Russian Federation as a 
whole; 
  -  on the volumes and plans (assignments) of state defense 
orders, on production and deliveries (in monetary or physical 
terms) of armament, military equipment and other defense 
products, on presence and augmentation of the capacities for 
their production, on cooperative ties of enterprises, and on 
developers or manufacturers of the indicated armament, military 
equipment and other defense products; 
  -  on scientific research, 
experimental design, planning and production procedures having 
important defensive or economic significance influencing the 
security of the Russian Federation; 
  -  on state reserves of 
precious metals and gems of the Russian Federation, and on its 
finances and budgetary policy (besides general indicators 
characterizing the overall state of the economy and 
finances). 

    3) Information in the area of foreign policy and economics: 

  -  on foreign political and foreign economic (commercial, 
credit and foreign exchange) activity of the Russian Federation, 
premature dissemination of which may do damage to its 
interests. 

    4) Information in the area of intelligence, 
counterintelligence and operational investigative activity: 

  -  on forces, resources, methods, plans and results of 
intelligence, counterintelligence and operational investigative 
activity, as well as data on the financing of this activity, if 
these data reveal the nature of the listed information; 
  -  on 
persons cooperating or who had cooperated confidentially with 
agencies engaging in intelligence, counterintelligence and 
operational investigative activity; 
  -  on the system of government 
and other forms of special communications, on state codes, and 
on the methods and resources of their analysis; 
  -  on methods and 
resources of protecting secret information; 
  -  on state programs 
and measures in the area of protection of state secrets. 

<H3>    SECTION III. CLASSIFICATION OF INFORMATION AND ITS STORAGE 
MEDIA </H3>
  Article 6. Principles of Information Classification 
  Classification of information and its storage media shall be 
defined as imposition, according to the procedure foreseen by 
this Law for such information, of restrictions upon 
dissemination of information comprising state secrets and upon 
access to its storage media. 
  Information shall be classified in accordance with the 
principles of lawfulness, justification and timeliness. 
  The lawfulness of classifying information shall mean 
correspondence of the classified information to provisions of 
articles 5 and 7 of this Law and legislation of the Russian 
Federation on state secrets. 
  Justification of information classification shall mean 
establishing, by expert examination, the suitability of 
classifying specific information, and of the probable economic 
and other consequences of this act on the basis of the balance 
of the vitally important interests of the state, the society and 
citizens. 
  Timeliness of information classification shall mean 
establishing restrictions upon dissemination of this information 
from the moment of its acquisition (generation), or in advance 
of this moment. 
  Article 7. Information not Subject to 
Classification 
  The following information shall not be classified: 

  -  on emergencies and catastrophes jeopardizing the safety 
and health of citizens, on their consequences, and on natural 
disasters and their official forecasts and consequences; 
  -  on the 
state of ecology, public health, sanitation, demography, 
education, culture and agriculture, and on the state of 
crime; 
  -  on privileges, compensations and benefits granted by the 
state to citizens, officials, enterprises, institutions and 
organizations; 
  -  on cases of violation of the rights and freedoms 
of the individual and the citizen; 
  -  on the dimensions of the gold 
reserve and state currency reserves of the Russian 
Federation; 
  -  on the health of the highest officials of the 
Russian Federation; 
  -  on cases of violation of the law by bodies 
of state power and by their officials. 

    Officials who decide to classify the listed information or 
to 
include it for these purposes in storage media of information 
comprising state secrets shall bear criminal, administrative or 
disciplinary liability depending on the material and moral 
damage done to society, the state and citizens. Citizens shall 
have the right to appeal such decisions in court. 
  Article 8. Degree of Secrecy of Information and the 
Security Classifications of the Storage Media of This 
Information 
  The degree of secrecy of information comprising state 
secrets 
must correspond to the severity of the damage that may be done 
to the security of the Russian Federation as a result of 
dissemination of the indicated information. 
  Three degrees of secrecy of information comprising state 
secrets and security classifications corresponding to these 
degrees for the storage media of the indicated 
information--"special importance," "top secret" and 
"secret"--shall be established. 
  The procedure for determining the dimensions of damage that 
may be done to the security of the Russian Federation as a 
result of dissemination of information comprising state secrets, 
and the rules of awarding a particular degree of secrecy to the 
indicated information, shall be established by the Government of 
the Russian Federation. 
  Use of the listed security classifications to classify 
information not defined as states secrets shall be prohibited. 
  Article 9. Procedure for Defining Information as State 
Secrets 
  Information shall be defined as state secrets in accordance 
with its origination in a particular sector, department or 
special-purpose program. 
  Justifying the need for defining information as state 
secrets 
in accordance with the principles of information classification 
shall be the responsibility of bodies of state power, 
enterprises, institutions and organizations obtaining 
(generating) this information. 
  Information shall be defined as state secrets by the chief 
executives of bodies of state power in accordance with the List 
of Officials Granted the Authority to Define Information as 
State Secrets, approved by the President of the Russian 
Federation. 
  The indicated persons shall bear personal liability for 
their 
decisions regarding the suitability of defining specific 
information as state secrets. 
  The interdepartmental commission on protection of state 
secrets shall draw up the List of Information Defined as State 
Secrets in order to enact a unified state policy in the area of 
classifying information. The bodies of state power granted the 
authority to dispose of such information shall be indicated in 
this List. This List shall be approved by the President of the 
Russian Federation, it shall be published in the overt press, 
and it shall be reviewed as necessary. 
  Bodies of state power whose chief executives have been 
granted the authority to define information as state secrets 
shall draw up expanded lists of information subject to 
classification. Information in regard to which the indicated 
bodies had been granted the authority of disposal shall be 
included and the degree of its secrecy shall be established in 
these lists. Separate lists of information subject to 
classification may be drawn up within the framework of 
specific-purpose programs for the development and modernization 
of models of armament and military equipment, and on 
experimental design and scientific research by decision of the 
clients for the indicated models and work. These lists shall be 
approved by the corresponding chief executives of bodies of 
state power. The suitability of classifying such lists shall be 
determined by their content. 
  Article 10. Restriction of the Rights of Ownership of 
Information by Enterprises, Institutions, Organizations and 
Citizens of the Russian Federation in Connection With Its 
Classification 
  Officials granted the authority to define information as 
state secrets in accordance with the procedure foreseen by 
Article 9 of this Law shall have the right to make decisions on 
classifying information owned by enterprises, institutions, 
organizations and citizens (henceforth--the owner of 
information), if this information is listed in the List of 
Information Defined as State Secrets. This information shall be 
classified at the request of the owners of the information or 
the corresponding bodies of state power. 
  Material damage done to the owner of information in 
connection with its classification shall be compensated by the 
state in amounts determined in an agreement between the body of 
state power into the possession of which this information is 
transferred, and its owner. The agreement shall also foresee 
obligations of the owner of the information pertaining to its 
nondissemination. Should the owner of the information refuse to 
sign an agreement, he shall be warned of his liability for 
unsanctioned dissemination of information comprising state 
secrets in accordance with currently effective legislation. 
  The owner of information shall have the right to appeal in 
court the actions of officials which in the opinion of the owner 
of the information infringe upon his rights. In the event of 
recognition of the actions of officials to be unlawful by the 
court, the procedure by which damage done to the owner of the 
information is to be compensated shall be determined by a 
decision of the court in accordance with currently effective 
legislation. 
  The right of ownership of information by foreign 
organizations and foreign citizens may not be restricted if this 
information was obtained (generated) without violating 
legislation of the Russian Federation. 
  Article 11. Procedure for Classifying Information and 
Its Storage Media 
  The grounds for classifying information obtained (generated) 
as a result of administrative, production, scientific and other 
forms of activity by bodies of state power, enterprises, 
institutions and organizations shall be defined as its 
correspondence to the lists of information subject to 
classification effective in the given bodies, at the given 
enterprises and in the given institutions and organizations. 
When this information is classified, the corresponding security 
classification shall be awarded to its storage media. 
  When it is impossible to identify obtained (generated) 
information with information contained in the currently 
effective list, officials of bodies of state power, enterprises, 
institutions and organizations shall be obligated to provide for 
interim classification of the obtained (generated) information 
in accordance with the proposed degree of secrecy, and send 
proposals on supplementing (amending) the list within a month's 
time to the official who had approved this list. 
  The officials who had approved the currently effective list 
shall be obligated to organize, within 3 months' time, expert 
examination of the submitted proposals, and adopt a decision to 
supplement (amend) the currently effective list or to remove the 
interim security classification awarded to the information. 
  Article 12. Requisites of Storage Media of Information 
Comprising State Secrets 
  Requisites including the following data shall be applied to 
storage media of information comprising state secrets: 

  -  on the degree of secrecy of the information contained in 
the storage medium, with reference to the corresponding item on 
the list of information subject to classification currently in 
effect in the given body of state power, at the given enterprise 
and in the given institution and organization; 
  -  on the body of 
state power, on the enterprise, and on the institution and 
organization classifying the storage medium; 
  -  on the registration 
number; 
  -  on the date or conditions of declassification of the 
information, or on events following which the information will 
be declassified. 

    When it is impossible to apply such requisites to the 
storage 
medium of information comprising state secrets, these data shall 
be indicated in documents accompanying this storage medium. 
  If the storage medium contains parts characterized by 
different degrees of secrecy, each of these parts shall be 
awarded the corresponding security classification, while the 
security classification corresponding to the security 
classification awarded to its part contain information having 
the highest degree of secrecy for the given storage medium shall 
be awarded to the storage medium as a whole. 
  Besides the requisites listed in this article, additional 
entries determining the authority of officials to acquaint 
themselves with information contained in this storage medium may 
be affixed on the storage medium and (or) on documents 
accompanying it. The form and procedure of affixing such 
additional entries and requisites shall be determined by 
standards approved by the Government of the Russian Federation. 

<H3>    SECTION IV. DECLASSIFICATION OF INFORMATION AND ITS 
STORAGE MEDIA </H3>
  Article 13. Procedure of Information 
Declassification 
  Declassification of information and its storage media shall 
be defined as the removal of restrictions, introduced previously 
according to procedure foreseen by this Law, on dissemination of 
information comprising state secrets and on access to its 
storage media. 
  The grounds for declassifying information shall be: 

  -  the Russian Federation's assumption of international 
obligations of open exchange of information comprising state 
secrets in the Russian Federation; 
  -  change in objective 
circumstances owing to which further protection of information 
comprising state secrets is unsuitable. 

    Bodies of state power whose chief executives have been 
granted authority to define information as state secrets shall 
be obligated to review, periodically but not less than once 
every 5 years, the content of lists of information subject to 
classification effective in bodies of state power, at 
enterprises and in institutions and organizations, as regards 
the justification for classifying the information and its 
correspondence to the previously established degree of secrecy. 
  The term of classification of information comprising state 
secrets must not exceed 30 years. In exceptional cases this term 
may be lengthened on the basis of a conclusion of the 
interdepartmental commission on protection of state secrets. 
  The right to amend lists of information subject to 
classification effective in bodies of state power, at 
enterprises and in institutions and organizations shall be 
granted to the chief executives of bodies of state power who had 
approved them, who bear personal liability for the justification 
of their decisions to declassify the information. Decisions of 
the indicated chief executives involving amendment of the list 
of information defined as state secrets shall be coordinated 
with the interdepartmental commission on protection of state 
secrets, which shall have the right to suspend and protest these 
decisions. 
  Article 14. Procedure for Declassifying Storage Media 
of Information Comprising State Secrets 
  Storage media of information comprising state secrets shall 
be declassified no later than after the term established at the 
time of their classification. Storage media shall be subject to 
declassification prior to expiration of this term if the 
provisions of the list currently effective in the given body of 
state power, the enterprise, the institution and organization on 
the basis of which they were classified are amended. 
  In exceptional cases the right to lengthen the initially 
established term of declassification of storage media of 
information comprising state secrets shall be granted to chief 
executives of state bodies authorized to define the 
corresponding information as state secrets, on the basis of the 
conclusion of an expert commission appointed by them according 
to established procedure. 
  Chief executives of bodies of state power, enterprises, 
institutions and organizations shall be authorized to declassify 
the storage media of information that was unjustifiably 
classified by officials subordinated to them. 
  Chief executive of state archives of the Russian Federation 
shall be authorized to declassify the storage media of 
information comprising state secrets stored in the closed 
collections of these archives, in the event that such authority 
is delegated to them by the collection-forming organization or 
its successor. In the event of liquidation of the 
collection-forming organization and absence of its successor, 
the question of the procedure for declassifying storage media of 
information comprising state secrets shall be examined by the 
interdepartmental commission on protection of state secrets. 
  Article 15. Fulfillment of Requests by Citizens, 
Enterprises, Institutions, Organizations and Bodies of State 
Power of the Russian Federation to Declassify Information 
  Citizens, enterprises, institutions, organizations and 
bodies 
of state power of the Russian Federation shall have the right to 
submit a request to bodies of state power, enterprises, 
institutions and organizations, including state archives, to 
declassify information defined as state secrets. 
  Bodies of state power, enterprises, institutions and 
organizations, including state archives, that receive such a 
request shall be obligated to examine it within 3 months and 
issue a substantiated reply on the essence of the request. If 
they are not authorized to resolve the question of declassifying 
the requested information, the request shall be transferred, 
within a month of its submission, to the body of state power 
possessing such authority, of to the interdepartmental 
commission on protection of state secrets; citizens, 
enterprises, institutions, organizations and bodies of state 
power of the Russian Federation submitting the request shall be 
informed of such action. 
  Refusal of officials to examine the merits of a request 
shall 
incur administrative (disciplinary) liability in accordance with 
currently effective legislation. 
  The justifications of defining information as state secrets 
may be appealed in court. When the court recognizes 
classification of information to be unjustified, this 
information shall be subject to declassification according to 
the procedure established by this Law. 
<H3>  SECTION V. DISPOSITION OF INFORMATION COMPRISING STATE 
SECRETS </H3>
  Article 16. Mutual Transfer of Information Comprising 
State Secrets by Bodies of State Power, Enterprises, 
Institutions and Organizations 
  Mutual transfer of information comprising state secrets 
shall 
be effected by bodies of state power, enterprises, institutions 
and organizations which are not subordinated to one another and 
which are not engaged in joint work, with the sanction of the 
body of state power having this information at its disposal in 
accordance with Article 9 of the Law. 
  Bodies of state power, enterprises, institutions and 
organizations requesting information comprising state secrets 
shall be obligated to create conditions providing for protection 
of this information. Their chief executives shall bear personal 
liability for failure to observe established restrictions on 
familiarization with information comprising state secrets. 
  Fulfillment of requirements foreseen in Article 27 of the 
Law 
by bodies of state power, enterprises, institutions and 
organizations to whom information comprising state secrets is 
transferred shall be a mandatory prerequisite of such transfer. 
  Article 17. Transfer of Information Comprising State 
Secrets in Connection With Fulfillment Joint and Other Work 
  Information comprising state secrets shall be transferred to 
enterprises, institutions, organizations or citizens, in 
connection with fulfillment of joint and other work, by the 
client for this work with the permission of the body of state 
power having the corresponding information at its disposal in 
accordance with Article 9 of this Law, and only to the extent 
necessary for fulfillment of this work. In this case prior to 
transfer of information comprising state secrets, the client 
shall be obligated to ascertain possession of a license by the 
enterprise, institution or organization for the performance of 
work using information of the corresponding degree of secrecy, 
and possession of the corresponding permit by citizens. 
  Enterprises, institutions or organizations, including ones 
not under state forms of ownership, may sign agreements with 
state enterprises, institutions or organizations on utilizing 
the services of their structural subdivisions to protect state 
secrets when performing joint or other work (obtaining state 
orders) and when the necessity of using information comprising 
state secrets arises in connection with this; the corresponding 
entry shall be made in the licenses of both agreeing parties to 
perform work using information comprising state secrets. 
  An agreement to perform joint and other work signed in 
accordance with procedure established by law shall foresee 
mutual obligations of the parties to safeguard information 
comprising state secrets both during the work and after its 
completion, and the terms of financing work (services) to 
protect information comprising state secrets. 
  Organization of control over the effectiveness of protecting 
state secrets during joint and other work shall be the 
responsibility of the client for this work in accordance with 
provisions of the agreement signed by the parties. 
  When an executor violates his obligations of protecting 
state 
secrets in the course of joint and other work, the client shall 
have the right to suspend fulfillment of the order until the 
violation is eliminated, and in the case of repeat violations, 
to raise the issue of annulling the order and the licenses for 
work using information comprising state secrets, and of 
punishing the offenders. In this case material damage inflicted 
by the executor upon the state, as represented by the client, 
shall be recovered in accordance with currently effective 
legislation. 
  Article 18. Transfer of Information Comprising State 
Secrets to Other States 
  The decision to transfer information comprising state 
secrets 
to other states shall be made by the Government of the Russian 
Federation in the presence of an expert conclusion of the 
interdepartmental commission on protection of state secrets 
regarding the possibility for transferring this information. 
  Obligations of the receiving party to protect information 
transferred to it shall be foreseen by a treaty (agreement) 
signed with it. 
  Article 19. Protection of Information Comprising State 
Secrets and Change in the Functions of the Subjects of Legal 
Relations 
  In the event of changes in their functions, forms of 
ownership, liquidation or termination of work using information 
comprising state secrets, bodies of state power, enterprises, 
institutions and organizations possessing information comprising 
state secrets shall be obligated to implement measures to 
protect this information and its storage media. In this case the 
storage media of information comprising state secrets shall be 
destroyed according to established procedure, surrendered to 
archives for storage, or transferred: 

  -  to the successor of the body of state power, enterprise, 
institution or organization possessing information comprising 
state secrets, if the successor is authorized to perform work 
using the indicated information; 
  -  to the body of state power 
having the corresponding information at its disposal in 
accordance with Article 9 of this Law; 
  -  to another body of state 
power, enterprise, institution or organization as instructed by 
the interdepartmental commission on protection of state 
secrets. 

<H5>    SECTION VI. PROTECTION OF STATE SECRETS </H5>
  Article 20. Bodies for Protection of State Secrets 
  Bodies for protection of state secrets shall include: 

  -  the interdepartmental commission on protection of state 
secrets; 
  -  bodies of federal executive power (the Russian 
Federation Ministry of Security, the Russian Federation Ministry 
of Defense, the Federal Agency for Government Communication and 
Information under the President of the Russian Federation), the 
Foreign Intelligence Service of the Russian Federation, the 
State Technical Commission under the President of the Russian 
Federation and their local bodies; 
  -  bodies of state power, 
enterprises, institutions and organizations, and their 
structural subdivisions for protection of state secrets. 

    The interdepartmental commission on protection of state 
secrets shall be a group decision-making body coordinating the 
activity of bodies of state power protecting state secrets in 
the interests of developing and fulfilling state programs, 
standards and methodological documents facilitating 
implementation of legislation of the Russian Federation on state 
secrets. The functions of the interdepartmental commission on 
protection of state secrets shall be carried out and its 
supradepartmental authority shall be exercised in accordance 
with the Statute on the Interdepartmental Commission on 
Protection of State Secrets approved by the President of the 
Russian Federation. 
  Bodies of federal executive power (the Russian Federation 
Ministry of Security, the Russian Federation Ministry of 
Defense, the Federal Agency for Government Communication and 
Information under the President of the Russian Federation), the 
Foreign Intelligence Service of the Russian Federation, the 
State Technical Commission under the President of the Russian 
Federation and their local bodies shall organize and provide for 
protection of state secrets in accordance with functions imposed 
upon them by legislation of the Russian Federation. 
  Bodies of state power, enterprises, institutions and 
organizations shall provide for the protection of information 
comprising state secrets in accordance with the tasks imposed on 
them, and within the limits of their competency. Responsibility 
for organization protection of information comprising state 
secrets in bodies of state power, enterprises, institutions and 
organizations shall be borne by their chief executives. 
Depending on the volume of work using information comprising 
state secrets, chief executives of bodies of state power, 
enterprises, institutions and organizations shall create 
structural subdivisions for protection of state secrets, the 
functions of which shall be determined by the indicated chief 
executives in accordance with standards approved by the 
Government of the Russian Federation, and with regard for the 
particular features of their work. 
  Protection of state secrets shall be a principal form of 
activity of the body of state power, enterprise, institution or 
organization. 
  Article 21. Access of Officials and Citizens to State 
Secrets 
  Access of officials and citizens of the Russian Federation 
to 
state secrets shall be voluntary. 
  Access of persons with dual citizenship, persons without 
citizenship and persons who are foreign citizens, emigrants and 
re-emigrants to state secrets shall be according to procedure 
established by the Government of the Russian Federation. 
  Access of officials and citizens to state secrets shall 
foresee: 

  -  their acceptance of obligations before the state not to 
disseminate information comprising state secrets entrusted to 
them; 
  -  consent to partial, temporary restriction of their rights 
in accordance with Article 24 of this Law; 
  -  their written consent 
to undergo background checks by authorized bodies; 
  -  a 
determination of the forms, dimensions and procedure of granting 
privileges foreseen by this Law; 
  -  acquaintance with rules of 
legislation of the Russian Federation on state secrets 
foreseeing liability for its violation; 
  -  adoption of a decision 
by the chief executive of the body of state power, enterprise, 
institution or organization regarding access of the applicant to 
information comprising state secrets. 

    The volume of background checks shall depend on the degree 
of 
secrecy of the information to which the applicant is to be 
granted access. Background checks shall be carried out in 
accordance with legislation of the Russian Federation. The goal 
of background checks shall be to reveal grounds foreseen by 
Article 22 of this Law. 
  The following privileges shall be established for officials 
and citizens granted permanent access to state secrets: 

  -  percent wage increases depending on the degree of secrecy 
of information to which they have access; 
  -  a preferential right, 
under otherwise equal conditions, to retain their job when 
bodies of state power, enterprises, institutions and 
organizations carry out organizational and (or) staff 
measures. 

    A percent wage increase for time of service in structural 
subdivisions for protection of state secrets shall be 
established for associates of the indicated structural 
subdivisions in addition to the privileges established for 
officials and citizens granted permanent access to state secrets. 
  Mutual obligations of the administration and the applicant 
shall be reflected in a labor agreement (contract). Signing a 
labor agreement (contract) before competent bodies complete a 
background check shall be prohibited. 
  Three forms of access to state secrets by officials and 
citizens shall be established in correspondence with the three 
degrees of secrecy of information comprising state secrets: to 
information of special importance, to top secret information or 
to secret information. Access to information of a higher degree 
of secrecy awarded to officials and citizens shall constitute 
grounds for their access to information of lower secrecy. 
  The period, circumstances and procedure of reapplying for 
access of citizens to state secrets shall be established by 
standards approved by the Government of the Russian Federation. 
  The procedure of granting access of officials and citizens 
to 
state secrets under the conditions of an announced state of 
emergency may be changed by the President of the Russian 
Federation. 
  Article 22. Grounds for Denying Access of an Official 
or Citizen to State Secrets 
  Grounds for denying access of an official or citizen to 
state 
secrets may be: 

  -  his recognition by the court to be incompetent, marginally 
competent or an especially dangerous recidivist, his state of 
being on trial or under investigation for state and other 
serious crimes, and presence of an unremitted conviction for 
these crimes; 
  -  presence of medical contraindications for work 
involving the use of information comprising state secrets, in 
accordance with a list approved by the Russian Federation 
Ministry of Health; 
  -  permanent residence of himself and (or) his 
close relatives abroad and (or) preparation of documents by the 
indicated persons for departure to other states for permanent 
residence; 
  -  revelation, by background checks, of actions of the 
applicant threatening the security of the Russian 
Federation; 
  -  his refusal to undergo a background check and (or) 
his communication of knowingly false questionnaire data. 

    The decision to deny access of an official or citizen to 
state secrets shall be made by the chief executive of the body 
of state power, enterprise, institution or organization on an 
individual basis with regard for the results of background 
checks. A citizen shall have the right to appeal this decision 
to a higher organization or in court. 
  Article 23. Conditions for Termination of Access of an 
Official or Citizen to State Secrets 
  Access of an official or citizen to state secrets may be 
terminated by a decision of the chief executive of the body of 
state power, enterprise, institution or organization in cases of: 

  -  dissolution of his labor agreement (contract) in 
connection with organizational and (or) staff measures; 
  -  a single 
violation by him of obligations foreseen by the labor agreement 
(contract) associated with protection of state secrets, and 
accepted by him; 
  -  the advent of circumstances which in accordance 
with Article 22 of this Law serve as grounds for denial of 
access of the official or citizen to state secrets. 

    Termination of access of an official or citizen to state 
secrets shall be additional grounds for dissolving a labor 
agreement (contract) with him, if such conditions are foreseen 
in the labor agreement (contract). 
  Termination of access to state secrets shall not release the 
official or citizen from obligations accepted by him to not 
disseminate information comprising state secrets. 
  A decision of the administration to terminate access of an 
official or citizen to state secrets and to dissolve a labor 
agreement (contract) on this basis may be appealed to a higher 
organization or in court. 
  Article 24. Restrictions on the Rights of an Official 
or Citizen Having Access or Having Had Access to State 
Secrets 
  An official or citizen having access or having had access to 
state secrets may be temporarily restricted in his rights. These 
restrictions may pertain to: 

  -  the rights of departure from the country for a period 
stipulated in the labor agreement (contract) at the time of the 
citizen's application for access to state secrets; 
  -  the right to 
disseminate information comprising state secrets, and to use 
discoveries and inventions containing such information; 
  -  the 
rights to inviolability of private life during background checks 
conducted during the time of application for access to state 
secrets. 

    Article 25. Organization of Access of an Official or 
Citizen to Information Comprising State Secrets 
  Organizing access of an official or citizen to information 
comprising state secrets shall be the responsibility of the 
chief executive of the corresponding body of state power, 
enterprise, institution or organization, as well as of 
structural subdivisions for protection of state secrets. The 
procedure of granting access of an official or citizen to 
information comprising state secrets shall be established by 
standards approved by the Government of the Russian Federation. 
  Chief executives of bodies of state power, enterprises, 
institutions and organizations shall bear personal 
responsibility for creating conditions under which an official 
or citizen is able to acquaint himself only with that 
information comprising state secrets, and in those volumes, 
which are necessary for him to carry out his official 
(functional) duties. 
  Article 26. Liability for Violation of Legislation of 
the Russian Federation on State Secrets 
  Officials and citizens guilty of violating legislation of 
the 
Russian Federation on state secrets shall bear criminal, 
administrative, civil or disciplinary liability in accordance 
with currently effective legislation. 
  The rights and lawful interests of citizens, bodies of state 
power, enterprises, institutions and organizations within the 
sphere of action of this Law shall be protected by court or 
other procedures foreseen by this Law. 
  Article 27. Access of Enterprises, Institutions and 
Organizations to Work Associated With the Use of Information 
Comprising State Secrets 
  Access of enterprises, institutions and organizations to 
work 
associated with the use of information comprising state secrets, 
with creation of resources for protecting information, and with 
implementation of measures and (or) rendering of services to 
protect state secrets shall be permitted on the basis of 
licenses to work with information of the corresponding degree of 
secrecy, obtained by them according to a procedure established 
by the Government of the Russian Federation. 
  A license to do such work shall be issued on the basis of 
the 
results of special expert examination of the enterprise, 
institution and organization, and state certification of their 
chief executives responsible for protection of information 
comprising state secrets, the expenses of which shall be borne 
by the enterprise, institution or organization receiving the 
license. 
  A license to do work using information comprising state 
secrets shall be issued to an enterprise, institution or 
organization upon its fulfillment of the following conditions: 

  -  fulfillment of the requirements of standards approved by 
the Government of the Russian Federation on providing for the 
protection of information comprising state secrets in the course 
of work associated with the use of the indicated 
information; 
  -  presence, within their structure, of subdivisions 
for protection of state secrets, and specially trained 
associates for work in the protection of information, the number 
and qualifications of which are sufficient to provide for the 
protection of state secrets; 
  -  presence of certified information 
protection resources. 

    Article 28. Procedure of Certifying Information 
Protection Resources 
  Information protection resources must be accompanied by a 
certificate indicating their satisfaction of the requirements on 
protection of information of the corresponding degree of secrecy. 
  Organization of the certification of information protection 
resources shall be the responsibility of the State Technical 
Commission under the President of the Russian Federation, the 
Russian Federation Ministry of Security, the Federal Agency for 
Government Communication and Information under the President of 
the Russian Federation, and the Russian Federation Ministry of 
Defense in accordance with functions imposed on them by 
legislation of the Russian Federation. Certification shall be 
based on requirements of state standards of the Russian 
Federation and other standards approved by the Government of the 
Russian Federation. 
  Coordination of work to organize certification of 
information 
protection resources shall be the responsibility of the 
interdepartmental commission on protection of state secrets. 
<H5>  SECTION VII. FINANCING OF MEASURES TO PROTECT STATE SECRETS </H5>
  Article 29. Financing of Measures to Protect State 
Secrets 
  Activity of bodies of state power, budget-supported 
enterprises, institutions and organizations and their structural 
subdivision for protection of state secrets shall be financed 
out of funds of the corresponding budgets, while that of other 
enterprises, institutions and organizations shall be financed 
out of funds obtained from their principal activity in the 
performance of work associated with the use of information 
comprising state secrets. 
  Funds to finance state programs in the area of protection of 
state secrets shall be foreseen as a separate item in the 
federal budget of the Russian Federation. 
  Expenditure of financial resources allocated for measures to 
protect state secrets shall be controlled by the chief 
executives of bodies of state power, enterprises, institutions 
and organizations, work clients, and representatives of the 
Russian Federation Ministry of Finance specially authorized for 
this. If such control is associated with access to information 
comprising state secrets, the listed persons must be cleared for 
information of the corresponding degree of secrecy. 
<H3>  SECTION VIII. CONTROL AND OVERSIGHT OF PROTECTION OF STATE 
SECRETS </H3>
  Article 30. Parliamentary Control 
  Control by the Supreme Soviet of the Russian Federation over 
fulfillment of legislation of the Russian Federation on state 
secrets and of expenditure of financial resources allocated for 
this purpose shall be effected by the corresponding permanent 
chamber commissions and committees of the Supreme Soviet of the 
Russian Federation. Bodies of state power protecting state 
secrets shall be obligated to submit the necessary information 
to the indicated committees and commissions. Information 
comprising state secrets shall be provided to bodies of state 
power in accordance with legislation of the Russian Federation. 
  Article 31. Interdepartmental and Departmental 
Control 
  Interdepartmental control of protection of state secrets in 
bodies of state power, at enterprises and in institutions and 
organizations shall be maintained by bodies of federal executive 
power (the Russian Federation Ministry of Security, the Russian 
Federation Ministry of Defense, the Federal Agency for 
Government Communication and Information under the President of 
the Russian Federation), the Foreign Intelligence Service of the 
Russian Federation, the State Technical Commission under the 
President of the Russian Federation and their local bodies, upon 
which this function is imposed by legislation of the Russian 
Federation. 
  Bodies of state government given the authority to dispose of 
information comprising state secrets in accordance with this Law 
shall be obligated to control the effectiveness of this 
information's protection in all subordinated bodies of state 
power, enterprises, institutions and organizations working with 
such information. 
  Control over protection of state secrets in the 
administrations of the Supreme Soviet of the Russian Federation, 
the President of the Russian Federation and the Government of 
the Russian Federation shall be organized by their chief 
executives. 
  Control over protection of state secrets in judicial bodies 
and in bodies of the procuracy shall be organized by the chief 
executives of these bodies. 
  Article 32. Procuracy Oversight 
  Oversight of observance of legislation when providing 
protection to state secrets, and of the lawfulness of decisions 
adopted in this case, shall be maintained by the General 
Procurator of the Russian Federation and procurators 
subordinated to him. 
  Access of persons maintaining procuracy oversight to 
information comprising state secrets shall be in accordance with 
Article 25 of this Law. 
  President of the Russian Federation B. Yeltsin 
  Moscow, Russian Palace of the Soviets 
  21 July 1993 
  No 5485-1 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42406 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> GROUND TROOPS </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Grad', `Uragan' Multiple Rocket Launchers </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0173A Moscow VOYENNYYE ZNANIYA in Russian No 3, Mar 93 
pp 9, C3 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0173A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYYE ZNANIYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Engineer A. Shirokorad: "`Grad' and </F>
`Uragan' -- These Are Not Bad Weather Phenomena"] 
  [Text] The "Grad" 122 mm and "Uragan" 220 mm multiple 
rocket launcher systems are the most widely used modern 
domestically-produced systems. 
  The "Grad" system on a BM-21 mount was accepted into the 
Soviet Army inventory in 1963 and recommended itself well in 
combat operations on Damanskiy Island, in the Middle East and in 
Afghanistan. 
  The "Uragan" Multiple Rocket Launcher System (9K57) was 
accepted into the inventory in 1976 and also had combat 
employment in Afghanistan. Unfortunately, right now these 
systems are being widely utilized in interethnic conflicts on 
the territory of the former USSR. 
  Because the dimensions and weight of the BM-21 mount were 
comparatively large, the light BM-21V mount, in which the number 
of 122 mm tubes was reduced from 40 to 12, was developed for the 
VDV [Airborne Troops]. 
  The basic device of both systems is nearly identical. The 
combat vehicle consists of an artillery section and a chassis of 
a specially equipped motor vehicle. The artillery section 
consists of tube launchers, a cradle, a base, elevating, 
traversing and leveling mechanisms, a launcher frame, aiming 
devices, an electric drive and auxiliary equipment. 
  The rocket projectiles of both multiple rocket launcher 
systems are also identically constructed. They have tail 
assemblies, the fins of which are secured by a ring in the 
closed position. When the contacts of the current distributor 
close, pulses of current flow to the contact sector of the 
projectile which results in the actuation of the squibs and the 
ignition of the powder charge. The gases that are formed tear 
away the contact lid and powder gases begin to escape through 
the nozzle opening. When the engine increases thrust, the 
projectile's lead pin comes out of the launcher's stopper-rod 
device and slips along its groove, forcing the rocket projectile 
to rotate with regard to the longitudinal axis. The tail 
assembly's fins unfold when it flies out of the tube and the MRV 
or MRV-U fuze is armed at a distance of 150-450 meters from the 
combat vehicle. The M-21-OF 122 mm high-explosive-fragmentation 
projectile and the 9M27F 220 mm high-explosive projectile are 
constructed in the same way. 
  9M27K 220 mm projectiles are differentiated from 
high-explosive projectiles by a cluster portion that consists of 
30 1.85 kg fragmentation cluster submunitions. These rocket 
projectiles are equipped with a mechanical time fuze (120 second 
maximum time of operation). The fuze is set manually by the crew 
(using a key). After the projectile leaves the launcher, the 
fuze activates after the assigned time. The fuze's fors of fire 
ignites the warhead's burster. The fuzes of the cluster 
submunitions are armed from the pressure and temperature of the 
gases formed, the warhead breaks up, and they are dispersed in 
the direction of the projectile's movement. When a submunition 
encounters an obstacle, its fuze activates and an explosion 
occurs. 
  During firings at short distances (1.5-5 km), all rocket 
projectiles provide a probable error range of 100 meters and the 
Firing Table states: "Conduct firing at ranges of less than 5 km 
in exceptional situations and only when friendly troops are not 
in the line of fire". Therefore, you need to be very careful 
when you read about cases of direct laying by rocket projectiles 
against tanks with massive destruction of the latter that are 
often described in the literature. But 122 mm and 220 mm rocket 
projectiles are an adequately modern and effective weapon to 
carry out organic missions, all the more so that far from all of 
the "Grad" and "Uragan" systems' munitions were cited in the 
article and some quite "exotic" projectiles are among those that 
were not named. 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Tactical-Technical Specifications of Multiple Rocket Launcher System Comba-| 
|t Vehicles                                                                 | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Designation       |BM-21             |BM-21V            |BM-22 (9K57)      | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Chassis           |Ural-375D         |GAZ-66B           |BAZ-135LM         | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Projectile calibe-|122               |122               |122               | 
|r, mm             |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of tubes (-|40                |12                |16                | 
|launchers)        |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of the com-|13,700            |approximately 6,00|approximately 20,2| 
|bat vehicle in th-|                  |0                 |00                | 
|e combat configur-|                  |                  |                  | 
|ation, kg         |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Time of complete  |20                |6                 |                  | 
|salvo, seconds    |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed alo-|75                |85                |69                | 
|ng paved roads, k-|                  |                  |                  | 
|ph                |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 




----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Tactical-Technical Specifications of Rocket Projectiles                    | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Model             |M-21-OF           |9M27F             |9M27K             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Caliber, mm       |122               |220               |220               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Projectile length,|2,870/23.5        |4,832/22.0        |5,178/23.5        | 
| mm/calibers      |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Projectile weight,|66                |280.4             |271.1             | 
| kg               |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Warhead weight, kg|18.4              |99.05             |89.5              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum firing ra-|20.1              |35.8              |35.0              | 
|nge, km           |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  COPYRIGHT: Izdatelstvo TsS SOSTO SNG "Patriot", "Voyennyye 
znaniya", 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42407 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> GROUND TROOPS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Specifications of 2S6M `Tunguska' Air Defense System </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0174A Moscow VOYENNYYE ZNANIYA in Russian No 5, May 93 
pp 10-11 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0174A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYYE ZNANIYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by A. Shirokorad: "With Missile and </F>
Projectile"] 
  [Text] "Are there systems similar to the American 
ADATS [Air Defense Anti-Tank System] in our Armed Forces? 
  " S. Kurganov (Kemerovo Oblast)" 
  The 2S6M "Tunguska" Self-Propelled Air Defense System, the 
first domestically-produced air defense system with the 2K22M 
missile-gun complex, entered the inventory at the beginning of 
the 1980's. Batteries consisting of six of these systems provide 
the air defense of motorized-rifle and tank regiments. 
  Initially, let's examine the missile portion of the air 
defense system. Eight launchers with 9M311 missiles housed in 
canisters are mounted on it. The missile is 2,562 mm long, 
weighs 42 kg, and has a 9 kg fragmentation-continuous rod 
warhead. Its maximum speed is up to 900 meters per second [mps] 
and its average speed is 600 mps. It is capable of destroying 
aircraft (helicopters) that are flying at speeds of up to 500 
mps. Missile firings are conducted in place or from a short halt 
when the target is within visual range. It has a semiautomatic 
radio command guidance system with manual target tracking and 
automatic placement of the missile on the sighting line based 
upon signals that are transmitted via a radio channel. The 
warhead has a proximity fuze with an operating radius of five 
meters. 
  Two 2A38 30 mm twin-barrel automatic guns that were 
developed 
under the leadership of V. Gryazev make up the artillery portion 
of the air defense system. The rate of fire of one automatic gun 
is 1,950-2,500 rounds per minute. The automatic gun operates on 
the energy of powder gases that are eliminated from the barrel 
channel through special vents. Cooling of the barrel is carried 
out using water that is circulated in the barrel jacket. 
Reloading of the automatic gun is pyrotechnic and manual (in the 
event a projectile becomes jammed). For the former, there are 
three pyrotechnic cartridges per automatic gun. 
  The "Tunguska's" chassis is a GM-352 that was manufactured 
by 
Minsk Tractor Plant. Right now Ulyanovsk Mechanical Plant makes 
it. A transloader vehicle on a KamAZ-43101 motor vehicle chassis 
is attached to each of the self-propelled air defense guns. It 
transports eight missiles and 32 boxes with projectiles for the 
automatic air defense guns, it has a crane, a machine for 
loading and to couple and uncouple cartridge belts, and radio 
communications equipment. 
  The "Tunguska" air defense mount is certainly an effective 
system. But you must keep in mind that it destroys only airborne 
targets. At the same time the United States, jointly with 
Switzerland, has developed the ADATS air defense-antitank 
missile system, the missiles of which can destroy aircraft at a 
distance of up to eight kilometers and at an altitude of five 
kilometers and any tanks at a distance of up to eight kilometers 
with a shaped charge-fragmentation warhead with a 900 mm 
armor-piercing capability. Missile guidance is by laser beam. 


Tactical-Technical Specifications of the 2S6M air defense System 

Target detection range, m                18,000 

Target tracking range, m                 13,000 

Destruction range, m: 

Using 9M311 missiles 

Altitude                                 15-3,500 

Range                                    2,500-8,000 

Using 2A38 automatic guns 

Altitude                                 0-3,000 

Range                                    200-4,000 

Basic load: 

Missiles                                 8 

30 mm projectiles                        1,904 

Combat effectiveness 

For 9M311 missiles                       0.65 

For 2A38 automatic guns                  0.6 

Weight of the system, loaded, kg         34,000 

Crew, men                                4 

Speed along paved roads, kph             65 

Air defense system reaction time,        10 
seconds 


  COPYRIGHT: Izdatelstvo TsS SOSTO SNG "Patriot", "Voyennyye 
znaniya", 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42408 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> GROUND TROOPS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Remote Mine-Laying System </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0168A Moscow VOYENNYYE ZNANIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 93 p 
21 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0168A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYYE ZNANIYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel V. Belikov: "Remote Mine-Laying </F>
Systems"] 
  [Text] We discussed the GMZ tracked mine-layer in 
VOYENNYYE ZNANIYA No 10, 1991. 
  Our readers, including Yu. Tarasov (Serpukhov), M. 
Feshchuk (Kamenets-Podolskiy), and others, request that we 
continue this topic. 
  Remote mine-laying systems are understood to be the sum 
total 
of landmines, aircraft, rocket-artillery and engineer systems 
that are used to scatter mines and deliver them to the 
minelaying area and to disperse them on terrain. Remote 
mine-laying systems have a morale and psychological impact on 
the enemy and are utilized to reduce the mobility of enemy 
troops, to inflict losses using landmines and to create 
favorable conditions for destruction by other weapons. 
Minefields, laid using remote mine-laying systems, are 
characterized by their great depth, by the absence of precise 
borders and by the placement of mines on the surface of the 
ground (snow). The laying of minefields is carried out, as a 
rule, during the course of combat operations or directly prior 
to their initiation while taking into account other obstacles, 
fire plans and the nature of the terrain. 
  At the present time, such systems as a universal mine-layer 
and portable minelaying system that have been accepted into the 
inventory in the 1990's have received widespread dissemination. 
  A ZiL-131 high off-road capability motor vehicle, in the bed 
of which are installed six canisters with 30 canister rounds 
armed with antitank or antipersonnel POM, PTM or PFM mines is 
used as the base vehicle for the universal 
mine-layer. Their number in the basic load depends on the 
purpose and design and totals from 180 to 11,520 canister 
rounds. The universal mine-layer conducts the laying of an 
antitank or antipersonnel minefield at a distance of 30-60 
meters from itself at an average minelaying speed of 10-40 
kilometers per hour [kph]. After laying one basic load, it can 
be reloaded by other crew personnel consisting of two men in 
1.5-2 hours. One mine-layer using one basic load can lay a 3-row 
minefield from 150 to 1,500 meters long, depending on the type 
of mine used. 
  As a rule, it is utilized as a mobile minelaying detachment 
consisting of from 1-3 vehicles during the course of a battle. 
The mobile minelaying detachment commander receives the 
minelaying order by radio after which the vehicle advances to 
the minelaying point, moving along roads or virgin soil at an 
average speed of 10-25 kph. When approaching a line after the 
appropriate order, the operator selects the required direction 
of the canister and, utilizing the control panel located in the 
driver's cab, lays a one-, two-, or three-row minefield. 
  The portable mine system consists of a mount with 
a launch tube, a blasting machine, and a wire communications 
link. Canister rounds, armed with one of the types of 
antipersonnel mines, are loaded in the launch tube. Having 
installed the system on a trench parapet, you can lay an 
antipersonnel minefield with dimensions of 10X20(40) or 20X10 
meters at a distance of 30-100 meters (depending on the type of 
mine). Scattered laying is conducted on the surface of the 
ground by firing the mines from the canister. The system is 
carried by a one-man crew, it weighs 2.63 kg, and preparation 
time for employment is less than five minutes. 
  The universal mine-layer and the portable minelaying system 
are employed for laying minefields that cover subunit positions, 
their flanks and the boundaries between them, fire positions, 
breaches in combat formations and paths in minefields and also 
for building up mined obstacles on armor approach routes. 
  In the missile troops and artillery, remote minelaying is 
carried out by multiple rocket launcher systems, the 
munitions of which are armed with landmines. Here a Ural-375 
high off-road capability motor vehicle is used as a base 
vehicle. Sixteen launchers with projectiles equipped with one 
type of mine (PTM, PFM) are mounted on the Ural-375's bed. Their 
number in a single projectile depends on the type and totals 
from several dozen to several hundred units. The dimensions of a 
minefield which can be laid by one combat vehicle (one salvo) 
depend on the type of system and the firing range (from 8 to 35 
km) and can occupy an area of from 24 to 81 hectares. 
  As a rule, multiple rocket launcher systems are enlisted to 
mine enemy targets that are located in the tactical depth and 
permit minefields to be laid with a significant depth and length 
directly at the targets. 
  Aircraft (fighters, fighter-bombers, and ground-attack 
aircraft) and helicopters are utilized in aviation. 
Bombers and fighter-bombers are enlisted to lay minefields in 
the operational depth and ground-attack aircraft -- in the 
tactical depth. Canisters armed with cluster submunitions 
(cassettes) with antitank and antipersonnel mines are suspended 
from aircraft and helicopters. 
  The capabilities of aircraft to lay minefields depend on the 
type of aircraft, their combat operating range (from 100 to 500 
km), optimal combat employment modes (a mining speed of 400-800 
kph; an altitude of 50-200 meters), the number of suspended 
small canisters, and the quantity and type of mine employed. 
  Minelaying employing helicopters is conducted, as a rule, on 
friendly territory and in the depth of enemy combat formations 
while supporting combat operations of airborne assault units. 
  The capabilities of helicopters also depend on the type of 
helicopter (Mi-8, Mi-24), the minelaying system, type of mine, 
and the optimal combat employment mode (a minelaying speed of 
20-300 kph; an altitude of from 30 to 100 meters), and the 
expenditure of mines (mines per kilometer). 
  Thus, a combined-arms commander has an adequately broad 
selection of remote minelaying systems to support the combat 
operations of friendly units and formations. 
  COPYRIGHT: Izdatelstvo TsS SOSTO SNG "Patriot", "Voyennyye 
znaniya", 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42409 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> GROUND TROOPS </F>
<H3> <TI>   PZM-2 Regimental Earth-Mover </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0180A Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 9, Sep 1993 
p C3 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0180A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article, under the rubric: "Engineer </F>
Munitions and Equipment Systems": "PZM-2"] 
  [Text] The PZM-2 Regimental Earth-Mover is designed for 
engineer preparation of terrain. 
  It consists of a wheeled prime mover, a bucket-less 
earthmoving tool and a winch. 


Tactical-Technical Specifications 

Dimensions of an excavated trench, 
meters: 

Depth                                   1.2 

Width along the top: 

in thawed earth                         0.9 

in frozen earth                         0.65 

Width along the bottom                  0.65 

Dimensions of excavated foundation 
pits, meters: 

Width                                   2-3.5 

Depth                                   up to 3 

Productive capacity: 

While excavating foundation pits,       100-140 
m[.sup]3[/] per hour 

While excavating trenches, meters per   up to 140 
hour 

Transport speed, kph                    up to 45 

Weight, tonnes                          12.8 

Crew, men                               2 


  COPYRIGHT: VOYENNYY VESTNIK No 9 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42410 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> GROUND TROOPS </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Tochka' Tactical Mobile Missile </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0180B Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 9, Sep 1993 
p C4 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0180B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "`Tochka' Missile System"] </F>
  [Text] The "Tochka" Missile System is designed to destroy 
nuclear weapons, missile launch and artillery firing positions, 
motorized infantry and armored vehicle subunits, airfields, 
command and control facilities, communications hubs and other 
point and small targets that are located in the tactical depth 
of enemy combat troop formations. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Tactical-Technical Specifications                                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Missile launch weight, kg             |2,000                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Warhead weight, kg                    |480                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Firing range, km:                     |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum                               |120                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Minimum                               |15                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum travel speed, kph:            |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|On paved roads                        |60                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|On dirt roads                         |40                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|On unimproved terrain                 |15                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|In amphibious mode                    |10                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range, km                             |650                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Transport speed, kph                  |up to 45                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Crew, men                             |4                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  COPYRIGHT: VOYENNYY VESTNIK No 9 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42411 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> GROUND TROOPS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Assignments Chief on State of Ground Troops' Officer Corps </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0175A Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 9, Sep 1993 
(signed to press 20 Aug 93) pp 15-16 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0175A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Report: "News in the Military Council of the Ground </F>
Troops"] 
  [Text] The Military Council of the Ground Troops discussed 
measures to improve work performance with the officer corps 
under a situation of reduction, and other organizational and 
establishment measures, in the Ground Troops. A report was 
delivered by Lieutnenant-General S. Pshenichnikov, chief of the 
Personnel Training and Assignments Directorate of the Ground 
Troops. We are publishing a report on that address. 
  The degree to which the forces are manned with officers, 
their professional preparation, efficiency and sense of 
responsibility are the determining factors with respect to 
ensuring combat readiness and accomplishing the missions 
involved in training and indoctrinating the personnel. This is 
precisely why the upbringing and placement of military cadres is 
one of the most important areas of work for commanders and 
chiefs at all levels. 
  The changes occurring in the nation and in the armed forces, 
however, have produced major changes in the organization and the 
execution of the work performed with the officer corps and 
greatly exacerbated many personnel problems and service issues. 
More than 58,000 officers were discharged from the Ground Troops 
during the period 1990-1992, around 26,000 (44.9 percent) of 
them junior officers, an absolute majority of whom were below 
the age of 30. A total of 7,603 officers were released into the 
reserve during the first six months of 1993, including 4,082 
(53.7 percent) junior officers. The number of young officers in 
the officer corps of the Ground Troops has dropped 9% 
during 
the past year. Together with the reduction in the number of 
military school graduates entering the troops, this has created 
an adverse situation with respect to manning the positions of 
platoon commanders and other primary officer positions. 
  The seriousness of the problem lies in the fact that there 
are at the present time no realistic possibilities or sources 
for making up the shortage of officers to man the primary 
positions. The capacity of the Ground Troops' schools was 
calculated several years back based on a natural attrition of 
4-5% of the officers, and at the present time it does not 
meet 
the requirements of the troops. 
  There is only one way out of the situation: to organize 
specific, focused work with civilian school graduates who have 
studied in the military departments. Most of them are now 
receiving a noncommitting diploma and, due to the drop in 
production, are having certain difficulties in finding jobs. 
This creates the essential basis for acquiring candidates for 
military service under contract. Success depends primarily upon 
our ability to get in touch with the people. First of all, it is 
necessary to proceed from the premise that as a rule the reserve 
officer signs a contract with the command element of the 
military unit at his place of residence. Upon signing a type-B 
or type-C contract, the officer may not be transferred to a 
different unit or garrison. At the same time, if the officer 
experiences housing difficulties, he can be provided with 
service housing or paid for the cost of renting. 
  When explaining the financial and material payments and 
benefits, it is essential to provide specific facts and figures 
to indicate not only the amount of pay for the position and 
officer's rank but also other advantages: The payment of a 
one-time monetary bonus for the year's results, material 
assistance, payment for travel on city and suburban transport, 
as well as travel to the place of leave and back, the value of 
the food ration and clothing allowance issued, special payment 
for housing and electricity, and so forth. With this approach 
there is a basis for comparison, and in view of the present 
social and economic difficulties this kind of specific work for 
selecting civilian VUZ graduates and signing contracts with them 
to serve in the army is producing good results. 
  Another aspect of the problem, which has to do with the 
service of the young officers, is the ability and the desire of 
commanders to work with them, to demonstrate concern for and 
give attention to their problems and requests. If the commander 
gets to know each newcomer and is able to deal with his needs 
not as a formality but sincerely and paternally, the officer 
will serve conscientiously, with desire and initiative. If not, 
we shall have another candidate for early release into the 
reserve. This is why it is essential to do everything possible 
properly -- to receive and assign the young officers, to help 
them in their service development and with their material and 
personal matters. 
  Only by demonstrating real concern for retaining the army's 
young cadres and working actively to attract personnel for 
service under contract will we succeed in solving the problem of 
manning the primary officer positions. 
  Working with officers assigned to the jurisdiction of 
commanders in connection with the conduct of organizational and 
establishment measures continues to be the most important for 
the command element and personnel agencies. More than 13,000 
officer positions will be cut this year under the plan of 
organizational measures in the Ground Troops. There are already 
around 6,300 supernumerary officers. 
  In view of the fact that the possibilities of the districts 
for placing officers, particularly older ones, have practically 
been exhausted, we must enhance control over the appointment of 
officers to positions and also accelerate the release into the 
reserve of officers who have served 20 or more years and are 
provided with housing. 
  The leading role in this matter must be taken both by 
commanders and personnel agencies and by the officers in their 
work with the personnel. It is their common mission not to evade 
acute questions but to answer them specifically and find 
solutions acceptable to the officers. 
  Focused individual work with those officers who have served 
out the established service terms based on age requires 
particular attention. It is mandatory for everyone to strictly 
observe the release plan and schedules for conducting talks and 
sending officers to the VVK [military medical board], because 
the prompt release of officers into the reserve is the main 
source of vacancies today. On the other hand, observance of the 
laws and formal send-offs of those being released into the 
reserve will demonstrate our concern for them, help them make 
the difficult transition in life and avert various complaints of 
violations of the procedure for release into the reserve. 
  By decision of the Commander-in-Chief of the Ground Troops, 
all officers who have served out the established period at 
remote sites or in regions with difficult conditions and are 
included in the replacement plan will be replaced. No changes 
are permitted in the replacement plans. A directive to that 
effect has been sent to the district personnel agencies. 
  COPYRIGHT: VOYENNYY VESTNIK No 9 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42412 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> GROUND TROOPS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Weapon Training: Problems of Troop Training </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0187A Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 11, Nov 93 
(signed to press 20 Sep 93) pp 69-73 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0187A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel V. Vasilyev, chief of Weapon Training </F>
and Combat Vehicle Driving Department of Ground Troops Main 
Combat Training Directorate, and Colonel V. Shevchuk, deputy 
department chief] 
  [Text] Fire effectiveness often has a greater influence on 
the outcome of a battle than the number and outfitting of 
troops. Under difficult situational conditions fire often is not 
only the swiftest, but also the only means of altering a 
situation in one's favor. In connection with the increased role 
of fire in modern combined-arms battle, the importance of weapon 
training also is growing. Firm skills in functioning at the 
weapons, preempting the enemy in opening fire, and hitting the 
target with the first round are developed in the process of 
weapon training. In addition, commanders master the art of fire 
control in the most diverse situations which form on the 
battlefield. 
  The existing level of weapon training today causes certain 
concern, since many specialists believe it does not meet the 
demands being placed on it. Over the past five years the state 
of personnel training in a number of units and formations has 
not exceeded the "satisfactory" mark, and problems which have 
built up during these years are being solved late and not always 
fully. The shortage of personnel in subunits, the increased 
number of details and fatigue duties, and the performance of 
other measures unusual for the army entailed a disruption of 
scheduled classes and drills, which of course was not slow in 
telling on the quality of the training process as a whole. 
  Meanwhile, there is a way out even from that seemingly very 
complicated situation. In our view, thorough planning which 
takes into account practical reality, constant improvement in 
the quality of weapon training classes, their integration with 
other subjects, wide use of training equipment, and officers' 
high proficiency in weapon and methods consitute that very 
reserve by which it is possible to achieve a good subunit 
training level in short time periods. And this has been proven. 
For example, the subordinates of Captain V. Anufriyev (Volga 
Military District) performed an exercise for an outstanding 
grade in a performance evaluation class. Twelve of the 17 
persons who fired received the highest mark. As noted in the 
critique, the thorough planning of weapon training served as a 
guarantee of quality performance of its tasks in the subunit. At 
the same time, although this planning does have certain 
features, it is not an independent process, but an inalienable 
part of the planning of combat training as a whole. 
  Combat training experience shows that where commanders give 
serious attention to and take a personal part in planning, then 
classes are held in prescribed time periods and with appropriate 
quality. Just what must be done to improve planning quality? 
Inasmuch as inspection results in the troops show that some 
officers experience certain difficulties here, it makes sense to 
take a look at the commander's work in more detail. 
  We should begin with a study of guidance documents. It is 
important to determine the time periods for familiarizing 
subordinates with them and make changes to commander training 
and combat training programs suggested by the leadership. Then 
we must answer a few questions, and specifically, when and to 
what extent to plan weapon drills and exercises in firing all 
kinds of weapons and throwing hand grenades; when to hold fire 
control drills; what questions should be included in the 
schedule of officer and NCO assemblies; when to hold methods 
conferences and meetings to exchange experience of the best 
gunnery specialists; what training films to show trainees; when 
to plan contests for title of best specialist, crew and platoon 
and when to hold classes for improving or confirming a class 
rating; in what time periods to organize training for mastering 
techniques and methods of employing all squad weapons in modern 
battle; what amount of combat training vehicles to allocate for 
performing gunnery exercises; how to distribute ammunition, 
simulation devices and vehicle resources and in what amounts; in 
what time periods to hold demonstration and instructional 
methods classes and on what topic; when to hold performance 
evaluation classes to determine the level of weapon proficiency; 
and what measures to provide for to ensure safety precautions in 
classes. And all these questions should be resolved taking 
account of trainee categories. 
  Additionally the following are determined in the course of 
studying and clarifying initial data: The quality of program 
fulfillment; the status of weapon proficiency of officers and 
subunits, again by categories of servicemen taking into account 
data from the latest performance evaluation classes and the 
end-of-training-period performance evaluation; the training 
facility capabilities; and the tasking function and strength 
level of units and subunits. A graphically formalized decision 
reflecting the measures enumerated and the time periods in which 
they are to be accomplished should be the result of a 
commander's work of planning weapon training. In addition, the 
rehearsal of topics, conduct of weapon drills, and performance 
of gunnery and fire control exercises must be tied in closely in 
content and sequence with tactical training and with time 
periods for teamwork training of subunits. 
  In our view, such a work sequence of a commander at any 
level 
will make it possible to take the fullest account of conditions 
under which classes will be held in subunits and will ensure 
quality performance of training tasks. 
  Combat training programs of motorized rifle and tank 
subunits 
set aside 256 hours per year for the activities enumerated, 
consituting 25 percent of total training time. Of this, up to 10 
percent is allocated for theoretical classes and 90 percent for 
weapon drills and firing. In following a methods sequence and 
systematic conduct of drills and firing, all this will permit 
maintaining and upgrading the level of servicemen's weapon 
proficiency if they are not used to perform any kind of 
activities to the detriment of combat training. 
  It would appear that the contract system of Armed Forces 
manpower acquisition will require an increased number of 
training days and consequently also hours for weapon training. 
Training in combat units will be presented in the form of 
individual and group training. During individual training 
specialists improve personal skills in actions at the weapons 
and in conducting fire, and in group training they participate 
in squad (crew) and platoon teamwork training. Time periods of a 
particular kind of training must be precisely distributed in the 
programs. The following is the basis of individual training in 
the U.S. Army: Weapon training 216 hours (37.5 percent), 
physical training 128 hours, airborne training 108 hours. 
Subunit teamwork training includes performance of integrated 
training missions, where 192 hours are set aside for weapon 
training. 
  It is common knowledge that weapon drills and firing 
exercises are the basic method of achieving high firing results. 
At ranges and in fighting vehicle gunnery training facilities 
the soldiers gain, reinforce and improve knowledge and skills in 
functioning at the weapons; reconnoitering targets; determining 
their nature, importance and distances; giving target 
designations; firing against different targets day and night by 
all methods; and remedying stoppages. 
  Research here and abroad shows that the number and duration 
of drills and firings should be within certain limits. Thus, if 
they are conducted too often and for too long a time, people 
become fatigued and apathy appears as a result. Their further 
continuation is only a vain waste of material resources and 
time. The optimum, practically tested option is three weapon 
drills and firings per week (one of them at night) lasting no 
more than 3 hours. Thus, 12 weapon drills and firings may be 
held in a month, and it is advisable to rehearse the practice 
and test firing exercises day and night at least once. 
  Consequently, the gap between practical classes should not 
exceed three days. But combat training programs provide that the 
cumulative number of weapon drills and firings is at least eight 
per month, with up to a four-day break allowed between them, and 
even longer for subunits working eight training days. 
Preparatory measures (before the beginning of winter and summer 
training periods) interrupt the training process by another one 
and one-half to two months, which of course has a very negative 
effect on preparedness of gun crew members. These measures are 
dictated above all by the existing manpower acquisition system 
and by the scope of administrative-economic functions assigned 
to each military unit. The Ground Troops Main Combat Training 
Directorate is forced simply to determine the minimum 
permissible number of weapon drills and firings to maintain the 
minimum skills necessary in soldiers' performance of functional 
duties. But with the transition to an 18-month term of service 
and to contract service, such an approach to determining the 
scope of servicemen's knowledge, abilities and skills will 
hardly prove acceptable. 
  The procedure and content of personnel training in skillful, 
effective use of authorized weapons and hand grenades in battle 
are spelled out by the Gunnery Course. Motorized rifle and tank 
subunits have been guided for eight years in weapon training by 
the unified "Kurs strelb KS SO, BM i T SV-84" [1984 Ground 
Troops Small Arms, Fighting Vehicle and Tank Gunnery Course]. Of 
course, in these years it has become somewhat outdated and no 
longer fully meets the requirements for training servicemen. 
Recently the Ground Troops Main Combat Training Directorate 
together with academies and military schools began work on a 
Gunnery Course which takes account of changes in manpower 
acquisition and in the procedure for performance of duty, and 
also the conditions under which subunits will have to perform 
actual combat and training missions.[.sup]1[/] 
  Officers from the troops often ask the question: why is so 
little ammunition issued for mastering gunnery? And they compare 
ammunition issue standards for combat training in armies of NATO 
countries and of Russia. We are speaking chiefly only about 
weapon training without taking into account ammunition 
expenditure in exercises. 
  Unfortunately the comparisons in fact are clearly not in our 
favor. According to foreign press data, NATO armies allocate an 
average of 50-60 rounds per tank, 2-3 missiles per ATGM 
launcher, 4 grenades per antitank grenade launcher, and 60 
cartridges per IFV per year. Moreover, the bulk of exercises are 
performed with all types of authorized ammunition in the 
vehicle's basic unit of fire. 
  We cannot allow ourselves anything of the sort because of 
certain economic difficulties, and the training content has no 
exercises using all types of ammunition. There is no question 
that this is a substantial drawback in training tankers. At the 
same time, standards for issuing material resources for combat 
training also are being reduced in NATO armies. While up to 110 
rounds were issued per tank per year back in the 1970's, their 
number now has been cut almost in half and the cost of 
ammunition has grown considerably. Several years ago the cost of 
one artillery round for the standardized 105-mm gun of M60A1, 
Leopard 1, AMX-30 and other tanks was figured at $200-300. One 
round from the Leopard 2 and M1 tanks costs taxpayers 
$1,200-2,000. Therefore a new criterion for evaluating training 
quality--cost-effectiveness--has moved to the foreground abroad. 
And the "range rounds" that are lacking are fully compensated 
for by the most modern simulators. 
  Attaining high results in gunnery training using only costly 
combat and combat-training vehicles is unjustified. Training 
equipment capabilities must be fully used to train specialists 
in the troops and military educational institutions. It permits 
holding classes under field conditions and in training 
classrooms more clearly and understandably, monitoring 
subordinates' actions, identifying mistakes promptly, 
determining the reasons and seeing to their elimination. 
Supplementary simulator drills shorten breaks between practical 
classes and help preserve and improve acquired skills. In 
addition, with a limitation on fuel and lubricant deliveries and 
a reduction in numbers and size of training ranges, the training 
equipment relieves the acuteness of many problems. 
  The troops have several types of training equipment as of 
today (Table 1). Unfortunately, some already are obsolete and 
need replacing with more modern models. Production of such 
articles has been stopped, and a new generation of simulators 
with their principle of operation based on personal computers 
has begun to come into units. But here, too, we observe a 
multitude of unresolved problems, about which, by the way, 
VOYENNYY VESTNIK carried on a detailed discussion last year and 
the year before last. 


Table 1 - Weapon Training Equipment 

Type of Training Equipment   Mod 155     Mod 166     Mod 434     Mod 172     Mod 184     Mod 437,    Mod 219AS   Mod 188     Mod 765     Mod 675     Mod 688   ATGM 
                                                                                         Mod 219                                                               Launcher 

Classroom      Equipment                             KOPT-4      KOPT-3                  KOPT-4 
               Sets for 
               Studying 
               Gunnery 
               Procedures 

Specialized    TNT-2M,       TNT-2M,     TNT-4                   9F61, 8M3   TNT-4,      9F6, 8M1                TNO-7M,     9F619,                  9F640, 
Gunner         9F61, 8M3     9F61, 8M3                                       9F6, 8M                             9F66        9F655                   2U451 
(Commander 
and 
Operator) 
Simulators 

Integrated     TPNT-2M       TPNT-2M     TPNT-4,     TNT-3                   TPNT-4,                             TNO-765P    TNO-675 
Gunner                                   2Kh49,                              2Kh49, 
(Operator)                               2Kh47                               2Kh47 
Simulators 

Integrated                                                                   TKNT-4 
Commander 
and Gunner 
(Operator) 
Simulators 

Field          Fire Result   KPK-234U    KPK-234U    KPK-234U    KPK-234U    KPK-234U    KPK-234U    KPK-324U                KPK-BMP,    KPK-675, 
               Monitor       PU          PU          PU          PU          PU          PU          PU                      PU-BMP      1U23, 
               Sets                                                                                                                      KOP-675 

Specialized    9F61, 8M3     9F61, 8M3                                       9F6, 8M     9F6, 8M1                9F66        9F619                   9F640, 
Gunner                                                                                                                                               2U451 
(Operator) 
Simulators 

Integrated     TOPT-B                                TOPT-3                  VTN-4,                              TOP-7       TOP-675 
Commander                                                                    2Kh29-1, 
and Gunner                                                                   2Kh29 
(Operator) 
Simulators 

Note. Boldface indicates training equipment removed from production. 


  On the whole, however, the concept of developing and 
building 
a training equipment system for weapon training has changed 
substantially (Table 2). Only three types remain from the past 
diversity of simulators: Training equipment intended for basic 
training of gun crew members (mock fighting compartments of 
simulated vehicles with an automated training system); classroom 
simulators for improving skills in functioning at the weapons 
and in firing (TKNT-4U and TKNO-9 integrated tank and IFV 
commander and gunner simulators); and field simulators (Geofil, 
Konotop, Zaplatka) for performing Gunnery Course exercises. 


Table 2 - Advanced Weapon Training Equipment 

              Type           Mod 184        Mod 188     Mod 478    Mod 688      Small 
              Training                                                          Arms 
              Equipment 

Classroom     Specialized    UBO-184 with               UBO-478    UBO-688 
              Commander      ASOK [not                  with       with ASOK 
              and Gunner     further                    ASOK 
              Simulators     expanded, 
              (for basic     possibly 
              training)      commander's 
                             automated 
                             training 
                             system] 

Integrated    TKNT-3B        TNKT-188       TNKT-4U     TKNO-9     Inhibitor 
Commander 
and Gunner 
Simulators 
(for 
improving 
skills) 

Field         Integrated     Geofil-S       Geofil-S    Konotop    Zaplatka 
              Commander      (2Kh58         (2Kh67      (2Kh62 
              and Gunner     [2X58])        [2X67])     [2X62]) 
              Simulators 
              (for 
              performing 
              Gunnery 
              Course 
              exercises) 


  One of the most important factors in improving weapon 
proficiency is a good physical facility. Range equipment of 
troop firing ranges, moving-target gunnery ranges, and fighting 
vehicle gunnery training facilities support only individual 
training. This does not allow creating a varied target 
situation, let alone registering exercise parameters and trainee 
actions. For example, there are no laterally moving targets for 
firing a gun with a subcaliber tube. There also are none for 
firing the authorized round. Moving targets displace only at 
identical speed. It is possible to register hits only on four 
targets, and the time for firing each round is not noted. Group 
training of crew, squad and platoon is limited for these reasons 
and is insufficiently effective. During a training period there 
is one squad and platoon field firing in motorized rifle 
subunits and only a platoon field firing in tank companies. 
  Such training practice does not produce the desired results 
in live-fire exercises because there is no system for group 
training in conducting fire as crews, squads and platoons in 
weapon training classes. On the other hand, in the majority of 
cases moving-target gunnery ranges, fighting vehicle gunnery 
training facilities and troop firing ranges are set up on 
unsuitable land, because of which it is impossible to take full 
advantage of all combat qualities of new models of weapons and 
equipment when they become operational. 
  Another problem arises here--upkeep and servicing of 
training 
facility installations. For example, soldiers must be diverted 
on the eve of classes to clear moving-target roads and restore 
targets and equipment. But the fact is, we have begun shifting 
to contract service. It is apropos to ask who will perform the 
preparatory work. The question of tables of organization and 
technical outfitting of ranges, training fields and simulator 
complexes continues to be very problematical. It will become 
essentially impossible to use so-called non-TOE specialists from 
combat units to service training equipment. It is fully obvious 
that sooner or later it will be necessary to resolve this 
long-standing problem. 
  It is no secret that whatever the level of officers' weapon 
proficiency, that is the quality of the personnel's weapon 
training. Therefore special attention must constantly be devoted 
to the training of officers, especially platoon and company 
commanders, for only a well trained commander is capable of 
really teaching his subordinates something. 
  It must be admitted that here, too, not everything is well. 
Despite a sufficient amount of allocated ammunition, 
preparedness of platoon and company level officers leaves much 
to be desired. Evidently considering the experience gained in 
schools to be sufficient, some scorn preparatory exercises and, 
taking advantage of the connivance of senior officers, also 
often avoid performing practice and even test firings. And 
superiors in turn check officers' preparedness only occasionally 
and do not analyze their state of training. As a result, concern 
for professional suitability becomes the lot of the officers 
themselves. 
  Requirements of prewar courses, where officer weapon 
training 
was placed at the proper level, are instructive in this respect. 
In particular, at that time it was prescribed that command 
personnel (up to and including the regimental commander) 
personally master weapons in the subunit and unit inventory. 
Each year all command personnel were graded in firing any model 
of small arm. 
  The problem of officer professionalism probably lies deeper. 
We believe that military school programs do not provide 
necessary skills for graduates to train subordinates. The fact 
is, the basis of training always was considered to be the 
teacher's graphic example in performing a particular procedure, 
and the system of commanders' methods training that is in effect 
is aimed at upgrading their skills. But the question arises: 
What is there to upgrade if they do not have them? 
  One would like to believe that the questions raised and 
suggestions expressed will be of certain interest to the 
readers, although, of course, they are not indisputable. 
Therefore we invite officers to express their opinions on the 
topic broached. Many problems have piled up and we all have to 
solve them. 
Footnotes 
  1. Dear readers! Send your suggestions and wishes for 
improving the Gunnery Course to the following address: 103160, 
Moscow, K-160, Ground Troops Main Combat Training Directorate. 
  COPYRIGHT: VOYENNYY VESTNIK No 11 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42413 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> AIR, AIR DEFENSE FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kornukov Briefs Moscow Air Defense Status </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  944K0631A Moscow ARGUMENTY I FAKTY in Russian No 4, Jan 94 p 
7 </F>

<F P=103> 944K0631A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ARGUMENTY I FAKTY </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Colonel-General Anatoliy Kornukov, commander </F>
of the Moscow Air Defense District, by Valeriy Buldakov; place 
and date not given: "The Duty of the Moscow Air Defense 
District. R15 Billion for Defense Enterprises: Rust Will Fly No 
More"] 
  [Text] Today every child knows that there are certain 
protective rings around Moscow, but what are these rings? M. 
Rust's flight along the route FRG-Red Square is well remembered. 
There were no rings protecting the city. What kind of defense 
system is this? Our correspondent discusses this with the 
commander of the Moscow Air Defense District, Colonel-General 
Anatoliy Kornukov. 
  [Kornukov] Rings around the capital--this is too simplistic 
an idea of the air defense structure. Troops of the Moscow Air 
Defense District are deployed over a territory of 24 oblasts of 
Russia and they monitor the air space over an area of 1.3 
million square kilometers. Large and small units of the district 
protect 141 facilities, including 59 military ones, 14--with 
radiation and nuclear hazards, 17--of high level state 
administration, and 11 large cities and industrial centers. 
  As for the immediate defense of Moscow, I would not call 
this 
system rings. It is simply that at the beginning of the Cold 
War, when missiles for delivering nuclear weapons were created 
in the West, we began to deploy our air defense missile units 
around the city in two echelons. Incidentally, L. Beria was the 
first to work on the new defense system. At that time we began 
to arm ourselves with S-25 air defense missile systems. For 
those times this was a high class (the technical equipment 
served us for 30 years after that). Regiments equipped with 
these systems were deployed in such a way that Moscow was 
practically invulnerable. 
  The defense included one external ring and one internal one. 
The former was located 100-120 kilometers from Moscow, and the 
latter--50-70 kilometers. That is the way it was after that as 
well. 
  [Buldakov] But what changes have taken place? 
  [Kornukov] By the end of the eighties a decision was made to 
create a new system. Now we can wage a controlled air defense 
missile battle with all flight equipment attacking both from the 
air and from space. Therefore the air defense system itself will 
soon be called an air-space system. The basis of this system is 
the S-300 air defense missile complex with various 
modifications. We have practically finished rearming ourselves. 
Field trials were held in 1993: More than 100 aircraft were 
"launched" over Moscow and all of them entered the capital zone 
at the same time. The air defense battle lasted a couple of 
minutes, and all the targets were conventionally fired on and 
destroyed. The new air defense missile complex can engage in 
combat with air attack equipment created under the Stealth 
program, that is, with the so-called "Stealth aircraft," for 
example, the familiar F-117 fighter-bombers. Using Moscow's air 
defense defense system it is possible to fire on 500 aircraft of 
various classes at the same time and destroy them simultaneously 
with one volley. These weapons are every bit as good, and in 
terms of many parameters (for example, the target location 
system) they surpass the renowned American Patriot complex, 
which proved itself so well in Desert Storm operations. 
  [Buldakov] Are there still systems in the world for defense 
of large metropolitan areas like the Moscow system? 
  [Kornukov] Like that--no. That is the only system of its 
kind. Without false modesty, it is the pride of our scientists. 
So many billions were invested in it...but it was worth it. One 
can say that nothing of the kind has been created around St. 
Petersburg. As for other large cities of Russia and also 
important facilities, they are protected in the overall air 
defense defense system. It is somewhat different from, say, the 
American one. The United States regards the entire territory of 
its country as an especially important object. Washington, for 
example, has no special protection systems. The states place 
their hopes in the Air Force and Navy in remote regions. Russia 
has a territory almost three times as large as that of the 
United States and we do not have the forces or money to arrange 
defense this way... 
  [Buldakov] What is the main thing state money is spent on in 
your department? 
  [Kornukov] In keeping with the new military doctrine, we are 
relying not on the quantity but on the quality of new military 
equipment. For example, we are replacing the obsolete MiG-23, 
SU-15, and MiG-25 aircraft which cannot successfully resist 
cruise missiles. And the SU-27 and MiG-31 are quite excellent at 
this. At the present time 95 percent of the air defense missile 
forces are equipped with various modifications of the S-300 arms 
system. 
  New equipment requires colossal expenditures. In order to 
guarantee to down one cruise missile it is necessary to launch 
at least two to four of our own from the S-300 complex. All this 
plus the work of the people amounts to approximately R320 
million. One hour of flight of a modern fighter, waging air 
combat and destroying three or four targets, costs more than R7 
million. In 1993, 40 percent of the missile units went through 
training with weapons fire and 70 percent of the fighter 
aircraft regiments went through the testing ground. The marks 
were high: Of the 62 targets on the testing ground, 59 were 
destroyed. So I can say with good reason that the skies over 
Moscow are protected. 
  [Buldakov] From whom? Are the Western countries still 
considered to be our main potential enemies? How do the Russian 
air defense defense troops feel about their colleagues from the 
former Union republics? 
  [Kornukov] As for the West, not all of the missiles that 
were 
aimed at Moscow have been aimed somewhere else. Well, we are 
working successfully with air defense defense forces, for 
example, of Ukraine and Belarus: We notify one another about 
aircraft that are coming from our territories. We are very 
sensitive to aircraft that carelessly come without notification. 
The Baltic republics are frequently guilty of this. Sometimes we 
force the aircraft to return to the airfield from which it took 
off. But we hope that we will never use weapons against our 
former friends in the Union. It is impossible to allow a 
free-for-all in the sky. We must agree on "corridors." Soon, 
when the Western Group of Forces takes its fighters up, we will 
especially need these corridors. 
  [Buldakov] And, finally, a question inevitably arises as 
soon 
as the topic comes around to modern weapons. How safe are they 
from accidents? Are we sure some untrained soldier will not 
press the wrong button? 
  [Kornukov] We have never placed ignoramuses in front of the 
radar screen or behind the wheel of those immense missile 
transporters. Only trained officers are seated at the "buttons." 
At the airfields the equipment is again serviced by officers and 
warrant officers. Basically we do not have enough enlisted men 
and noncommissioned officers. And in the last fall-winter callup 
the plan was fulfilled by only 8 percent. But I think that in 
two or three years we will eliminate such things as having 
majors stand guard or be in a detachment for loading coal. There 
are 2,400 military servicemen on duty in the air defense defense 
system 24 hours a day. More than 10,000 people are serving under 
contract (more than half of them are women). There are officer 
teams capable of waging combat without enlisted men and 
noncommissioned officers. The wages of a fighter pilot (captain, 
major) are R150,000-160,000 plus 30 percent of the salary for 
special duty. And food is free. Judge for yourself how much that 
is when the salary of our district commander when translated 
into dollars is barely half as much as that of a sergeant in the 
U.S. Air Force. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42414 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> AIR, AIR DEFENSE FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Military Airfields Falling Into Disrepair </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  PM0302165594 Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 29 Jan 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> PM0302165594 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Colonel Aleksandr Andryushkov article under "Topical </F>
Subject" rubric: "Runway"] 
  [Text] The situation now developing in the Air Force is 
such that, even given combat-ready aircrew and a fleet of 
serviceable aircraft, they might never get into the sky. 
  There is one reason: Every day airfields are becoming 
increasingly unfit for use. Moreover, the entire range of 
airfield administration and support services needs emergency aid. 
  A modern airfield, for fighter aircraft for example, 
consists 
of tens of hectares of artificial surfaces -- the runway, 
taxiways, and flight line parking spaces. In addition, it has 
around 100 various facilities and many kilometers of 
special-purpose supply lines, pipe, and ducts above and below 
ground. 
  "Russia's airfield network," Major General Vladimir 
Yermakov, 
deputy chief of the Air Force Main Engineering Directorate, 
says, "is part of the country's overall infrastructure." The 
Union's disintegration also led to the network's disintegration, 
and has faced us with a number of very complex problems 
associated with the combat readiness of all Armed Forces 
branches and the state's defense capability as a whole. Before 
this our attention was concentrated on the western direction, 
where powerful air combat forces were stationed. They had 
high-quality, well-equipped airfields with concrete surfaces, 
from which all types of heavy bomber could operate. 
  Many aviation units have now been withdrawn to Russia with 
their combat equipment. But an airfield is not an aircraft -- 
you cannot lift it into the air in order to rebase it in the 
Moscow region or beyond the Urals. Now the well-equipped 
airfields belong to Ukraine, Belarus, and the Baltic countries. 
After the "carve-up" Russia was left with 100 
artificial-surface airfields which are now forming the basic 
foundation of the Russian Air Force, Air Defense Forces 
aviation, and other branches of the Armed Forces. Aircraft use 
of many of these has doubled or tripled in the last few years. 
Russia is in no position to construct new ones. A modern 
airfield complex costs in the region of 250-300 billion rubles 
[R]. Too expensive an amusement for the country's unstable 
economy. 
  "We have been forced," Vladimir Nikolayevich says, "to adapt 
existing airfields for heavy aircraft, but most airfields are 
not suitable for this. As a result of the very first flights 
runway and taxiway surfaces were put out of action." 
<H5>  Our Information </H5>
  Around 70 percent of Russia's airfields are constructed 
of slabs like SAS [PAG] (smooth airfield slab). The "life" of 
such a slab is 25 years. When used by modern aircraft the 
slab's service life is reduced to 10-12 years. Previously one 
smooth airfield slab cost R175. The cost is still 175,000. The 
Air Force has no money, and this year a request was made for 
only 5.8 batches of slabs -- and 2.9 were received. 
  What could this situation lead to? To the impossibility of 
carrying out routine airfield maintenance according to the 
schedule: One airfield is repaired and the rest are in 
operation. But if repairs are not carried out airfields will go 
out of action en masse. Repairing several airfields in a large 
strategic formation all at one time would mean failing to ensure 
the formation's combat readiness. 
  But even the availability of slabs does not solve airfields' 
problems. Smooth airfield slabs have their weak spot -- the 
joints. A standard airfield runway has around 100 km of such 
joints. In order to ensure flight safety, to prevent water from 
finding its way beneath the pavement, and to prevent foreign 
bodies from getting into aircraft engines, the joints are filled 
with special bitumen mastic, which heavy aircraft cause to be 
extruded during takeoff and landing. 
  Thus, Air Force personnel are not in a position to construct 
new airfields with solid reinforced concrete surfaces. To 
reconstruct existing airfields would also involve an immense 
amount of work. Thus, maybe the solution is to use airfields 
competently and carefully look after them using equipment and 
facilities? 
  "Do not press a sore point," Gen. Yermakov says. "The 
complex task of operational and routine maintenance of airfields 
is the duty of specialists in airfield operations subunits." 
They monitor the condition of runway, taxiway, and flight line 
parking space surfaces. It is their job to mark them, clear 
snow and ice-glaze from them, and repair them. These subunits 
have special airfield operations equipment at their disposal. 
In the Air Force as a whole slightly over 60 percent of units 
are equipped with it. For a long time now we have not been 
writing off vacuum cleaning vehicles ("dustbusters"), heating 
vehicles, rotary screw snowplows, and combination washing and 
watering vehicles which have exceeded their service life. We 
cannibalize one vehicle out of two or three. 
  Deliveries from industry of spare parts and new vehicles 
have 
almost stopped. During the entire year the Air Force did not 
receive a single combination washing and watering or heating 
vehicle. But these are the main workhorses on an airfield, 
especially in winter. Day and night they crawl around it, 
getting it in order. Because of the equipment shortage the Air 
Force, as the general client for such equipent, has not 
delivered a single item for Air Defense aviation, the Strategic 
Rocket Forces, or the Navy. 
  So it turns out that the current winter is a survival test 
for airfield personnel. Almost all Russian airfields are 
located in severe climatic conditions. Airfield operations 
equipment must therefore be delivered to units under state order 
conditions. 
  Unfortunately, whatever problem you take its solution is 
held 
up by finance. Air Force specialists have proposals on methods 
of obtaining funds. One of them is to lease out unused airfield 
facilities and charge other departments for using military 
airfields and aircraft parking spaces. Nobody is banning the 
idea, but nobody is supporting it either. This is at a time 
when military aircrew at other people's airfields are being 
robbed blind without compunction. Our civilian colleagues have 
gotten this mechanism all worked out and it is yielding profit, 
which enables them to maintain the airfield administration and 
support services in working condition. 
  The situation regarding the Russia's airfield administration 
and support services deteriorates every year. But the Air Force 
command does not sit idly waiting for manna from heaven. 
<H5>  Our Information </H5>
  In September 1992 the Air Force High Command devised a 
plan to improve the Air Force's basing and rear services system, 
bearing in mind the concept for developing them until 2000. It 
was considered by the Russian Federation Defense Ministry and 
approved on 10 July 1993. The Air Force Commander-in-Chief and 
the high commands of other branches of the Armed Forces which 
have aviation were instructed to implement a plan to reconstruct 
and equip the Russian airfield network. Through the efforts of 
Air Force airfield engineer battalions 564,000 square meters of 
artificial surfaces have already been laid (around 50 percent of 
them at airfields being used for troop withdrawal), and 
selective repairs to runways, taxiways, and flight line parking 
spaces have been carried out. 
  In short, by saving every ruble military aviation personnel 
are trying to maintain their airfield administration and support 
services at a state of combat readiness. But the Air Force 
cannot solve this problem without support at the state level. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42415 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> NAVAL FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Automatic 76.2 mm AK-176 Gun Turret </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0171A Moscow VOYENNYYE ZNANIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 93 p 
14 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0171A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYYE ZNANIYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by engineer A. Shirokorad: "Automatic Ship </F>
Mounts"] 
  [Excerpt] Powerful rapid-fire weapons were required to arm 
small ships at the end of the 1960's. A decision was made to 
develop light 57-mm and 76.2-mm single-gun mounts. The designs 
of these automatic mounts were developed at the KB [design 
bureau] of a machine building plant (since 1970 -- "Burevestnik" 
TsNII [Central Scientific Research Institute) and they also 
manufactured experimental models of automatic mounts there. The 
57-mm mount received the model number A-220 and the 76-mm mount 
received the model number A-221. 
  Ship tests of the A-221 were conducted from 23 through 30 
November 1979 in the area of Baltiysk Naval Base on an R-5 
design 1241-1 missile boat. Based upon their results, the 
automatic mount was recommended for acceptance into the 
inventory which occurred on 22 June 1979. The A-221 automatic 
mount received the designation "AK-176". As for the A-220 57-mm 
automatic mount, it successfully underwent ship tests in 
1977-1978 on a design 205PE boat but only that design was 
accepted into the inventory. 
  The barrel of the AK-176 was designed under the ballistics 
of 
the AK-726. The automatic mount's operating principles and the 
barrel's internal mechanism are primarily the same. In contrast 
to the AK-726, continuous external cooling of the barrel by 
passing seawater between the barrel jacket and monobloc has been 
introduced. Feeding is continuous from two sides and without 
cartridge holders. The basic load (152 projectiles) is located 
vertically on lower platform transporters. Loading time of the 
152 projectiles by a crew of four men totals six minutes. 
  Shells are fed from two sides and therefore all of the feed 
system's mechanisms are divided into two identical groups -- 
right and left. They are linked into a single kinematic chain 
and have a drive from a common electric motor. The system itself 
consists a deck upon which are located two horizontal 
transporters (left and right) with cartridge holders for 76 
shells each, two chain elevators with receivers and two 
pendulums with drives. From the transporters, piston rods feed 
the shells into the vertical elevators. The pendulum transfers 
the cartridge from the elevators into the receiver of the 
tipping part. 
  Guidance of the automatic gun is carried out: automatically 
-- using the servo drive from the "Vympel-221" Radar; 
semiautomatically -- from the "Kondensor-221" gunsight; and, by 
manual drive. Two men are in the turret during firing: The 
automatic gun chief and the artillery observer who carries out 
semiautomatic laying in the event the PUS [Fire Control 
Direction] malfunctions. A bulkhead separates the local command 
post from the remaining portion of the automatic gun. 
  At the present time, 76 mm automatic guns have found 
widespread use in the majority of the world's navies. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Tactical-Technical Specifications of USSR's AK-176 Shipborne Automatic Gun   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Year accepted into the inventory      |1979                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of barrels                     |1                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Caliber, mm                           |76.2                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Barrel length, calibers               |59                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Elevation angle, degrees              |-10, +80                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Traverse angle, degrees               |+/- 168                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Elevation speed, degrees per second   |30                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Traverse speed, degrees per second    |35                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of the tipping parts, kg       |2,796                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of the automatic gun without t-|approximately 10,100                  | 
|he crew and basic load, kg            |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Rate of fire, rounds per minute       |120-130                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Length of continuous burst            |up to 70                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Basic load ready for firing, units    |152                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Automatic gun crew, men               |2                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Projectile weight, kg                 |5.9                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Muzzle velocity, meters per second    |980                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Firing range, km                      |15.7                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Ceiling, km                           |13.0                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Note: The AK-176 has two types of projectiles -- antiaircraft and high-explo-| 
|sive-fragmentation. They are distinguished only by their fuzes: The antiairc-| 
|raft projectile has a radar fuze and the high-explosive-fragmentation projec-| 
|tile has a contact percussion fuze.                                          | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  COPYRIGHT: Izdatelstvo TsS SOSTO SNG "Patriot", "Voyennyye 
znaniya", 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42416 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> NAVAL FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Baltiysk Continues Work on Cruiser `Petr Velikiy' </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0169B Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 19 Jan 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0169B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by the Russian Federation Ministry of Defense </F>
Information and Press Directorate: "Construction of a New 
Cruiser"] 
  [Text] Construction of the Heavy Missile Cruiser "Petr 
Velikiy" is continuing at the Baltiysk Plant in St. Petersburg 
despite serious financing problems (it was erroneously called a 
heavy aircraft-carrying cruiser in some articles). Construction 
of the cruiser is one of the priorities of the Russian 
Federation Ministry of Defense shipbuilding program and they 
plan to complete it at the end of this year. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42417 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> REAR SERVICES, SUPPORT ISSUES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Civil Defense/Education Order on Student Training </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0167B Moscow VOYENNYYE ZNANIYA in Russian No 9, Sep 93 
(Signed to press 27 Jul 93) pp 20-21 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0167B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYYE ZNANIYA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Order: "On the Organization of Training of Students in the </F>
`Safety Principles' Course in Educational Institutions"] 
  [Text] Official Department 
<H3>  Ministry of Education of the Russian Federation, State 
Committee of the Russian Federation for Civil Defense, 
Emergencies, and Mopping Up in the Aftermath of Natural Disasters </H3>
  ORDER dated 3-16-93, Moscow, No 66/85 
  On the Organization of Training of Students in the 
"Safety Principles" Course in Educational Institutions 
  The decree of the Government of the Russian Federation of 18 
April 1992 No 261 "On the Creation of a Russian System of 
Prevention of and Operations in Emergencies" defined a uniform 
state policy with respect to prevention of emergencies and 
mopping up in the aftermath of emergency situations, and 
protection of peoples' lives and health, of material and 
cultural values, and of the environment should they occur in 
peacetime or in war. 
  To implement this decree, WE ORDER: 
  1. The organs of control of education of the republics in 
the 
Russian Federation, krays, autonomous formations, and the cities 
of Moscow and St. Petersburg to take additional measures to 
organize study of the "safety principles" (OBZh) course in 
general educational institutions and institutions of primary and 
secondary professional education, which was introduced by the 
Order of the Ministry of Education of the USSR No 160 dated 27 
May 1991. 
  2. The chiefs of the Main Directorates for the Development 
of 
General Secondary Education (M.R. Leontyev), for Pedagogical 
Education (M.N. Kostikov), and for Professional Education (A.V. 
Yelistratov), the chief of the Economic Planning Directorate 
(Z.I. Filomonova), the chief of the Special Department of the 
Russian Ministry of Education (M.P. Frolov) and the chief of the 
Directorate for Civil Defense, GKChS [Main Committee for 
Emergency Situations] of Russia (Yu.N. Klimenko): 
  2.1. Before 1 December 1993, must organize development of 
programs for the OBZh program for different types of educational 
institutions, providing for inclusion of the necessary minimum 
educational standard and teaching aids. 
  2.2. Must approve pay-rates and qualifications, in 
coordination with the Ministry of Labor of the Russian 
Federation, for the position of "safety principles" 
teacher/organizer of educational institutions. 
  2.3. Before 1 September 1993, must devise sample teaching 
plans and programs for training and retraining of specialists in 
the OBZh course in higher pedagogical educational institutions 
and teacher-improvement institutes (for enhancing the 
qualifications of education workers). 
  3. That classes in the OBZh course in general educational 
institutions (from grade 2 to grade 11) and in institutions of 
primary and secondary professional education be assigned to the 
"safety principles" teacher/organizer. 
  4. That for the "safety principles" teacher/organizers: 
  4.1. Pay for the position is to be paid for 36 hours of work 
per week with allowance for teaching work directly in the OBZh 
course in the amount of 9 hours per week (360 hours per year). 
  When the volume of teaching work in the OBZh course is less 
than 5 hours per week (180 hours per year), payment is to be 
made in the amount of one half the duty pay, with a work week 
duration of 18 hours. 
  4.2. For teaching work in the OBZh course of more than 9 
hours per week (360 hours per year), and also for teaching work 
in other subjects, supplemental pay is to be provided in 
accordance with the procedures and terms established for 
teachers and instructors. 
  4.3. Vacation is granted in the amount of 48 working days. 
  4.4. Work time in specialty (including for payment of hours 
of teaching work in the OBZh course of more than the established 
norm, and payment of teachers and instructors recruited to teach 
the OBZh course) includes, besides the work in this position, 
the time of work (service) corresponding to the profile of the 
subject taught. 
  5. To the rectors of pedagogical universities 
(institutions), 
as of 1 Sep 1993, that they continue to train OBZh teachers in 
military departments. 
  6. To the directors of institutes for improvement of 
teachers, and to the rectors of institutes for skill enhancement 
of education workers, starting in the 1993/94 academic year, 
that they organize skill-enhancement and retraining of 
specialists of the OBZh course. 
  7. To civil defense staffs, that they provide methodological 
and practical assistance to educational institutions to 
implement training in the OBZh course, and also in the 
preparation and retraining of "safety principles" 
teacher/organizers. That they send the teachers of civil defense 
courses and specialists to educational institutions so that they 
may train students of lower and higher levels in the most 
complex topics demanding special knowledge, and provide them 
with practical and methodological assistance. 
  8. To the civil defense staffs, that they implement the 
training of "safety principles" teacher/organizers, as well as 
recruited teachers and other pedagogical workers for teaching 
OBZh in civil defense courses, as a rule during holidays at 
two-week assemblies. To the leaders of educational institutions, 
that they ensure that the "safety principles" teacher/organizers 
and teachers conducting classes in the OBZh course be sent to 
the designated assemblies. 
  9. Oversight of implementation of this order is the task of 
the Assistant Minister of Education of Russia, A.G. Asmolov, and 
the Assistant Chairman of the GKChS of Russia, N.I. Burdakov. 
  Minister of Education of the Russian Federation Ye.V. 
Tkachenko 
  Chairman of the State Committee of the Russian Federation 
for Civil Defense, Emergencies, and Mopping Up After Natural 
Disasters, S.K. Shoygu 
<H3>  "SAFETY PRINCIPLES" Teacher/organizer (at educational 
institutions) grades 8-14: </H3>
  Duties of Position. Train and educate students 
with allowance for the specifics of the "safety principles" 
course, promote the formation of general culture of the 
personality. Use various forms, techniques, methods and means of 
training. Organize, plan, and conduct training (including 
elective and undetermined) classes in the course in the amount 
of 9 hours per week (360 hours per year). Participate in 
developing educational programs, and in the planning of measures 
of the institute for protection of the labor, life and health of 
students. Ensure the implementation of the educational program, 
bear responsibility for its complete implementation in 
accordance with the training plan and the schedule of the 
educational process. Ensure that the students comply with 
discipline. Interact with interested institutions and 
organizations. Jointly with public health institutions, organize 
medical examinations for youths of pre-draft and draft age. 
Provide assistance in the selection of youths for entry into 
military educational institutions. Keep a record of 
military-obligated personnel. Conduct practical classes and 
drills in actions to be taken by students in emergencies. Assure 
the preservation of property, and the creation and improvement 
of educational facilities in the "safety principles" course and 
compliance of the students with the rules of safety during 
classes. When there is no position of chief of staff of civil 
defense in the table of organization of the educational 
institution, devise a plan of civil defense (GO) of the 
installation, organize civil defense classes with workers, 
prepare and conduct installation civil defense measures, devise 
measures to improve the functional stability of the educational 
institution should various emergency situations occur, and 
assure the readiness of protective structures, individual 
protective gear, and civil defense formations in extreme 
situations. Systematically raise his professional 
qualifications. Communicate with parents or persons replacing 
them. Meet the requirements for safety procedures and industrial 
sanitation in the operation of training equipment. Be 
responsible for the lives and health of students during the 
educational process. 
  Must Know: The laws of the Russian Federation "On 
Education," "On Defense," "On Civil Defense," and other 
normative documents on training and education measures, with 
allowance for the specifics of the "safety principles" course; 
the principles of pedagogy and psychology; the theory and 
methods of "safety principles"; the rules for protection of life 
and health of students; the principles of labor legislation and 
rules of labor protection; organizational structures of the 
warning system and actions in emergencies; the basic principles 
and methods of protection of the population in natural and 
ecological disasters, major industrial accidents and 
catastrophes, and also protection against modern weapons; 
techniques for provision of first pre-physician aid. 
  Required Qualifications By Pay Grade: 
  Grade 8. Secondary professional education, special 
training in civil defense or secondary military education 
without requirements for work experience. 
  Grade 9. Higher professional education and special 
civil defense training or higher military education without 
requirements for work experience, or secondary professional 
education and special civil defense training or secondary 
military education and work (service) experience in specialty of 
2 to 5 years. 
  Grade 10. Higher professional education and 
special civil defense training or higher military education and 
work (service) experience in specialty of 2 to 5 years, or 
secondary military education and work (service) experience in 
specialty of more than 5 years. 
  Grade 11. Higher professional education and 
special civil defense training, or higher military education and 
work (service) experience in specialty of more than 5 years. 
  Grade 12.("Safety Principles" teacher/organizer, 
category II) Must meet the general requirements for the "safety 
principles" teacher/organizer; assure stable positive results in 
the training and educational process; actively participate in 
the work of creative groups and methods associations; know how 
to independently develop methods for teaching the subject, and 
to use progressive methods of teaching the subject in his work, 
and also have: 
  - Higher professional education and special training in 
civil 
defense or higher military education and work experience in the 
position of "safety-principles" teacher/organizer of no less 
than 2 years. 
  Grade 13. ("Safety Principles" teacher/organizer 
category I) Must meet the general requirements for the "safety 
principles" teacher/organizer category II. Must know the methods 
of analysis of training-methods work in the subject. Must draw 
up and implement individual educational programs. Must know how 
to direct the work of creative groups or methods associations in 
the subject. Must also have: 
  - Higher professional education and special civil defense 
training or higher military education and work experience in the 
position of "safety-principles" teacher/organizer of no less 
than 4 years. 
  Grade 14. ("Safety Principles" teacher/organizer 
of highest category) Must meet the general requirements for 
"safety principles" teacher/organizer category 1; devise new 
training programs, pedagogical techniques and methods of 
teaching the subject; conduct work to test these; have the 
skills of experimental work. Must also have: 
  - Higher professional education and special civil defense 
training (or higher military education) and work experience in 
the position of "safety principles" teacher/organizer of no less 
than 6 years. 
  COPYRIGHT: Izdatelstvo TsS SOSTO SNG "Patriot", "Voyennyye 
Znaniye", 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42418 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> REAR SERVICES, SUPPORT ISSUES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Conference Considers Future of CBR Service </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0186A Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 11, Nov 93 
(signed to press 20 Sep 93) pp 31-33 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0186A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by Col V. Mayatskiy: "Military Chemistry: The </F>
Reality and the Future (Report on Special Operational 
Assembly)"] 
  [Text] In accordance with the operational and combat 
training plan for the Ground Troops a special operational 
assembly was held for supervisory personnel of the CBR troops 
and military educational institutions at the Scientific Research 
and Testing Institute in Shikhany from 14 to 17 June of this 
year. This year it dealt mainly with development of the 
Radiation, Chemical and Biological Service and troops of the 
Russian armed forces: The concept for their development, their 
missions in peace time and time of war, their combat training, 
their equipment and so forth. 
  According to plan, the first two days were designated for a 
scientific military conference on "Problems of Radiation, 
Chemical and Biological Protection, and its Technical Support." 
Colonel-General S. Petrov, chief of CBR Troops, delivered the 
introduction and a report. Describing the difficulty of the 
transitional period and its influence upon the shaping of a new 
Russian army, he noted that in addition to all else, somewhat 
different factors are still the determining ones for the CBR 
service and troops. 
  On the one hand, despite the signing of a number of 
significant international agreements pertaining to weapons of 
mass destruction, they continue to pose a potential threat to 
military personnel and the civilian population in case of an 
armed conflict involving their employment. Furthermore, there is 
already information on modern scientific research which does not 
fall within the framework of existing types of OMP [weapons of 
mass destruction]. These are primarily binary systems with other 
than traditional action, chemicals which, although not covered 
by the Convention Banning the Development, Production and 
Employment of Chemical Weapons, and on Their Destruction, put 
military equipment and the like out of action. 
  On the other hand, there is a growing likelihood of 
accidents 
involving highly active toxic and radioactive substances. 
Incidents of recent years at industrial enterprises and in 
transport have convincingly demonstrated that the technogenic 
aspect poses no less a danger than the effects of nuclear and 
chemical attacks. 
  There is yet a third circumstance of considerable 
importance. 
While the two superpowers, the USSR and the USA, were previously 
drawn into the arms race, a totally opposite process has now 
begun. Chemical disarmament, that is, the salvaging of our 
stockpiles of toxic substances which were to have been delivered 
to the CBR troops, will cost Russia 1.5 trillion dollars at 
current prices. 
  The requirements of the CBR troops were then defined. First 
of all, they have a dual purpose enabling them to carry out 
missions equally effectively in peace time and in time of war. 
Their weapons and technical equipment must be all-purpose and 
highly productive. In the future the T/O of the units and 
subunits will be determined precisely by the capabilities of the 
equipment. The command and control system for the CBR troops 
will also undergo considerable change, since one is 
inconceivable at the present stage without being integrated into 
the overall system of command and control of the forces our 
specialists are supporting. Finally, the CBR troops cannot 
survive without the development of their own infrastructure. 
  Many generals and other officers presented co-reports. The 
most diverse issues were raised. I shall mention a few of them: 
The participation of CBR troops in the destruction of chemical 
weapons and the cleansing of the environment, the specific 
features of the emotional and psychological conditioning of the 
personnel in the contemporary situation, improvement of the 
training system, including the training of officers, in view of 
the low manning level of the units and subunits and the 
transition to contract service, and so forth. 
  A discussion of radiation, chemical and bacteriological 
protection in a battle and an operation evoked the greatest 
interest. Unlike chemical support, its organization and 
implementation will be directed toward reducing losses to a 
minimum and ensuring the execution of the missions assigned to 
them in a situation of CBR contamination, as well as 
counteracting high-precision weapons, weapons laying and 
reconnaissance facilities. It was suggested that the place and 
role in the overall system of troop protection and the new type 
of combat missions be viewed from the standpoint of the 
combined-arms commander and not the Chief of the CBR service. 
  During the following two days the assembly participants, as 
well as Colonel-General A. Sergeyev, commander of the PriVO 
[Volga Military District], Lieutenant-General G. Shpak, district 
chief of staff, and Saratov Oblast leaders attended practical 
exercises. They were first shown an exhibit of Russian line gas 
weapons and ammunition developed for them by associates at the 
NIII [Scientific Research and Testing Institute]. They then 
inspected prospective models of CBR weapons and protective gear. 
A special protective suit with a ventilated space beneath the 
surface, all-purpose, on-board BKSO [on-board special 
decontamination systems] designed for use with water or 
solvents, and much more were demonstrated at special sites. 
  Deserving of attention in the area of line gear for 
measuring 
ionizing radiation were new instruments for measuring dose 
strength: The IMD-2 with an operating range of 10-5 to 103 
roentgens/hour, which can be fixed, on-board or portable; the 
IMD-5, which can register both gamma (within a range of 6 to 
200,000 millirads/hour) and beta radiation (50-5,000 
decays/minute cm2); the IMD-22, designed for measuring the 
radiation level in an area (10-104 rads/hour), as well the total 
permissible dose of pulsed gamma-neutron and continuous-wave 
gamma radiation (50-2,000 rads). 
  With respect to the other types of CBR weapons and 
protection, many of them were also demonstrated in action after 
they were inspected. This was due to the fact that in view of 
the significant reduction in the number of exercises and drills 
in recent years, many combined-arms officers, particularly the 
specialists, have lost their skills in organizing and carrying 
out CBR measures. Among other things, they have almost forgotten 
the methods of employing incendiary weapons and aerosols, at a 
time when the importance of these in unit and subunit combat is 
continuously increasingly today. 
  According to the international classification incendiary 
weapons are listed as conventional weapons. Their indisputable 
advantage, however, a fact demonstrated in the Great Patriotic 
and Afghan wars, lies in their powerful emotional and 
psychological effect upon personnel. The flamethrower units and 
subunits, the artillery and the aviation presently have 
incendiary ammunition. 
  A practical exercise in a tactical setting was organized and 
conducted by Col I. Mukhin, chief for Combat Training of the 
Directorate of the Chief of CBR Troops. The flamethrower 
operators were the first to demonstrate their skills. With a 
squad salvo they destroyed an infantry group with armored 
equipment. They fired the rocket-propelled infantry flamethrower 
with different filling: a thermobaric compound and an incendiary 
mixture. 
  An experimental model of a combat vehicle for flamethrower 
operators was also demonstrated. Theoretically, it enhances 
their effectiveness when operating together with motorized-rifle 
subunits in close combat. Institute associates have mounted a 
compact, 12-barrel, bank-type unit on a tracked armor chassis, 
which can fire the RPO-A organic flamethrower in single-fire or 
automatic mode at a range of 700 meters. The vehicle was 
designed for a squad. It will also carry spare rounds and 
support the flamethrowers with organic guns and machine guns. 
  A one-shot, jet flamethrower is unique and promising. It is 
made in a standard RPO-A container and is loaded with a 
condensed liquid incendiary compound and designed for destroying 
targets at a range of up to 70 meters in street battles, in 
structures, tunnels and so forth. 
  The aviation then took over. Two Su-24s dropped ZB-500Sh 
incendiary tanks on a motor-vehicle column, each containing 250 
kilograms of incendiary mixture. The effect was impressive. The 
next pairs used aerosol counteraction substances. DAB-100-90fm 
smoke bombs blinded the "enemy" in his positions for a long 
time. An AAP-500 airborne aerosol device was used from an 
altitude of 100 meters to cover the fly-through route of a 
tactical airborne landing force with a vertical screen. 
  The most difficult and extensive aerosol camouflage missions 
will still be performed by the CBR troops, however. The 
technical equipment for this is presently being modernized, and 
new models are being developed. This primarily involves on-board 
aerosol generators for spray trucks. The ARS-14 equipped with 
them is capable of generating smoke continuously for five hours, 
creating a 600-meter aerosol cloud with improved parameters. 
  Improved operating modes were presented for the organic 
smoke 
machines (TMS-65D, TDA-2M, TDA-2K): pulsating or combination and 
directing certain free-flowing materials into a high-speed 
stream of dispersed aerosol-generating elements. They not only 
do not reduce the space-and-time features of the screen but are 
markedly more effective than existing ones -- in their 
consumption of smoke mixture, their covering of the infrared 
band, and so forth. Ultimately all of this will enhance the 
capabilities of the CBR troops for aerosol counteraction by a 
factor of 2-3. 
  The assembly concluded with a class on the subject "Mopping 
up Following an Accident in Transporting SDYaV [Highly Active 
Toxic Substances]." It was also organized and conducted by 
combat training officers of the Directorate of the Chief of CBR 
Troops. Personnel of the unit commanded by Lt-Col S. Safoshkin 
took part. It was held at a training field specially outfitted 
with a rail bed and tank cars. 
  The advance group was the first to reach the accident site. 
CW reconnaissance scouts ascertained the situation at the 
center, marked a contamination zone around the perimeter and 
designated the entry route. The column of Capt A. Kartashov's 
composite subunit soon came up. They began emergency work 
following brief reconnaissance. They covered the mirror of 
spilled SDYaV with foam and then began diluting it. The mixture 
was trapped, neutralized and removed to a safekeeping site. 
  The exercise was instructive. Most importantly, however, it 
made it possible to demonstrate for the assembly participants 
the sequence and the process of all the operations involved in 
the system for mopping up after an accident involving highly 
active toxic substances at civilian facilities. 
  In his summation Colonel-General S. Petrov, chief of the CBR 
troops, gave a good rating to the performance of all the 
personnel who helped set up and conduct the assembly. Many of 
them were singled out for valuable awards and monetary prizes. 
  COPYRIGHT: VOYENNYY VESTNIK No 11 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42419 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> CIS/RUSSIAN MILITARY ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> PEACEKEEPING FORCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Peacekeeping: Rapid Deployment Plus Will to Use Force </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0175B Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 9, Sep 1993 
[Signed to press 20 Aug 93] pp 17-19 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0175B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lt-Col G. Zhilin, Volga Military District, under </F>
the rubric "The Problem Demands a Solution": "Troops of 
Peacekeeping Forces Must Operate Decisively, Firmly and Without 
Delay..."] 
  [Text] There has been a steady increase in the number of 
armed conflicts on the territory of the CIS countries in recent 
years. And there have been many causes. The main one, in my 
opinion, lies in the inability of authorities to forestall a 
developing outbreak of violence and particularly to extinguish 
the flames of fratricidal war by political and economic means. 
  It is also apparent that local authorities are unable to 
extricate themselves from such crises without external 
assistance involving the use of force. This has been confirmed 
by recent events in the Dniester Region and South Ossetia, where 
peacekeeping forces have had their say. 
  The only peacekeeping division in Russia has been formed in 
the Volga Military District. Some of its units and subunits are 
already performing missions in hot spots. Although it should be 
said for the sake of the truth that units and formations of the 
Ground Troops, the VDV [Airborne Troops] and the MVD [Ministry 
of Internal Affairs] have performed such functions and continue 
to do so today. 
  A careful analysis of all the conflicts and their 
localization by means of MS [peacekeeping forces] leads one to 
believe that the peacekeeping forces are not very effective. 
Soviet Army and MVD units separated the sides in the conflict in 
Nagornyy Karabakh and on the border between Armenia and 
Azerbaijan. They did not achieve the desired results, however. 
  Something similar is occurring right now. Units of the 201st 
Motorized-Rifle Division were able to do practically nothing in 
Tajikistan until they received reinforcements and authorization 
to take decisive action. The situation in South Ossetia is 
unstable. 
  There is an exception, to be sure: The positive experience 
in 
the Dniester Region. We succeeded in extinguishing the flames of 
civil war there at the very height of the battle. It was not 
peacekeeping forces, though. When these arrived from Russia, the 
armed conflict had already been basically put down by units of 
the 14th Guards Combined-Arms Army. It was the competent action 
of the regular Russian Army which halted the carnage on the 
streets of Bendery. 
  It is a well-known fact that the commander of the 14th Army 
set up posts on the most dangerous sectors. The people called 
them "Lebed barriers." It would be naive to assume that these 
were weak posts with six soldiers and an armored personnel 
carrier, however. 
  The fact is that Lieutenant-General A. Lebed, relying upon a 
superb intelligence network which he had set up, inflicted such 
damage upon attacking units of the opposing side with mobile 
artillery groups it became clear to them that it was pointless 
to continue the bloodshed. Surprise, precise, powerful, 
preemptive strikes, as well as the availability of back-up 
mobile armored groups, forced the initiators of the military 
conflict to come to the negotiating table. And it can be boldly 
stated today that, backed by the powerful 14th Guards 
Combined-Arms Army, the peacekeeping forces have successfully 
performed their functions for a year now. It would be difficult 
to say how events would have developed had the Russian formation 
not been in the area. Reports that Moldova is demanding the 
withdrawal of units of the 14th Army from the Dniester Region 
have recently appeared in the press. But let us imagine what 
would become of the peacekeeping forces in that case. Obviously 
the same thing which occurred with the UN subunits in Lebanon in 
1962, when Israel committed aggression. Flouting international 
law, its troops passed through the combat formations of the UN 
forces swiftly and certainly. The same thing was done by units 
of the Croatian Army this spring, when they pushed back the UN 
battalions insolently and with impunity and launched offensive 
operations against the Serbian Kraina. 
  We have our own bitter experience as well. Last summer, when 
we were assigned the job of converting one of the district 
formations into a peacekeeping formation, we recommended setting 
up separate motorized-rifle battalions both on BTR-80s and BMPs 
[infantry fighting vehicles], as well as separate mobile 
artillery units (with intelligences assets) and subunits of army 
aviation. In view of the fact that the peacekeeping forces would 
be operating independently, we proposed including rear service 
and technical support subunits. 
  However... a version involving a light, regiment-type 
military unit was adopted. As a result we have a thin chain of 
peacekeeping troops and patrols at hot spots. The commander of a 
regiment (or battalion) is unable to set up a reserve of 
long-range guns and mobile forces. 
  That sort of day-to-day service would seem adequate in a 
peacetime situation, of course. But where is the guarantee that 
we will not have a repeat of what occurred in Central Asia or in 
the Caucasus? Seeing that the peacekeeping forces there were 
incapable of providing a decisive rebuff, mobile armed groups 
and bands began operating actively. And the flames of civil war 
flared up with even greater force. 
  This is why I share Lieutenant-General A. Lebed's opinion: 
"The main experience in preparing peacekeeping forces consists 
in the following: If a decision is made to use troops, they must 
be employed decisively, firmly and without delay. And it must be 
clear to everyone that a force has arrived capable of putting 
every insolent, encroaching bandit in his place. Anyone 
attempting to throw a wrench into the works will be arrested or 
destroyed." (VOYENNYY VESTNIK, No 1, 1993). 
  The composition of the forces and the organizational 
structure of the units must provide for the bloodless 
accomplishment of all the assigned missions. In other words, the 
military strength of the peacekeeping forces and their 
preparedness for decisive action must be such that the opposing 
sides immediately lose their desire to continue the war. 
Incidentally, the American command element understands this very 
well. The experience of units and formations of U.S. forces in 
the performance of peacekeeping actions is deserving of 
attention. The Americans keep a close eye on the development of 
every conflict. And if the government makes the decision, the 
command element has adequate intelligence and rapidly prepares 
and dispatches to the given area an adequate number of troops. 
  To the Americans an adequate number is an absolute 
superiority over the enemy. Moreover, it is an absolute 
superiority primarily in equipment and modern weapons. When a 
large body of supermodern combat equipment, with a deafening 
roar amplified many times over by special propaganda machines, 
appears suddenly from the air, land or sea, the warring parties 
automatically develop a desire to solve all the problems by 
peaceful means. And should some field commander still open fire, 
a devastating strike will be inflicted upon him from air and 
land. The American troops are operating in this pattern in 
Somalia. 
  This unquestionably requires a lot of personnel and assets. 
It is justified, however. There is a large probability that the 
fratricide can be halted without bloodshed. If we take this 
route (and there is apparently no alternative), then, based on 
our experience in the Dniester Region, we must first of all give 
the peacekeeping forces political status. Then their units and 
formations must be reinforced. In the CIS situation peacekeeping 
forces with light weapons cannot separate the sides (this was 
demonstrated by the events in Central Asia and in the Caucasus). 
I repeat, the men in the blue helmets must have real power. Let 
the soldiers man the posts and patrol with small arms in a jeep 
or an armored personnel carrier, but they must be backed up by a 
powerful striking force, as they say, of self-propelled, 
long-range artillery groups and subunits of combat helicopters 
and ground-attack aircraft. And, naturally, also by a mobile 
reserve of tactical forces in tanks or infantry combat vehicles. 
  There should be special stress on intelligence. Peacekeeping 
forces must be equipped with surface reconnaissance radar, night 
vision devices and sets of reconnaissance and signaling devices. 
These should make it possible to monitor areas and forestall an 
attack by formation bands. 
  Units which perform special missions are manned and 
outfitted 
in this way. Take the expeditionary brigade of US Marines, for 
example. Its members can carry out its assigned missions on 
their own. Such a brigade includes a field landing group of 
Marines, a composite air group and a brigade rear service group. 
Such a tactical and operational formation has more than 50 
tanks, over 120 guns and mortars, around 120 Tow and Dragon 
ATGMs and other antitank weapons. It includes as many as 100 air 
defense weapons, more than 100 infantry combat vehicles and 
amphibious armored personnel carriers, around 200 combat planes 
and helicopters. 
  A Marine expeditionary battalion includes a battalion 
airborne group, a composite air squadron and a battalion 
rear-service support group. Its arsenal includes as many as five 
medium tanks, six 155mm howitzers, 40 antitank missile systems, 
around 20 mortars, 20 Stinger air defense systems, almost 30 
helicopters and 15 armored personnel carriers. These formations 
are not intended for peacekeeping missions, of course. Their 
structure could provide the basis for structuring and manning 
Russian peacekeeping forces, however. It is the opinion of 
specialists in the Volga Military District that a division of 
peacekeeping forces should be a part of the Russian Army's 
mobile forces; more specifically, of its rapid-reaction forces. 
Such a formation could be employed in its entirety or in part in 
the case of a full-scale war or limited (local) wars. If 
necessary it could perform peacekeeping missions as well. Such a 
formation should have a brigade composition, since this is the 
optimal organization. 
  Let us say that it could include 12 separate motorized-rifle 
battalions, of which four would be "heavy," that is, armed with 
tanks and infantry fighting vehicles, while the rest would be on 
BTR-80 wheeled armored personnel carriers. And certainly, three 
or four support subunits. This would enable the command element 
to execute missions with greater flexibility, to put together 
and sent to a designated area the optimal grouping of personnel 
and assets. You will agree that in one situation two light 
battalions (on armored personnel carriers) with a support 
battery and a flight of helicopters is sufficient, while another 
would require five battalions, two of them "heavy" battalions, a 
couple of separate, self-propelled artillery battalions for 
overall fire support, and one or two squadrons of mixed 
helicopters. They would be headed by brigade staffs and 
supported by appropriate material and technical support groups. 
  And so, a formation should have four or five separate, 
self-propelled artillery battalions, army air subunits and 
separate units of all types of support forces. 
  Yes, this is reminiscent of a US mechanized division, but 
the 
purpose of the formation, which would ordinarily be employed not 
at full strength but in part, necessitates the adoption of 
precisely such a structure. In the case of peacekeeping 
missions, the subunits in armored personnel carriers would 
perform patrol service. Their authority, however, would be 
backed up by intelligence subunits and helicopters of the army 
aviation, a general support group and strike groups of "heavy" 
battalions. 
  It is not possible in a single article to cover all of the 
problems involved in the use of peacekeeping forces. Some people 
will probably disagree with my suggestions for the employment 
and the composition of peacekeeping units. So let us argue the 
matter. After all, controversy brings out the truth. 
  COYRIGHT: VOYENNYY VESTNIK No 9 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42420 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Black Sea Fleet vs Ukrainian Navy </TI></H3>
<H4>   `Sahaydachnyy' Prevented from Docking </H4>
<F P=102> 94UM0205A </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0205A </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:CSO 

  [Editorial Report] Kiev NARODNA ARMIYA in Ukrainian on 4 
August 1993 on page 1 carries an article under the heading 
"Conflicts Accompany Emergence of Ukraine's Navy," and subtitled 
"Power Disruptions Affect Patrol Ship `Hetman Sahaydachnyy'." 
  Power to the patrol ship, `Hetman Sahaydachnyy' from 
on-shore 
power sources was cut off recently. The disruption in electric 
power sources led to major expenditures of fuel and service life 
for the diesel engines aboard the patrol ship. This technical 
problem prompted the warship's transfer to another Sevastopol 
wharf. The ship was prevented from docking and establishing 
communications. "Guardsmen" cut the "Hetman Sahaydachnyy"'s 
mooring lines. As a result, the commander, Captain 3rd Rank V. 
Katushenko ordered the patrol ship to stand off at some distance 
from the "inhospitable" shore. Ukrainian sailors had to wait a 
whole day to find out whether or not the "Hetman Sahaydachnyy" 
would be able to tie up along side its new wharf. 
  This conflict was eventually resolved, "but not without 
intervention of `higher authorities' in Kiev." The report 
concluded with the reminder that, "Sevastopol legally is the 
primary navy base for our state." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42421 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94020" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Black Sea Fleet vs Ukrainian Navy </TI></H3>
<H4>   Heat Cut off to Sevastopol Naval Institute </H4>
<F P=102> 94UM0205B </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0205B </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:CSO 

  [Editorial Report] Kiev NARODNA ARMIYA in Ukrainian on 8 
December 1993 on page 1 carries an article under the heading 
"Heat Turned Off At Sevastopol Naval Institute" reporting a 
heating plant shutdown that left the Sevastopol Naval Institute 
in a "critical situation." 
  The existing agreement calls for the supply of heat to the 
Sevastopol Naval School by one of a group of Black Sea Fleet 
technical networks. Captain 2nd Rank Yevhen Rozhnov, in charge 
of this network, informed the Institute leadership that the heat 
would be turned off after 30 November in accordance to demands 
by the Black Sea Fleet Command, explaining that this measure was 
due to a lack of heating oil for the boilers. The heat network 
was to be closed up and sealed, to "freeze" the institute. 
  The report pointed out that some thousand cadets were the 
hostages of this disruption, which occurred despite the fact 
that the Institute had made full payment for November and, 
despite financial difficulties had promised to make prior 
payments. 
  In a subsequent article Kiev NARODNA ARMIYA in Ukrainian on 
25 December 1993 on page two showed the Sevastopol Naval 
Institute efforts to continue operations in spite of the heat 
being turned off since the beginning of December. The article 
disputed the explanation that the disruption was due to a lack 
of fuel in the Black Sea Fleet. It maintained that the 1760 
tonnes of heating oil set aside in the summer would have been 
sufficient for the winter. But on 16 August a document arrived 
from the Black Sea Fleet, breaking the 30 July agreement for 
fuel service to Ukraine's Navy. The article maintained that the 
Black Sea Fleet took the oil from Ukraine's Navy to settle 
accounts with other Ministry of Defense units. 
  The report rejects Black Sea Fleet explanations and states 
that, "This violation of the juridical side of the agreement 
forced Ukraine's Navy fuel service to appeal to an arbitration 
court over the disputed material." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42422 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94021" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Black Sea Fleet vs Ukrainian Navy </TI></H3>
<H4>   Naval Infantry Directorate Created </H4>
<F P=102> 94UM0205C </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0205C </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:CSO 

  [Editorial Report] Kiev NARODNA ARMIYA in Ukrainian on 12 
January 94 on pages 1-2 reports in an article lamenting that the 
Black Sea Fleet naval infantry brigade might have shared its 
material base and experience but has not done so and, despite 
moves by Ukraine's marine battalion to maintain friendly 
relations with the Black Sea Fleet naval infantry brigade, 
Ukraine's formation of its own naval infantry organization has 
at times been met with hostility and suspicion. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42423 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94022" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Black Sea Fleet vs Ukrainian Navy </TI></H3>
<H4>   Engineering Service Formed </H4>
<F P=102> 94UM0205D </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0205D </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:CSO 

  [Editorial Report] Kiev NARODNA ARMIYA in Ukrainian on 6 
January 1994 on page 1 carries an article under the heading 
"Ukraine's Naval Engineers Pressured." Along with a navy, 
Ukraine has been forming and selecting cadre for a Naval 
Engineering Service. Naval Engineering Service officers in the 
Odessa and Mykolayiv garrisons of the Black Sea Fleet had 
expressed their wish to serve Ukraine's armed forces and had 
taken the oath of loyalty to the people of Ukraine. Workers and 
employees in these also voluntarily decided to transfer to 
Ukraine's naval engineering service. 
  However the situation became tense after the Black Sea Fleet 
command in Mykolayiv sent armed soldiers to place the building 
under guard and ordered the officers, workers and employees to 
leave the facility. Thanks only to the timely intervention of 
the senior naval officer in the city of Mykolayiv, Captain 1st 
Rank A. Rodkin, was further conflict avoided. 
  The commander of Ukraine's Navy, Vice Admiral V. 
Bezkorovaynyy and acting Black Sea Fleet Commander V. Larionov 
met to resolve the incident. Given that a similar situation 
could arise in other Ukraine Navy garrisons in which Navy 
engineering sections were being formed, an agreement was reached 
to continue consultations, in order that the process not get out 
of control. 
  Ukraine's navy press center rejected all claims that it 
forcibly impressed naval engineering workers and employees in 
the Odessa and Mykolayiv garrisons into Ukraine's Navy. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42424 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94023" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> UKRAINE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Black Sea Fleet vs Ukrainian Navy </TI></H3>
<H4>   Conflict Over Housing </H4>
<F P=102> 94UM0205E </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0205E </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:CSO 

  [Editorial Report] Kiev NARODNA ARMIYA in Ukrainian 21 
December 1993 carries on page 1 a short article reporting on a 
conflict between Black Sea Fleet and Ukrainian navy personnel on 
14 December. According to the Navy Press Center report about 20 
Black Sea Fleet naval infantry, led by an officer, came to a 
housing area which had some days earlier been occupied by 
families of Ukrainian navy personnel. They presented residents 
with the demand that they vacate the quarters and tried to enter 
the building. However they were stopped with the help of four 
unarmed Ukrainian sailors. The article noted the irony of this 
occurrence on the same day on which Ukraine's Navy Commander 
Vice-Admiral Bezkorovaynyy was meeting with First Deputy Black 
Sea Fleet Commander, Vice-Admiral Larionov to discuss problems 
in dividing the housing. 
  Kiev NARODNA ARMIYA in Ukrainian on 19 January 1994 reports 
on page 1 that Ukraine's Navy Commander, Vice-Admiral Volodymyr 
Bezkorovaynyy made a trip to the Navy's Odessa and Izmayil 
Garrisons. While with the Izmayil Garrison he was briefed on 
combat training and the formation of a section of the Naval 
Engineering Service within the garrison. 
  In Odessa Bezkorovaynyy met with deans and department heads 
at the Odessa State Maritime Academy and the Odessa Maritime 
Engineers' Institute, where training of specialist, future 
officers for the navy was discussed. 
  Vice-Admiral Bezkorovaynyy also conversed by telephone with 
Acting Black Sea Fleet Commander Larionov. Agreement was reached 
on a procedure for resolving problems arising from unsanctioned 
actions of certain leaders or military collectives of either 
country. 
  Vice-Admiral Bezkorovaynyy expressed the need to work out a 
bilateral document between the Ukraine's Navy and the Black Sea 
Fleet to address housing, financing, energy supplies, etc. to 
prevent confrontations, which would interfere with mutual 
understanding and trust. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42425 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94024" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> BALTIC STATES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Latvia to Seek Military Security With West </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  PM0802115194 Moscow ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA in Russian 8 Feb 94 
First Edition p 6 </F>

<F P=103> PM0802115194 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report "specially for ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA" by ITAR-TASS </F>
correspondents Galina Kuchina and Yuriy Sizov incoporating 
remarks by and interview with Latvian Prime Minister Valdis 
Birkavs, date and place not given, under the "Former Union 
Republics" rubric: "We Do Not See the Future in a Gloomy Light"] 
  [Text] Russia remains Latvia's main trading partner. 
Goods from Russia constitute over 28 percent of total imports, 
while the proportion of goods being dispatched from the Baltic 
state is close to 30 percent. Latvia imports mainly energy and 
fuel resources from its neighbor -- they form approximately 
one-half of the import volume. 
  Economists analyzing not only the absolute figures but also 
their dynamic processes noted long ago that Latvia is moving 
away from the eastern market and turning sharply toward the 
West. What is the reason for this strategy? It was with that 
question that we began our conversation with Valdis Birkavs, 
head of the Latvian Government. 
  In the premier's opinion, the "attempt to preserve old 
relations, however tempting that may seem, is doomed to total 
failure in the future." The Russian market, in his words, is 
already full of high-quality goods from many countries. Latvian 
goods, which are inferior to Japanese machinery and German radio 
equipment, may be in demand in Russia for a couple of years more 
only because of its market's capacity to absorb them. That 
would keep local enterprises "afloat" for a while. But then the 
inevitable collapse would follow. So is there any sense in 
continuing to create products today with a limited level of 
competitiveness? Is it not better to embark right away on the 
socially painful path of reforming the structure of production 
and seeking to meet the demands of the European and U.S. markets? 
  Valdis Birkavs is convinced that the republic's traditional 
sectors -- radioelectronics, textiles, and timber processing -- 
will recover and survive. What about the "RAF" minibus plant in 
Jelgava? 
  As the head of the government said, the plant has designed a 
new test model, the "RAF-style," and Russian enterprises will 
take part in its production. But this program is not going to 
be implemented until the beginning of the next century. For the 
moment the plant is living off its accumulated assets and the 
improvement of existing models. 
  Is politics not proving a hindrance to economic relations 
between Latvia and Russia? Yes, that is true, Valdis Birkavs 
agreed, and he recalled the story of the "capture" of two 
Russian generals. When that incident was over -- as far as the 
Latvian side and the Russian side were concerned -- there 
followed what the premier called the demarche of Leonid Mayorov, 
commander of the Northwestern Group of Forces. The colonel 
general issued an order on the use of weapons in the event of an 
attempt to seize Russian military installations. 
  Then when it seemed that passions had subsided and the 
differences of opinion had been sorted out, the "situation was 
immediately reversed," Birkavs said. The outline of the 
forthcoming troop withdrawal treaty immediately became less 
clear and instability crept into the negotiating process. 
  "The disturbance of the foreign economic balance could lead 
to internal political imbalance and an opposition onslaught 
after which the resignation of the government cannot be ruled 
out," the premier said. He added: "The limit of our 
concessions to Russia has been reached. But the talks must go 
on even in the present situation, impossible though that may be. 
There is no other way, the countries will not achieve 
rapprochement by military methods." 
  During the conversation the question of the situation of 
people who do not have Latvian citizenship was raised. This 
affects about one-third of the population. As is well known, 
officials in Riga have repeatedly asserted that the distinction 
between citizens and those without citizenship will amount 
solely to the right to vote or be elected. At the same time the 
number of laws limiting noncitizens' opportunities in the 
economic and social spheres is increasing. A second reading has 
been given to the law on state service, which envisages that 
only a Latvian citizen may be a state official. Article 35 of 
the law "On Aviation" says that only citizens may form part of 
an aircrew. Noncitizens cannot be judges, lawyers, or private 
detectives, they receive fewer passes, and they get a social 
pension amounting to 90 percent of the social pensions of 
citizens. 
  [ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA] What is the head of government's view 
of the opinion of Max van der Stoel, CSCE high commissioner for 
the affairs of national minorities, that the problem of 
citizenship in Latvia has not so much a political aspect as an 
economic one? 
  [Birkavs] I think someone is trying to artificially 
aggravate this problem. After all, people go where things are 
best for them. The fact that there is no mass exodus from 
Latvia demonstrates that various categories of residents are not 
suffering a marked economic disadvantage. On the contrary, 
people want to live and work normally here. It takes time and 
some patience for the solution of the citizenship problem and 
the adoption of a law. Previously we did not even pay attention 
to citizenship. Now, however, when this question is constantly 
being raised, when there is talk about mass deportations, even 
though no one has any intention of doing such a thing, now 
people want an anchor in the form of citizenship. 
  Admittedly, there is a certain number of people who want to 
leave. There are around 150,000 of them according to the 
statistics of the "Roots" association, which is engaged on the 
resettlement of people to Russia. Around 30,000 Belarusians and 
Ukrainians also want to return to their ethnic homeland. They 
need assistance. If the financial problem is resolved, the 
voluntary departure of 150,000 people would immediately ease the 
situation. Of course, the West too could help in that. 
  We have always said that we have three ways of normalizing 
relations. The first is a very cautious naturalization. The 
second is absolutely voluntary repatriation to the ethnic 
homeland with financial support for that process. There is one 
more way -- emigration to third countries, but that of course 
will not be large scale. Incidentally, Riga has always been a 
transit zone from where, by virtue of its liberal conditions, 
people have after their arrival then gone on to third countries. 
  In meetings with representatives of many states I have 
always 
said: Those who want to leave must be helped. I have discussed 
this with U.S. Secretary of State Christopher and at other 
levels. But there has been no real movement. The process will 
probably become more active when the army has withdrawn. 
  [ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA] What is the attitude in Latvia to Bill 
Clinton's initiative on the new reconstruction of NATO? 
  [Birkavs] We take a positive view of the "Partnership for 
Peace" program, it has long-term prospects. It requires 
resources, admittedly, but nevertheless we will take part in it. 
Had we already been participants in this program at the start 
of the incident involving the Russian generals, we could have 
turned to NATO for consultation because that is envisaged by 
Article 14 of the "Partnership for Peace" declaration. 
  The proposed mechanism for the peaceful settlement of 
conflicts is also valuable for us because the problem of 
security for Latvia will be a very topical one in the next two 
to three years. Indeed, the time has come to look at the 
military systems of other countries. We were part of the old, 
Soviet, system for quite a long time. We did not emerge from it 
with the fondest memories. 
  Of course, we will look closely at what is happening in the 
Russian Armed Forces because there are plenty of interesting 
reforms there. But this is not the right time for military 
cooperation and joint maneuvers with Russia. First of all we 
must settle mutual grievances. 
  [ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA] So that is why you see even Israel and 
the Czech Republic as suppliers of weapons? 
  [Birkavs] I don't particularly like spending money on 
weapons. Nevertheless, we need to equip our military forces in 
a sufficiently organized way and for the fairly long term. We 
are not preparing to attack anyone. We simply need to have 
mobile, well-trained defense forces. Compared with European 
countries our budget has the lowest spending on the needs of the 
armed forces -- just 1.8 percent. That is clearly inadequate 
and we, the government, are often criticized for that. 
  Even so, I am confident that Latvia will enter the 21st 
century not as a country with big military muscles but with the 
highest level of education in Europe. After all, before World 
War II we had the highest number of people with higher education 
(per thousand inhabitants) in Europe. While looking back at the 
past, we see the future and we see it by no means in a gloomy 
light. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42426 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94025" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> CAUCASIAN STATES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Armenian Aviation Chief on Need for Specialist Personnel </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  944K0418A Yerevan YERKIR in Armenian 15 Sep 93 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> 944K0418A </F>
<F P=104>  Yerevan YERKIR </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Armenian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Air Force Aviation Chief Colonel Aleksandr </F>
Abrahamyan by A. Dokholyan: "Flight `In Armenian'"] 
  [Text] The Air Force, one of the most important 
components of modern armed forces, is, for understandable 
reasons, a new thing for us. Up until recently we would look at 
military aircraft appearing in the sky overhead with an interest 
purely for the hardware itself. We now experience a conscious 
awareness that those intrepid souls up there are sons of 
Armenia, our boys. At first our joy was mixed with doubts: Would 
Armenia, which lacks vital necessities of life, be able to 
handle such a burden? 
  In spite of all this, however, on 26 July we celebrated 
the first anniversary of our Armed Forces. We are talking with 
Air Force Aviation Chief Col. Aleksandr Abrahamyan. 
  [Abrahamyan] In a structural sense we have essentially 
stabilized, and we are presently deploying our subunits. 
Instruction of young pilot personnel has also commenced. 
  [Dokholyan] Military aviation in Armenia is a new thing. How 
have you resolved the problem of specialist personnel? 
  [Abrahamyan] The fact is that we have started from scratch. 
Thanks to the efforts of our ministry, however, we received 
first-rate pilots, pilots who in the former Soviet Union had 
completed advanced training school. And we ourselves began 
training pilots locally. Many of these are today flying modern 
aircraft. We are now operating in Arzni, the Republic of Armenia 
Ministry of Defense Aviation Training Center. 
  [Dokkholyan] Aviation, especially military aviation, is an 
expensive pleasure, as they say. And our republic is presently 
experiencing an economic crisis. I would imagine that this in 
all probability has an adverse effect on your work as well. 
  [Abrahamyan] Yes, it does. There are many difficulties and 
basic problems. The government and ministry support us, however. 
We are allocated an adequate amount of fuel. Otherwise, we would 
not be able to perform military missions. 
  [Dokholyan] What kind of living conditions do the pilots 
have? 
  [Abrahamyan] The good news is that in our republic, as was 
the case in the former Soviet Union, they understand the 
importance of and give priority to aviation. Only 2 or 3 of our 
pilots have not received individual apartments. First on our 
list of tasks is to provide them with an apartment. 
  [Dokholyan] Do you work in cooperation with CIS states, with 
the Russian Federation? 
  [Abrahamyan] Of course we are working in that direction. 
Everything, however, depends on Armenia's financial solvency. 
  There are also issues pertaining to internal matters: 
Violations of military regulations, desertions, etc. We are 
endeavoring to eliminate such things. 
<H6>  * * * </H6>
  In the course of an informal get-together with 
primary-rank enlisted personnel, the latter indicated that they 
were not so dissatisfied with economic difficulties and 
difficulties with daily life (although pay is extremely low) as 
they were upset by the demeanor of "money-possessing" young men 
(strange as it may seem, even such as these sometimes grace us 
with their service in our army). At times it is difficult even 
for command personnel to "communicate" with them. One of the 
noncommissioned officers came right out and stated: "A person 
with more money than you can shake a stick at comes and stands 
in front of you and tries to dictate special conditions for his 
son." 
  It is a situation with which many of us are quite 
familiar. We encounter such phenomena all the time. The reasons 
for and the roots of this phenomenon are well known. The army is 
not an entity separate from society, and certainly it is 
subjected to the influence of the moral and ethical standards 
which exist in society. However, we should have kept such market 
relations out of the Armenian National Army at any price. 
  In spite of all the problems and setbacks, however, the 
Republic of Armenia Air Force exists today. Col. A. Abrahamyan 
replied as follows to the question: "If it became necessary 
today, could they defend our skies?" -- "It is our duty to do 
so." And it is the duty of all of us to strengthen the National 
Army. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42427 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94026" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> CAUCASIAN STATES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Improvement Seen in Armenian Army Status </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  944K0594A Paris HARATCH in Armenian 23 Dec 93 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 944K0594A </F>
<F P=104>  Paris HARATCH </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Armenian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Arpi Totoyan: "Armenian Army Has Food, Uniforms </F>
and Authority"] 
  [Excerpt] [Passage omitted] It is obvious by now that 
[former minister of defense] Vazgen Manukian played an important 
role in finally converting the various Armenian armed units into 
a regular army during the 9 to 10 months (October 1992 through 
July 1993) he was in office. That interval also coincides with a 
period of relative peace on Armenia's borders, the recapture of 
Maghavuz and Martakert in Artsakh and the success in Kelbajar. 
Evidently the work that [Manukian] started has continued in the 
same direction: As encouraging news reported by the NOYAN TAPAN 
news agency on 17 December suggests, problems associated with 
antagonisms that could be caused by the formation of the 
Armenian army have been set aside. 
  A meeting was held at the conclusion of the fall 
conscription 
campaign to tally up its results. Vazgen Sargsian, a former 
minister of defense and currently the minister of state 
responsible for defense affairs, says that the conscription has 
concluded successfully everywhere except in the two large cities 
of the earthquake zone, Gumri [formerly Leninakan] and Vanadzor 
[formerly Kirovakan]. So far 511 conscripts are missing in Gumri 
and 244 in Vanadzor. The deadline for reporting to duty has been 
extended by 7 to 10 days in those cities. 
  Problems associated with conscription were one of the 
principal reasons delaying the formation of the army for a long 
time. A not so insignificant proportion of the youth in cities 
tried every means to dodge the draft. Their parents also did 
everything necessary to make their children's task easier. Both 
the youth and their parents had forgotten the conditions of 
serving in distant locations in the Soviet Army in the past. 
That led to demonstrations and hunger strikes on Yerevan's 
squares, with the demand that Armenian soldiers serve their 
terms in Armenia. Ironically, when those seemingly unrealizable 
dreams came true so suddenly, those subject to the draft sought 
ways of dodging it rather than rejoicing. The report cited above 
does not offer details of the methods employed in the gratifying 
correction of this problem, but the important point is that a 
shameful and extremely dangerous situation has ended. That is 
affirmed most strongly by the following statement: "Incidents of 
administrative action to ensure the normal progress of the 
conscription campaign are becoming steadily rarer." 
  Of course, all this does not mean that the process of 
building the army no longer faces any difficulties or that there 
are no deficiencies to correct. For example, sometimes it is 
difficult to determine the permanent residences of young men who 
have migrated from Azerbaijan. It is also said that barracks 
buildings are insufficient. V. Sargsyan says that a new census 
must be taken in Armenia. The last one, taken in January 1989, 
immediately after the [December 1988] earthquake, cannot be 
considered reliable because it could not provide a true picture 
of the population. The most gratifying element of the said 
report is that the meeting underscored the following despite the 
complex problems facing the country: "The army is fully stocked 
with food and uniforms." 
  The NOYAN TAPAN report provides other details also. 
Armenia's 
military academy will begin operating next year and will train 
officers. At present Armenian officers are trained in Russia. 
Some of the current conscripts serve in the ranks of Russian 
border forces on Armenia's borders with Turkey and Iran, as well 
as the Russian 127th division, which is based near Gumri. 
  Despite the many positive signs, V. Sargsian is far from 
being fully satisfied. He says: "Although many observers 
consider the Armenian Army the most combat-ready in the region, 
the Armenian leadership itself is viewing the national army 
critically, finding that much more must be done to consolidate 
the army's combat readiness and that the weakness of the armed 
forces of Azerbaijan and Georgia are temporary." 
  It can be gathered from the report that there is something 
more than the statement that "the army is fully stocked with 
food and uniforms." The reality of a successful conscription is 
proof that the problem of authority has been resolved. Those two 
points are sufficient to confirm that the army of independent 
Armenia has successfully overcome the basic hurdles of the 
initial period. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42428 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94027" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> STATE AND LOCAL MILITARY FORCES </F>
<F P=101> CAUCASIAN STATES </F>
<H3> <TI>   State of Azerbaijani Forces, Role of Russian Personnel in Karabakh Conflict </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  944K0659A Moscow OBSHCHAYA GAZETA in Russian 28 Jan 94 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> 944K0659A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow OBSHCHAYA GAZETA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Samed Mansurov: "In War as in War"] </F>
  [Text] I was here before the war and my recollections 
connected with peaceful Karabakh are beautiful. Today, however, 
they are only recollections. There is no return to the past, as 
there is no road to Agdam, which, in fact, has also not existed 
for several months. 
  We turn in the direction of the headquarters of the Agdam 
brigade. Regular buses taken off routes for soldiers' 
transportation pass on the road. Tomorrow a young replacement 
will join the battle. The column of the battalion medical 
station, which has thundered past us in the direction of the 
front line, smells of war. The buses remind us of the city. 
  In the barracks of the Agdam brigade, officers sleep on the 
floor and soldiers have forgotten what bed linen and blankets 
are. After a meager supper in the soldiers' mess one does not 
want to think about anything else but sleep. Here, at the very 
front line, this is a luxury, because the lice, with which the 
barracks are teeming, are not asleep. 
  In this war senseless victims (if, in general, it is 
appropriate to talk about any sense) are in the order of things. 
On the Azerbaijani side up to 90 percent of the losses are the 
consequence of the low level of combat training of both soldiers 
and officers. One colonel complained to me that from among the 
commanders subordinate to him no one knew how to handle even a 
compass. Despair is heard in the voice of the former Soviet Army 
officer, an Azerbaijani, who has served in Ukraine for 20 years. 
  Things are even worse with soldiers. Adolescents, who have 
barely left school, receive weapons almost in trenches. If a 
cartridge suddenly becomes jammed in the breech during combat, 
the weapon becomes a useless piece of iron, because no one has 
taught the soldier how to take the Kalashnikov assault rifle 
apart and clean it. After the command "attack" soldiers maintain 
the correct direction of motion for no more than about 10 meters 
and then disperse in different directions like blind cats. 
  We arrived at the front line before the very beginning of 
the 
Armenian attack. The enemy tank was stopped one meter from the 
defense line--it almost overran the trench. A grenade hit the 
track and the T-72 rolled back downhill. If not for this lucky 
accident, both the defenders and we, journalists, would be in a 
bad way. Later soldiers tried to determine who fired more 
accurately. The most accurate grenade launcher operator can 
expect a reward of 2 million rubles. 
  What even the youngest cannot be denied is the desire to 
win. 
However, desire alone is not enough. "It is easy to be killed 
and this is by no means always heroism," says a young 
lieutenant--a battalion commander. "A soldier deserves more 
glory if he wins and remains alive." He did not want to remember 
how a unit of the second battalion tried to leave the position 
during the attack. The commander stopped them with shots into 
the air. 
  Soldiers are killed not only in battle. Quite recently 27 
young combat engineers were blown up by an antitank mine during 
a training exercise. The commander explained to them the 
principle of fuze operation and forgot that in front of him 
there was a real, not training, mine. My friend was killed last 
year: During dinner the barracks was wiped off the face of the 
earth, because someone carelessly unloaded ammunition nearby. 
  Some battalions have been sitting in trenches since the 
summer of 1993, when Armenian forces scored several crushing 
victories in succession. The offensive was stopped thanks to a 
corps of Afghan mujahidin. In the middle of January of this year 
Afghans also liberated Goradiz, a strategically important 
station on the Iranian-Azerbaijani border. The Mujahidin act 
autonomously, coordinating only the most necessary details with 
the Azerbaijani command. An Afghan soldier receives up to 10,000 
U.S. dollars per month. Legends are composed about Mujahidin in 
Beylagan, where their headquarters are located. People say that 
one Tajik-Afghan (the majority of those fighting in Azerbaijan 
are Tajiks) can handle a tank: He jumps up onto the armor with a 
pail of dirt and blocks its vision devices. The subsequent 
extraction of the crew from the tank is a technical matter. The 
Mujahidin bring prisoners from missions in packs. If they seize 
Russians fighting on the Armenian side, they do not hand them 
over to the Azerbaijani military. Afghans have iron discipline, 
although they scorn conventions such as uniforms, drill 
training, and so forth. On a road in Beylagan we picked up four 
Mujahidin, who mastered the Azerbaijani language to such an 
extent that they were able to explain where to bring them and to 
thank us at parting. The day before our 25-year old traveling 
companions seized Goradiz. An Azerbaijani girl, who was a 
medical corpswoman, told me later that several corpses of women 
snipers--according to rumors, either Lithuanians or French--were 
found in the city ruins. All the women's throats were cut. "One 
of them had very beautiful hair," the girl said. After this 
story the driver of the microbus refused to drive us to Goradiz. 
  After the series of defeats last year the desertion of 
Azerbaijani soldiers assumed a catastrophic scale. President 
Aliyev's edict promised amnesty to those who ran away if they 
returned to their units before 10 January 1994. A few days 
before the expiration of this date crowds of deserters and their 
parents gathered in front of the entrance to the Ministry of 
Defense in Baku, trying to find out in the personnel 
administration where the units were located. The number of those 
who repented tripled after the decree of the military tribunal, 
which sentenced two deserters to execution by a firing squad, 
was published in the Azerbaijani press. 
  The prospects for the return of deserters do not gladden 
soldiers. The fighters think that, having run away once, they 
will also run away for the second and third time. "When the war 
ends, I am sure to meet one of them," says the bearded sergeant 
with a bandaged head. "I know what I will do then... If I stay 
alive." Soldiers in trenches do not consider deserters to be 
Azerbaijanis. 
  With the exception of several elite subunits in the 
Azerbaijani National Army there are no units capable of 
performing serious combat missions. Assault battalions and 
special forces, basically, consist of professional servicemen, 
former members of the special-purpose militia detachment. They 
are too few to alter the course of the war in a short time and 
to forget about the most serious destruction of Azerbaijani 
arms, which has led to a revision of the political course and 
change of the republic's leadership. 
  Moscow has never denied that the Transcaucasus is a zone of 
special interests of Russian foreign policy. However, until now 
Russian politicians have not brought themselves to acknowledge 
their indirect (or direct) participation in the 
Armenian-Azerbaijani war. Meanwhile, Russia's military aid to 
Armenia has never been a secret to those let in on it. In 
Yerevan the seventh combined-arms army of Russia's Armed Forces, 
which was later transformed into three mobile brigades modeled 
after American quick-response forces, was used either as a 
shield, or according to the direct purpose. Suffice it to recall 
the tank attack on Fizuli and the bombing of Azerbaijani 
settlements from the air by aircraft, which Armenia does not 
have. 
  With Aliyev's coming to power Baku's situation seemingly has 
changed for the better. A draft of the Azerbaijani-Russian 
agreement on military cooperation, which, probably, will be 
signed in the very near future, has caught my eyes. A compromise 
has finally been reached on the matter of joint operation of the 
former Soviet--and now no man's--center of radioelectronic 
reconnaissance in Gabal in the north of Azerbaijan, which is the 
largest in Europe. In exchange for concessions Russia 
transferred to Azerbaijan several dozens of the latest 
"Shturm-S" antitank systems and, at the same time, specialists 
as well, who will teach Azerbaijani servicemen how to handle 
fine equipment. The results of backstage negotiations between 
Azerbaijani political leaders and the Russian military will make 
themselves felt in spring, when the weather makes it possible to 
activate combat operations around Karabakh. 
  In all, about 100 Russian military specialists now serve 
under contract in the Azerbaijani Army. Most of them have 
arrived here at the beginning of the current year. This is the 
result of the secret mission, on which a group of Azerbaijani 
recruiting officers departed from Baku to Russia at the end of 
December 1993. In the military commissariats of Moscow, Ivanovo, 
Yaroslavl, Nizhniy Novgorod, and other Russian cities 
Azerbaijanis obtained access to the service records of reserve 
servicemen: Some of them agreed to serve in the Azerbaijani 
Army. The republic's armed forces are experiencing an acute 
shortage of air defense, artillery, and other specialists. 
Russian military specialists do not (or hardly) take part in 
combat operations. 
  Nadzhmedlin Sadykhov, chief of the General Staff of the 
Azerbaijani National Army, is surrounded by Russian military 
specialists. Colonel Aleksandr Vasyak, chief of the Operations 
Directorate of the Ministry of Defense, who was invited from 
Russia, formulates and directs the activities of the Azerbaijani 
Army all over the front. At the headquarters of the Agdam 
brigade, Colonel Vasyak's eloquent expressions before a 
formation of Azerbaijani officers about the lackadaisical 
attitude of the latter made me give up the idea of asking the 
colonel a few questions. 
  Major Gribanov, chief of staff of x-brigade, came to 
Azerbaijan from Murmansk, leaving his wife and three children 
there. He is fighting for his homeland. The Russian Major 
considers it to be Azerbaijan, where he has lived for more than 
1 year. Mikhail Vasilyevich says: "I am the same Azerbaijani as 
all of them. Sometimes I tell my children that I am a better 
Moslem than they are, although I am not circumcised. If 
necessary, I will die here." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42429 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94028" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> GENERAL ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> ARMS TRADE </F>
<H3> <TI>   IDEX-93: Results, Conclusions </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0185A Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 11, Nov 93 
(signed to press 20 Sep 93) pp 2-5 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0185A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Col-Gen N. Dimidyuk, commander of the Missile </F>
and Artillery Troops of the Ground Troops, under the rubric "A 
Topical Subject": "To the Arms Market Through Joint Efforts"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  IDEX-93: Results, Reflections, Conclusions </H5>
  The Russian exhibit was the largest at the International 
Exhibition of Weapons and Military Equipment held in the United 
Arab Emirates this year. It included everything from a 
Kalashnikov assault rifle to a transport helicopter and a large 
ASW ship. In my opinion the willingness of enterprises in our 
defense complex to display the latest items with a view to 
selling them to potential clients was greeted with interest and 
at the same time with caution by military firms of the USA, 
Great Britain, France, Canada and the Republic of South Africa. 
And that is understandable. The arms trade today is the most 
lucrative business there is. It can be compared to diamond sales 
with respect to revenues generated. And one should not seriously 
count on mutual understanding among the leading foreign firms. 
The competition is fierce. 
  In order to trade successfully as equals, then, enterprises 
in our defense complex will have to take a sharp turn toward the 
market. I feel that since this is a state matter, an attitude 
corresponding to this status should be taken toward it. The 
exhibition demonstrated once again that we must give priority 
for the immediate future to the development of the most modern 
intelligence equipment, including airborne facilities. So long 
as we continue to invest money in the revitalization of 
enterprises producing obviously noncompetitive models, this 
problem will not be solved properly. Is it not time to 
officially designate in the nation a minimum of two or three 
competitors producing these products? 
  Foreign experience has indicated the need for such measures. 
The government of postwar Japan, for example, did not permit 
firms to produce products for export until a fully competitive 
basis had been shaped in the industry. The effects of these 
decisions were so great that competition became one of the most 
important organizational principles even in relations within 
firms. We know that the Sony company is presently developing 
computers and video recorders simultaneously in ten highly 
competitive areas. 
  This is typical also for the companies of other Western 
nations. Among the largest American companies producing the 
latest weapons, for example, only a tenth of the projects now 
reach the stage of commercial sale. Their designers always bear 
in mind the individual, the team or the crew. A convenient 
arrangement of this or that weapon model, well-designed lighting 
for the compartment, reliable intercom systems, fans and air 
conditioners, and effective fire-extinguishing facilities are a 
basic requirement of the arms purchasers. Extremely important 
along with the administrative and legal measures are economic 
regulators, which include long-term measures (programs, 
subsidies and benefits for effecting important structural and 
technological reforms in the defense industry), as well as 
measures designed to stimulate ongoing legal competition. Along 
with foreign economic actions, these measures include the 
regulation of prices, taxes, interest and the benefit of state 
orders. 
  It will clearly be extremely difficult for our nation to 
take 
such a turn, particularly since the removal of the state from 
the economy has only begun. And this means that in order to 
stimulate competition the state must concern itself with the 
viability of those enterprises which are not experiencing the 
best of times. This state concern must differ from that of the 
present, however. If the state intends to take on the support of 
weak competitors, then it must see to the implementation of 
measures to improve their health. 
  Incidentally, it should be mentioned that the reduction of 
the defense budget is evoking concern that allocations for basic 
research in the defense industry will also be reduced. This 
situation could result, as an example, in Russia's artillery 
science and technology taking a back seat in world scientific 
and technological progress. And we have fine designers, real 
professional specialists, working in the military-industrial 
complex. Take the team at the Uraltransmash production 
association, for example. The MSTA-S 152mm self-propelled 
howitzer displayed at the exhibition was developed there under 
the supervision of general designer Yu. Tomashov. Comments by 
the military experts indicate that its technical-tactical 
features are superior to those of American, British and French 
guns of the same caliber. Its main merit is its modern ammo-feed 
system and its high maximum rate of fire. Nor could I fail to 
mention one other prominent designer, S. Nepobedim, who has 
developed a large number of missiles--from ATGM to the 
well-known Oka and the Tochka missile system, which was 
displayed at the exhibition. I believe that books will be 
written about Sergey Pavlovich and this designer's extensive 
service to the homeland. His creative work is based on a union 
of the latest achievements of basic science and advanced 
technology. 
  It is a terrible thing to think that many of these people 
will be deprived of the opportunity to engage in basic research 
as they should and will lose their scientific skills. In the 
conversion of the defense industry basic research should not be 
curtailed but, on the contrary, should be enhanced. This fact is 
for some reason discussed unwillingly and in different 
languages, as it were. Some people discuss it openly and 
honestly, while others just give accounts and reports. Still 
others are demandingly reproachful, especially when they want to 
shift the blame for their blunders onto subordinates. The 
latter, they say, underestimate the importance of this factor. 
But the language of truth should prevail in this discussion. He 
who is afraid to discuss the problem openly and honestly today, 
no matter how unpleasant it is, he who has had it with criticism 
directed at him is convincingly demonstrating that he has become 
a totally new type of conventionalist hiding his true identity 
behind the entire discussion. 
  Given the great importance of these matters, the level of 
preparation and organization of the exhibit takes on particular 
importance. I would note with satisfaction that in the course of 
the joint effort we developed good business relations with V. 
Glukhikh, chairman of the Committee for the Defense Branches of 
Industry, with his first deputy G. Yanpolskiy and with the 
exhibit's board of directors P. Trishin, V. Kartavtsev and V. 
Belukov. 
  It should be acknowledged, however, that, unfortunately, 
certain matters were not worked out in the best possible way at 
the first stage. In this regard I would have to express regret 
over the situation which developed with the loading of weapons 
and military equipment onto maritime and railway transport 
facilities and their unloading. The experience showed that the 
establishments and military departments involved need to give 
some serious thought to this matter. There was a shortage of 
gear for securing the items (rope, chains, bracing line and 
running-gear supports), beams and devices for loading large 
pieces of military equipment by means of cranes. This included 
design flaws in the equipment models themselves (absence of 
hooks, claws and other devices), which hampered their loading 
onto these types of transport. How does one account for all of 
this? 
  Or take the following, which should not escape notice. In my 
view, the range of the latest weapons and military equipment 
selected was so diverse it not only significantly complicated 
preparations for the display but also made it impossible to 
design the pavilion so as to draw the visitors' attention to 
specific models. IDEX-93 was the debut of our defense industry, 
except for specific models of aviation equipment, which had been 
displayed at previous international air shows. Nonetheless, this 
approach could still not be considered optimal. I believe that 
in future such large undertakings the weapons should be broken 
down into groups: Missile troops, artillery and air defense, for 
example; armored and engineer troops; aviation; communication 
and radioelectronic equipment, and so forth. This would make it 
possible to display not just "bare" models but the weapons 
system in its entirety. That is, everything involved with the 
system, including the ZIP [set of spare parts, instruments and 
accessories], repair assemblies, combat support supplies and 
equipment, and modern ammunition for the most diverse purposes. 
  It is hardly worthwhile to scrimp on funds to develop 
advertising write-ups, video films, posters and electrically 
operated stands depicting the parts and assemblies of the 
components and mechanisms for the models of training equipment 
to be displayed. We now need to mesh all of the know-how we have 
developed into a single whole and concentrate it all in the 
hands of those who produce the weapons and military equipment. I 
realize, however, that it will be extremely difficult or even 
impossible to do this. This is because the defense industry 
enterprises have not yet been granted complete independence. 
  The equipment is one thing, but its effect in the arms 
market 
will be predetermined in great part by how well the teams and 
crews are prepared. The generals and officers of the MO 
[Ministry of Defense] GRAU [Main Missile and Artillery 
Directorate] and GBTU [Main Armor Directorate], our directorate 
and the military districts deserve high praise in this respect. 
Tests involving live missile launchings and live firing were 
conducted under their supervision at the Gorokhovetskiy (MVO 
[Moscow Military District]) and Kapustin-Yar (PriVO [Volga 
Military District]) training centers. A special tactical 
exercise involving live firing and conducted under the 
supervision of Col-Gen V. Semenov, commander in chief of the 
Ground Troops, was successfully fitted into the exhibit 
preparations plan and was off perceptible benefit. This is where 
the officers achieved a moral victory and acquired confidence in 
their capabilities. 
  And now, as a result of the painstaking and intense work, 
top 
honors and first prize have been awarded to Russia's missilemen 
and artillerymen for firing on the range. They bettered the norm 
for combat performance in the desert by 25-30 percent and made 
no technical errors in the process. Thanks primarily to the good 
professional skills of officers A. Popov, S. Krainov, V. 
Polyakov, A. Dyrdin, V. Kuchinskiy, V. Kisov and A Khodul, the 
demonstration firing and missile launches took place without 
hitches and with highly effective fire. 
  It goes without saying that when military duty merges with 
an 
inner need for self-improvement, with a love for the profession, 
in this meld are born such professionals. They know what they 
are worth and each of them, so to speak, has something to place 
onto the scale. 
  In conclusion, I should mention that the ideas expressed in 
these comments do not cover all of the problems involved in 
accessing the arms market by far. There can be no doubt about 
one thing, however, that we will not travel this difficult path 
without joint efforts on the part of state agencies, the 
developers of the new weapons and practical specialists in the 
forces. 
  COPYRIGHT: VOYENNYY VESTNIK No 11 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42430 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94029" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> GENERAL ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> ARMS TRADE </F>
<H3> <TI>   Role of Belarus in Arms Market </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  WS2801083094 Minsk VO SLAVU RODINY in Russian 25, 26 Jan 94 
p 3 </F>

<F P=103> WS2801083094 </F>
<F P=104>  Minsk VO SLAVU RODINY </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by N. Vaskov: "Who Hinders Arms Trade?"] </F>
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] What are the chances of 
sovereign Belarus on the arms market? Unfortunately, on the 
vast arms market we only have a modest stall occasionally 
visited by poor customers. We cannot compete with any other 
state because we do not manufacture the end product. The 
contracts that we managed to sign with "consumer states" as a 
rule have to do with obsolete products. In one of foreign-trade 
organizations I was told: "The list of our offers includes 
almost a hundred articles. However, in reality consumers are 
interested in five to seven of these. We simply have to scrap 
the rest. Rich buyers turn to rich producers, while our clients 
are poor. They do not put forward any special demands as long 
as the equipment can move and shoot." 
  However, one thing I cannot comprehend: immediately after 
the 
Republic signs a contract, even a small one, [for selling arms] 
protests are voiced by different institutions, including the 
Control Chamber claiming that the deal will bring material and 
moral losses. 
  What makes them think so? These simple examples will help us 
understand their logic. In the fall of 1992, the Belarusintorg 
Association tried to sell $1 million worth of old weapons. 
Specialists say that the world price for the weapons was almost 
$2.5 million. Belarusian controlling organs suspended the 
contract, having decided that the Republic cannot afford to lose 
$1.5 million. In reality, Belarus lost much more than that, 
because it did not receive a penny. Nobody is going to pay us 
world prices for our products, because world powers, including 
Russia, will not put up with our attempts to compete with them 
in the arms trade either now or in the future. Besides, Belarus 
cannot provide spare parts or servicing for the arms it sells, 
which also brings prices down. 
  To be honest, I want to point out that many customers prefer 
to deal with Belarus because until recently, they could sign all 
the necessary documents in 15 to 20 days. Our government's 
approach is highly valued by entrepreneurs. 
  Here is another example: the controlling agencies once 
discovered that Belarusintorg was to pay a private company 
$5,000 for serving as a mediator. They raised a hue and cry: 
why is a state-run company paying private businessmen? And why 
not? Belarusintorg was going to pay with its own money, 
extracted from its own revenues. The existing Law on 
Enterprises does not prohibit this. 
  Claims that the Republic's political prestige may be damaged 
are often artificial and exaggerated. If one is honest he does 
not have to prove it to everyone. 
  Some time ago, newspapers carried reports on the 
Belvneshpromservis company, saying that the latter had attempted 
to sell a shipment of assault rifles to the United States, and 
later the weapons were detained at the Yugoslav shore. Some 
politicians jumped on this case, because there is a ban on arms 
trade with countries like Yugoslavia. They maintained that 
Belarus might face international sanctions. However, is there 
any evidence that it was Belarus who sold the weapons? Are 
there any documents proving this? We sold arms to a third 
country and they acquired a new owner. If the latter violates 
international regulations, let his own government deal with him. 
  Many rules determining arms trade have to be changed. The 
fact is that Belarus, finding itself in an abyss, is sitting on 
a sack of gold. 
  According to most moderate professional estimates, after the 
collapse of the Soviet Union Belarus inherited heaps of modern 
arms, equipment, and property. Some experts believe that 
Belarus could earn up to $1 billion even if it had to sell them 
at dumping prices. However, one of the main conditions is that 
sales should be conducted within the next two to four years and 
not later, because arms and all accompanying equipment become 
obsolete and consumers lose interest in them. We have entire 
arsenals packed with outdated artillery shells. The United 
States and Great Britain are helping us scrap them but they will 
not spend their money on this program forever. Thus, as long as 
somebody wants to buy our arms let us sell them. We do not have 
the means to eliminate large volumes of arms. 
  What and how shall we sell? Provided the $1 billion is a 
realistic figure, all the interested ministries, departments, 
and companies should study this issue with utmost attention. 
Analysts believe that in the immediate future we must outline 
our position with regard to the inherited property of the former 
USSR. In the military-industrial sector these are enterprises, 
amalgamations, and the like. In the Armed Forces -- these are 
troops, their property, and equipment. 
  Who does this legacy belong to? Undoubtedly, it belongs to 
the state. Thus, let the state handle all the serious aspects 
of the problem. 
  Let us start with the conversion project. Russia has begun 
altering its attitude toward conversion, its philosophy and 
ideology. What about Belarus? It is good that 30 U.S. 
companies are ready to participate in a bid for the best 
conversion project in Belarus. Three facilities have already 
been chosen for joint ventures -- BelOMO, Minsk Computer 
Association, and Integral. Our partners believe that as early 
as 1994 they can launch production of satellite television 
equipment and medium-capacity automatic telephone stations. We 
can only hail such plans. 
  At the same time, we should not forget that the Republic has 
decided to have its own army. If we equip it with outdated 
weapons, our sovereignty will be very fragile. If we want to 
maintain our Armed Forces' combat readiness, like it or not we 
have to start producing arms at our military enterprises. We 
cannot do this on our own because we depend on Russian producers 
for many technological processes. Thus, we must form joint 
stock enterprises. The process will be of mutual advantage. 
The famous Tunguska is used by a number of CIS, Middle East, 
and Persian Gulf states. The Belarusian contribution to 
Tunguska's production equals some 17 percent. If we create a 
joint-stock company we will be able to receive one-sixth of the 
profits. We will also preserve the scientific-technical elite, 
and maintain a high technical level of our Army. 
  The same can be said about tracking systems, communications 
equipment, equipment for training centers and test ranges, 
products like "Smerch," "Tor," "Igla," or "S-300." 
  It would be perfect if cooperation could develop within a 
single ruble zone. In this case Russia would not sell us arms 
and equipment at world prices. However, even if Belarus 
introduces a national currency, this approach will yield 
dividends. 
  What path should we choose? First Deputy Defense Minister 
Aleksandr Tushinskiy believes that we [the Defense Ministry] 
should not trade arms. The Ministry has its specific functions, 
while commerce lies in the competence of other structures. 
Beltekhexport General Manager V. Peftiyev suggests a solution 
that is worth mentioning. 
  Peftiyev maintains that the national economy should meet all 
the demands of the Army, which is the guarantor of sovereignty. 
A lion's share of Army orders should be placed with the 
military industrial sector so as to separate the latter from the 
rest of the economy. Besides, we should keep in mind that there 
is a vast demand for these kinds of products in Russia. 
  Second. We must finally determine what kind of army we need. 
I do not mean the number of cooks and generals. We must 
precisely know what would be the best solution under the current 
circumstances -- whether we only need border guards, a couple of 
strategic missiles and a presidential guard, or a garrison in 
every one-horse town. This should be determined by an 
independent committee represented by intellectuals. The 
estimates should be done according to contemporary world 
standards and not norms adopted in the 1940's. 
  After it becomes clear what our Armed Forces need, the state 
represented by a special coordinative committee, should assume 
control over excess arms. The committee should be supervised by 
an official, no lower than a deputy prime minister, competent in 
the issues of military industries. This official should have 
special powers, including issuing orders to sign contracts 
stipulating conditions of payment to foreign middlemen and 
native commercial companies. 
  This organ should not have supervisory functions over 
commercial organizations. It should form joint-stock companies, 
place orders, and decide who should or should not be allowed to 
sell arms. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42431 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94030" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> GENERAL ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> DEFENSE INDUSTRY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Discussion of Presidential Decree on Defense Industry Stability </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0198A Moscow VEK in Russian No 45, 15-25 Nov 93 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 94UM0198A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VEK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Kirill Lebedev: "Pour in the Money, Defense </F>
Industry Workers Say"] 
  [Text] 
<H3>  It Seems the Restructuring of the VPK [Military-Industrial 
Complex] Will Have to Wait </H3>
  Russia truly is a strange state! Two events of the past week 
make one proclaim this. 
  Minister of Finance B. Federov prepared a report for the 
session of the Presidium of the Council of Ministers, in which 
he noted that an increase in the budget deficit from 11.9 to 
22.2 trillion rubles is taking shape this year. This exceeds the 
gross national product by 14 percent. The nation is on the 
threshold of hyperinflation. 
  Shortly before the session of the Presidium of the Council 
of 
Ministers President B. Yeltsin issued for official distribution 
an ukase "On Stabilizing the Economic Situation of Enterprises 
and Organizations of the Defense Industry and Measures to Secure 
State Defense Orders." The reader unfamiliar with this ukase 
will assume that it has to do with curtailing the appetite of 
the military-industrial complex. This would be only natural, 
since the minister of finance is warning of hyperinflation. 
Unfortunately, the reader would be wrong. That is how it is with 
us. We are moving toward hyperinflation but we do not want to 
reform defense production. 
  First, a brief account of the measures contained in the 
president's ukase. Military plants are allowed an advance on 
state defense orders up to a maximum of 20 percent of the total 
of annual budgeted allocations for the purchase of weapons and 
military equipment. At the beginning of next year enterprises 
filling defense orders are allowed to include in the basic cost 
of products outlays for wages in the amount of eight times the 
minimum wage; those engaged in the development of nuclear 
weapons, nine times the minimum. By way of comparison, other 
branches of industry are allowed to include only four times the 
minimum wage. 
  Let us say right off that the president cut back the rigid 
demands of the directors of the military-industrial complex. 
They wanted not 20 but 30 percent in advance for defense jobs. 
The president would go no further. 
  The commentators did not fail to underscore the fact that 
the 
president was pressured by the political atmosphere. It is not 
worth arguing with the directors of the military-industrial 
complex on the eve of elections, and the president understands 
that full well. This is why he signed the ukase. 
  The restructuring of the military-industrial complex will 
still have to continue, however. This unpleasant fact will not 
be mitigated by statements to the effect that the economic 
effectiveness of the defense industry has to be improved. It is 
clear even to a person only superficially familiar with the 
situation in this sector that the defense plants have never 
recognized market economic principles, but have operated and 
continue to operate by the rule: If you want reliable weapons, 
pour in the money! 
  Of course, one can take comfort from the fact that 
individual 
defense enterprises are now doing a great deal to produce 
substitutes for imported equipment, saving foreign currency for 
the state, that they are in fact converting and switching to 
totally civilian products. Nor can one forget that outlays for 
arms production are being reduced year after year. Still, in 
Russia's present situation it cannot afford outlays for these 
purposes, which place a great burden on it. Otherwise, no steps 
to stabilize the financial situation, over which the government 
is racking its brain, will help us avoid hyperinflation. 
According to the finance minister, it is even now at our front 
door. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42432 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94031" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> GENERAL ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> DOCTRINAL ISSUES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Merimskiy: `Afghanistan: Lessons, Conclusions' </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0172A Moscow VOYENNO-ISTORICHESKIY ZHURNAL in Russian No 
11, 1993 pp 30-36 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0172A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNO-ISTORICHESKIY ZHURNAL </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel-General (Ret) V. A. Merimskiy; </F>
continued; see VOYENNO-ISTORICHESKIY ZHURNAL, No 10, 1993: 
"Kabul-Moscow: War to Order"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Introduction or Invasion? </H5>
  After undergoing treatment at the Kislovodsk sanatorium I 
returned to Moscow with my wife. The train arrived at Kursk 
Station near midnight. As we stepped out of the car we were met 
by an officer I didn't know, who told me that Army General S. F. 
Akhromeyev was expecting me. 
  Just a few minutes later I was at the General Staff. After 
inquiring after my health and apologizing for my "kidnapping" at 
the station, S. F. Akhromeyev went on the business part of our 
conversation. 
  It essentially boiled down to this. The Afghan government 
had 
approached our country's leadership several times with an 
insistent request to introduce Soviet troops into Afghanistan. 
The motives were as before--to place state facilities under 
protection, thus freeing the Afghan Army to fight the rebels. 
This matter was resolved positively. Agreement was reached that 
the Afghan side would make a radio announcement to all the world 
about its request. A mobilizational exercise had started in the 
Turkestan Military District, in the course of which the field 
administration of the 40th Army, the 5th and 108th motorized 
rifle divisions, and an army contingent of combat and rear 
support units were being deployed at wartime strength. 
  In general, a force grouping was being created for 
introduction to Afghanistan. A small operational group headed by 
S. F. Akhromeyev was go there to provide assistance in resolving 
mobilizational matters. I was appointed his deputy. Colonels A. 
K. Kotlyar, M. M. Mordas and B. Ya. Rogontsev were assigned to 
the group from the Main Directorate of Combat Training. 
  I was surprised by this turn of events. Had the situation in 
Kabul really grown worse? The mass media, after all, had been 
reporting steady development of the April revolution, its 
support by the people, and a successful struggle against the 
counterrevolution. So what happened there? 
  I reminded S. F. Akhromeyev that after our military 
delegation returned from Afghanistan we had submitted a report 
to the Minister of Defense in which we clearly stated that it 
would be unsuitable to introduce our forces into this country. 
In addition, we emphasized that the freedom-loving Afghan people 
would not condone intervention from outside, and cited a number 
of facts confirming this conclusion. As an example when our 
Military Advisor made a casual remark to the Commander of an 
Afghan Army regiment, the reply was this: "We didn't ask you to 
come here. Go back to your own country, and we'll sort things 
out ourselves." 
  "The situation in the country took a dramatic turn for the 
worst after Amin assumed unshared power," S. F. Akhromeyev 
explained. "Repressions assumed mass proportions, by which the 
existing regime compromised itself, and conditions under which 
Amin might be overthrown by the counterrevolution had been 
created." 
  "But isn't it true that Amin isn't the first, and probably 
not the last ruler to be deposed in Afghanistan?" I noted. 
  "That's all so," S. F. Akhromeyev agreed, "but the Americans 
could come in together with the counterrevolution, and that 
would be extremely undesirable. In addition our relations with 
China, which supports Pakistan, are strained. And the situation 
in Iran isn't clear. It was in this situation that the question 
as to what we were going to do arose. 
  "The position of the General Staff was unequivocal--don't 
introduce any forces. When we were given the question of troop 
introduction for preplanning, we prepared a report to the 
Ministry of Defense. It indicated that extremely weighty 
arguments would have to support such a critical decision as 
introducing troops into a foreign country, and all the more so 
an Eastern country, and that we didn't have such arguments. 
  "Of course the leadership feels that our forces would stay 
in 
their garrisons and defend the existing regime against attempts 
to overthrow it from without, while inside the country the 
Afghan Army would deal with the rebels, and we would soon leave. 
Of course, it was more likely that our prestige and 
international position would be undermined. Moreover, grounds 
would appear for accusing the Soviet Union of aggression. But an 
order is an order. Although let me say once again that the 
General Staff is opposed to introduction." 
  "So what are we preparing the division for--introduction or 
invasion?" I asked. 
  "For both the former and the latter," was the reply. 
  In the morning of 14 December 1979 our group took off by air 
to its base in the city of Termez. S. F. Akhromeyev was delayed 
in Moscow until evening. We were met at the airfield by 40th 
Army commander Lieutenant-General Yu. V. Tukharinov and Army 
Military Council Member Major-General A. V. Taskayev. 
Immediately upon our arrival at headquarters the commander 
informed us of the progress in mobilizing. Deployment of the 
army field administration, and of the combined units and units, 
was proceeding uneventfully. Rear Service units and subunits 
were mobilizing somewhat more slowly. A large quantity of motor 
vehicles had to be replaced. The fact is that during annual 
mobilization training, enterprise directors held back new 
high-capacity vehicles for themselves, sending small and even 
unserviceable vehicles to the forces in their stead. 
Understanding the difficulties of civilian organizations, the 
unit commanders shut their eyes to this. But the same situation 
was recurring even now, when the mobilization was for real. 
  The district's air force units had already upgraded to full 
combat readiness, and had regrouped to frontier airfields. S. F. 
Akhromeyev flew in to Termez by evening and reported that Amin 
had been deposed, and that Yaqubi was unruffled by this. No 
changes had occurred in the situation in Afghanistan. This 
communication didn't relieve the tension completely. Knowing a 
little about Afghanistan, I didn't exclude the possibility that 
events could develop unpredictably. When I asked who was taking 
Amin's place, Sergey Fedorovich replied that he know nothing 
about that. 
  Our group's work plan was updated on the basis of the 
information we received. I was ordered to supervise preparation 
of the 5th Motorized-rifle Division in Kushka, which was under 
the command of Major-General Yu. V. Shatalin. A group of 
officers under S. F. Akhromeyev remained in Termez, where it 
prepared the army's field administration and the 108th Motorized 
Rifle Division. 
  It should be said that by the time of our arrival the 
administration of the 40th Army, which was under Major-General 
L. N. Lobanov, was basically manned by district staff officers 
and generals, and it was already a fully competent and 
sufficiently coordinated organism. 
  Our work basically consisted of providing assistance to 
commanders in developing teamwork and coordination in the 
subunits, units and combined units after their mobilization, and 
hammering staffs together as administrative bodies. Our task was 
made easier by the fact that district officers were already 
working in both garrisons, and we were able to unite our efforts 
immediately upon arriving in the division. 
  Let me emphasize that the deployment and preparation of the 
forces proceeded almost overtly. 
  Official directives were received soon after. Their essence 
was that in accordance with a treaty of friendship with 
Afghanistan, and at the request of its government, Soviet forces 
were being introduced into the country to render assistance in 
combatting external aggression. No other goals were being 
pursued. As soon as the external interference ceased, Soviet 
Forces would be withdrawn from the country immediately. 
  These explanations were perceived with understanding by the 
personnel. 
  On 19 December 1979 S. F. Akhromeyev telephoned me to say 
that he had taken ill, and was flying to Moscow. He also 
reported that as it turned out, no action was taken against 
Amin, but Afghan Army units had been raised to higher combat 
readiness, and troops had occupied all key positions in Kabul. 
The idea flashed through my mind right away that if this were 
true, then introduction of our troops into Afghanistan would 
mean war. This is probably why the command opted to deploy one 
more motorized rifle division. But these forces were still not 
enough to wage war. When I asked whether this information was 
dependable, Sergey Fedorovich replied that it needed 
confirmation. I gained the impression that he wasn't receiving 
sufficient information from Moscow either. I was ordered to 
temporarily take charge of the work of the operational group. I 
took off for Termez, leaving Colonel L. K. Kotlyar as the senior 
officer in the garrison. 
  There was one question I couldn't get an answer to in 
preparing the troops for introduction into Afghanistan: What is 
this going to be -- introduction or invasion? 
  At first glance there may appear to be no difference in the 
meaning of these two concepts. But actually the difference 
between them is enormous. An invasion is the entry of the armed 
forces of one state into the territory of another without the 
consent of its leadership. Naturally the invading forces 
encounter not only the armed resistance of the other side, but 
also the enmity of the people. Usually such actions end in major 
military conflicts or war. Introduction is entry of the forces 
of one country into the territory of another with the consent or 
at the request of its government. The conditions under which the 
introduced forces remain in the country are totally different in 
this case. 
  The situation was unclear because a conclusive agreement had 
never been reached between the governments of the two states at 
the official level. Nonetheless, I thought that this would be a 
troop introduction, or that our forces out remain where they 
were. After all, conducting an invasion by the forces of two or 
three divisions would be absurd. Of course there was also a 
third variant--they could announce an introduction, but actually 
carry out an invasion. This variant would have been the most 
undesirable, and I would say that it would have been 
adventuristic and knowingly calamitous. 
  During our work we became persuaded that the timetable 
indicated in most mobilization plans for making the units ready 
was unrealistic--the time allowed was extremely short. Moreover 
the absence of a program for developing teamwork and 
coordination disconcerted many reserve officers, especially 
platoon commanders. 
  We were compelled to develop the needed program right during 
mobilization, but we had too little time at our disposal. 
  I communicated all of my remarks and proposals based on the 
mobilization personally to Chief of General Staff Marshal of the 
Soviet Union N. V. Ogarkov. He listened to me attentively, and 
asked my to put everything I said in writing. Later on most of 
our proposals were updated as the mobilization plans were 
revised. 
  In the evening of 23 December I reported the readiness of 
the 
divisions to march to Chief of General Staff N. V. Ogarkov once 
again. 
  The Marshal informed me that introduction of our forces was 
tentatively planned to begin in the second half of 25 December. 
The 108th Motorized Rifle division and only the reconnaissance 
group of the 5th Motorized Rifle Division were to be committed. 
The army staff would remain where it was. For the moment the 
40th Army would consist of the 5th and 108th motorized rifle 
divisions and the 860th Separate Regiment of the Central Asian 
Military District, which was to begin moving out the next day. 
The 56th Separate Airborne Assault Brigade was to remain for the 
moment at the disposal of the district. The mission would be 
announced tentatively tomorrow in the second half of the day. 
  In the course of the following day we once again checked the 
readiness of the 108th Motorized Rifle Division to march. An 
order to replace the division commander came in at a totally 
inopportune moment. I suggested to General Yu. P. Maksimov that 
General K. A. Kuzmin should lead the division into the area 
assigned to it, and then transfer it to the new 
commander--Colonel V. I. Mironov--after that. Yuriy Pavlovich 
agreed with me. 
  In the second half of 24 December General of the Army V. I. 
Varennikov (who was the Chief of the Main Operational 
Directorate of the General Staff at that time) telephoned to say 
that the Chief of the Operational Administration of the Afghan 
Army would arrive in Termez today with a group of officers. The 
purpose of his trip was to carry out joint reconnaissance in 
order to determine the stationing areas of the Soviet forces in 
Afghanistan more precisely. The Commander of the 40th Army was 
ordered to meet the delegation and conduct negotiations with it. 
There was no recommendation for me to meet with it. Why all of 
this secrecy, I didn't know. 
  The arrival of the Afghan military delegation inspired the 
confidence that agreement had been reached on introduction of 
our forces into Afghanistan. I knew Lieutenant-General 
Babadzhan, chief of the Operational Administration of the Afghan 
Army's General Staff, from previous meetings. He assumed this 
post upon going over to the side of the revolution. He had 
difficulty in handling his duties, and he displayed no business 
qualities. He behaved very cautiously. He agreed unquestioningly 
with all recommendations of our advisors, but he took no steps 
to carry them out, finding excuses one out over every ten times. 
  Consequently Babadzhan's visit was certainly not on his own 
initiative. He would have come only with the permission of Chief 
of General Staff Major Yaqubi, who was wholly devoted to Amin. 
  This was the situation that persuaded me that agreement on 
introducing--let me emphasize introducing--our force into 
Afghanistan had been reached between the governments of both 
countries. 
  At 0200 on 25 December I reported to Marshal of the Soviet 
Union N. V. Ogarkov by high-frequency telephone: 
  "The 108th Motorized Rifle Division is ready to march. We 
are 
awaiting receipt of the mission and the time to move out. Please 
consider that we will require 6-7 hours to deploy a bridge. We 
have worked out all of the details with the Afghan Army 
delegation." 
  "A directive is now being drafted, and after it is signed by 
Defense Minister D. F. Ustinov it will be sent to the district," 
reported N. V. Ogarkov. "To set you in the right direction, let 
me give you a brief synopsis of it. The internal political 
situation in Afghanistan is complex, and it is getting worse. At 
the request of the country's government our forces are being 
introduced into Afghanistan in order to stabilize the situation, 
to free the Afghan Army from protective functions, and to switch 
it over to fighting the counterrevolution. 
  "The force grouping to be introduced includes the 40th Army 
(the 108th and 5th motorized rifle divisions, the 860th Separate 
Motorized Rifle Regiment, the 56th Separate Airborne Assault 
Brigade, the 353d army artillery and 2d surface-to-air missile 
brigades; the 103d Airborne Division and the 345th Separate 
Airborne Regiment; the 34th Combined Air Corps). In addition the 
201st Motorized-rifle Division from the Central Asian Military 
District will be advanced to the Kabul sector, and the 68th 
Motorized-rifle Division from the Turkestan Military District 
will be advanced as reserved to the Kushka sector after 
mobilization. (Soon after introduction, the army artillery and 
surface-to-air missile brigades and the separate missile 
battalions of the two motorized rifle divisions were withdrawn 
from Afghanistan.) 
  "Concurrently with the start of the advance of the 108th 
Motorized Rifle Division, the following will land at these 
airfields: Bagrame--the 3d Battalion of the 345th Airborne 
Regiment; Kabul--the 103d Airborne Division under the command of 
Major-General I. Ryabchenko. Aviation will remain in place for 
the moment." 
  The Army Commander and the Division Commander were 
immediately informed of this, which made it possible to finish 
loading all of the gear into motor transport without haste, to 
once again clarify the march computations and the route of 
travel, to assign the missions to all the personnel, to clarify 
the goals of our introduction, and to form up the columns of 
march ahead of time. 
  On the morning of 25 December I telephoned N. V. Ogarkov to 
report that we were set to cross the state border at 1500 Moscow 
time (1700 local). 
  Army Commander Yu. V. Tukharinov was conducting 
reconnaissance together with the Afghan delegation at this time. 
I was at the District Commander's office when he turned to me 
and reported. 
  "As soon as we landed in Kunduz we went to see Abdullah 
Amin, 
the older brother of the Head of State, who was responsible for 
the northern provinces of Afghanistan. He was sitting as it his 
desk when we entered. He didn't rise to his feet, and he didn't 
even greet us. He gestured for us to sit down on the couch. The 
discussion concerned the disposition of our forces. He had been 
informed of their proposed introduction into Afghanistan and 
their stationing in the country's north. Abdullah named several 
places which I had found to be unsuitable during my inspection. 
I would like you, Comrade Commander, to allow us to set up our 
camp after first coordinating this matter with local 
authorities." 
  After some thought, Yu. P. Maksimov gave such permission. 
  At the scheduled time the forward detachment of the 108th 
Motorized Rifle Division and the forward echelon of the 103d 
Airborne Division crossed the state border into Afghanistan on 
land and in the air. 
  Throughout the entire night of 25-26 December 1979 we 
monitored the advance of the division. In the morning of 26 
December Colonel B. Ya. Rogontsev, who was traveling together 
with the division staff, reported that two regiments had reached 
their designated areas 1.5-2 hours ahead of schedule. The march 
was proceeding normally. Many of the inhabitants came out to 
greet our columns. When they halted, men and boys came up to the 
vehicles, displaying a certain amount of interest and 
friendship. Yes, that's the way it was. The fact that the 
situation changed later on is another matter. But at the time of 
introduction of our forces a certain faction of the people 
displayed goodwill and cordiality. Colonel Rogontsev then 
reported that the highway shown on the map was nonexistent in 
the Tash Kurghan-Kunduz section. Its construction had not yet 
begun, and in its place was a continuous stretch of dunes. 
Consequently, the units that were to be located in the city of 
Kunduz took a detour 120-150 kilometers long. 
  After reporting the situation to Moscow I left for the 
airfield, where I met S. L. Sokolov, who had flown in from the 
capital. He said that the introduction of our forces was the 
subject of much debate in the leadership of the Ministry of 
Defense. There were opinions both pro and con. When the final 
decision was made, leadership of this operation was assigned to 
Sokolov. 
  On the following day the situation in Kabul changed 
dramatically. The so-called "second phase" of the April 
revolution began, marked by assassination of the former Chief of 
State Amin, Babrak Karmal became the Head of State, the Prime 
Minister, the General Secretary of the PDPA [People's Democratic 
Party of Afghanistan] and the Supreme Commander-in-Chief. 
  In order to stabilize the situation in the capital the 108th 
Motorized-rifle Division entered it at 1930, while the 5th 
Motorized-rifle Division was given the mission of crossing the 
state border at 0100 on 28 December 1978 and moving in the 
direction of Kushka, Herat and Shindand. 
  The second day's march was much more difficult than the 
first. This was explained not only by the presence of Salang 
mountain pass on the route, but also by the absence of maps 
among platoon commanders. A road section of around 100 km over 
the pass was especially dangerous. The road iced over at night. 
Wheeled equipment skidded on the upgrade, while tracked vehicles 
slid on the downgrade. 
  Ventilation in the tunnel was designed to accommodate one 
vehicle at a time, but these were continuous columns of armored 
equipment with diesel engines. Because of the high density of 
fumes the drivers had to put on gas masks; even so, the division 
was able to enter Kabul on schedule. 
  The operational group of the staff of the 40th Army assumed 
full control over the two divisions and the two units that 
entered Afghanistan. As for what the "second phase" of the 
revolution was, and what its content and direction were, no one 
could give an answer. The mass media quickly seized upon this 
terminology and blared it out without revealing its essence. 
Then they soon stopped talking and writing about the "second 
phase" of the April revolution as suddenly as they started. 
  After the 108th and 5th motorized-rifle divisions were 
dispatched and control over them and other units that had 
entered Afghanistan was transferred to the operational group of 
the 40th Army, our group concentrated its efforts on combat 
coordination of the 201st and 68th motorized-rifle divisions, 
which finished mobilizing and drew up to the state border. 
  On 4 January 1980 our group, which consisted of 18 persons 
headed by Marshal S. L. Sokolov, flew into Kabul. We were met by 
a real Russian winter--bright sun, a great deal of snow, and 
15-20 degrees of frost. 
  We were met at the airfield by the new ambassador F. A. 
Tabeyev, Afghan Defense Minister Lieutenant Colonel Mohammad 
Rafi, Member of the Presidium of the Revolutionary Council Abdul 
Kadyr, the new Chief Military Advisor Lieutenant-General S. K. 
Magometov and other officials. 
  We drove straight from the airfield to the embassy. F. A. 
Tabeyev, formerly the First Secretary of an oblast committee in 
the Tatar ASSR, had just recently arrived in Afghanistan, and 
therefore he was not fully informed on the situation, but he 
estimated it to be complex and acute. The Ambassador noted that 
the country's new leadership was in a developmental stage, and 
that it required aid, although attempts were already being made 
to infringe upon the rights of PDPA members of the Khalk 
faction. This announcement caught our attention. Could it be 
that the reverse process was about to begin, in which the 
Parcham faction, which was now in power, would enjoy a 
privileged position while persecution of the Khalk faction would 
begin. 
  All statements by the ambassador, and especially his 
conclusions, were categorical in nature. It felt as if a person 
who had become accustomed to ruling was talking. Prior to his 
appointment as ambassador, Tabeyev enjoyed the reputation of a 
highly placed career party worker, possessing enormous power in 
the republic and having grown accustomed to unquestioning 
fulfillment of his directives. He was internally convinced that 
he would handle his new duties successfully. 
  In short, in Afghanistan Tabeyev continued to feel himself 
to 
be more an oblast committee secretary that an ambassador. 
  On that same day S. L. Sokolov, the Ambassador and I were 
received by B. Karmal. He met us very warmly. 
  Approaching S. L. Sokolov, he inquired after his health, 
expressed pleasure in our arrival, and invited all to sit down. 
He was extremely gracious in his manners, but a certain 
cautiousness could be sensed. The discussion was general--I 
would even say introductory. 
  B. Karmal talked basically about the difficulties he 
encountered upon assuming the post of head of state, and about 
the kind of aid that would be desirable from our country. It was 
evident from everything that the new head of state had not yet 
acquired confidence, and was only starting to familiarize 
himself with the numerous duties imposed upon him. 
  Sergey Leonidovich--a heaven-sent diplomat--steered the 
discussion very competently, directing it into the needed 
channel. He emphasized several times that our forces had been 
introduced into Afghanistan to provide moral support to the 
country's leadership and to exert a psychological influence upon 
antigovernment forces. The troops could take the most important 
state facilities under their protection, and free the Afghan 
Army to fight the rebels and to strengthen national rule. If 
necessary they were ready to provide assistance to Afghan 
subunits and units in personnel training and in preparation for 
combat activities. As far as concerned supplying arms, combat 
equipment and military property to the Afghan Army, this issue 
had to be resolved at the government level. 
  In the evening we talked with generals and officers from the 
Administration of the Chief Military Advisor. Information 
received from them indicated that the new leadership of the 
Democratic Republic of Afghanistan had in principle been 
recognized by the officer corps of the Afghan Army, even though 
it wasn't in control of the situation in the country yet. After 
introduction of our troops, counterrevolutionary forces became 
more active in a number of regions, and especially in the 
country's northeast. Cases of attacks upon lone vehicles of ours 
had already occurred, and the first injuries and deaths 
appeared. Antigovernment demonstrations were conducted in 
Qandahar. Many corps, division, brigade and regiment commanders 
who were members of the Khalk faction of the PDPA were replaced 
by officers from the Parcham faction. This act evoked discontent 
among officers from the Khalk faction, because it made them 
uncertain about the future; hence their inertia and indifference 
toward their official duties. 
  Various panicky rumors began spreading widely through the 
army, and many believed them, because no official denials 
followed in the forces. The morale of the personnel declined 
significantly, and educational work was put on hold. 
  The information was not reassuring. S. L. Sokolov emphasized 
that advisors with the troops were essentially working under 
combat conditions. This required great courage on their part. It 
is a great credit to them that they prevented conflicts between 
Afghan and Soviet forces upon introduction of the latter into 
the country. 
  At the end of his statement Sergey Leonidovich noted: 
  "I would like to turn special attention to the 
impermissibility of drawing Soviet forces into the armed 
conflict with the rebels, and that their functions are to be 
entirely different, as I already said." 
  In the morning of the following day we met with the Defense 
Minister of Afghanistan. Lieutenant Colonel Mohammad Rafi had 
about him the look of independence and, at the same time, 
modesty. 
  S. L. Sokolov informed him of the work we had done, and of 
the plans for this next two days; he also offered an estimate of 
the state of affairs in the army, and expressed his hope that it 
would improve. 
  It must be said that in terms of the experience of his 
previous work and his level of military knowledge, M. Rafi was 
not ready for his position as defense minister. Moreover, his 
personality didn't stand out in the officer milieu. He was 
unknown, and it was difficult for him to count on the support of 
the officer corps. But to be fair, Rafi did not overestimate his 
strengths, and he did not build any illusions. Even so, he was 
unable to master his new responsibilities, and at the end of the 
year he was relieved from his position under the pretense of 
sending him to a Soviet military academy for training. 
  During our meeting the minister said little--he did more 
listening than talking--and in conclusion he said: 
  "The Soviet Army's experience is a model for us of how we 
need to defend our motherland. Without your assistance it would 
be difficult for us to accomplish this task in short order. I am 
laying high hopes on Soviet military advisors. They are very 
conscientious, and we value their work highly. Please give me 
whatever help you can in mastering these new responsibilities of 
mine as quickly as possible. We will accept all of your 
recommendations gratefully." 
  Immediately after this meeting we flew to Qandahar, and on 
the following day to Bagram, Herat and Shindand, where we spent 
some time with three Afghan infantry divisions and with units of 
the 5th Motorized-rifle Division under the command of General 
Yu. V. Shatalin. 
  What we saw was not pleasant. For practical purposes the 
Afghan divisions did not exist as a single whole. 
  Subunits were significant distances apart from one another, 
and they lacked communication not only among themselves but also 
with the staffs of their units. 
  The local government authorities didn't look any better. 
Having no contact with the provincial centers and the capital, 
they were left to their own devices. Telephone communication was 
disrupted by rebels throughout almost the entire country. The 
population received information on the situation in the republic 
from the mouths of the clergy, who were mostly opposed to the 
revolutionary transformations. 
  A visit to the Afghan 20th Infantry Division in Bagram left 
an especially depressing impression. The 4th Artillery Regiment, 
an infantry battalion of the 10th Infantry Regiment, and two 
battalions of the 31st Infantry Regiment had gone over to the 
rebels as a sign of protest against introduction of our forces. 
Only 60 officers out of 130 and around 100 of 1,300 enlisted men 
were left in the 31st Infantry Regiment. Only the 24th Infantry 
Regiment, located in Faizabad 200-250 km away from the division 
headquarters, was still combat worthy. 
  It was our conclusion that the division had ceased to exist 
as a fighting unit. 
  I had occasion to visit these garrisons during my first 
visit 
to Afghanistan. Comparing the situation of 2-3 months ago with 
the present, I noted a dramatic worsening. The officers were in 
confusion. One of the causes of low morale was universal 
replacement of senior commanders by oft-unprepared personnel who 
were loyal to B. Karmal. The apathy and inertia that spread 
among the personnel were intensified even more by all kinds of 
panicky rumors. It was obvious that action had to be taken not 
only against the rebels but also chiefly against the army's 
demoralization. 
  Of course the situation could not but cause concern in S. L. 
Sokolov, and he felt it necessary to share his ideas once again 
with Defense Minister M. Rafi. The meeting was held immediately 
upon our group's return to Kabul. Sergey Leonidovich acquainted 
the minister with his estimate of army affairs, after which he 
said: 
  "The current situation in the army needn't be considered to 
be hopeless. The state has sufficient strength to oppose the 
rebels. In my opinion the main task of the ministry today is to 
reinforce order and organization in the army, and ensure 
unquestioning support of the country's new leadership by it. 
  "We feel that the time has come to activate the armed 
struggle of the army against the rebels. After all, they won't 
be able to put down the counterrevolution by sitting in their 
garrisons." 
  "Comrade Marshal," M. Rafi turned to S. L. Sokolov, "I would 
like to take advantage of your graciousness and ask you to 
allocate a few forces from the Soviet troops to fight off rebels 
from the 20th Infantry Divisions's artillery depots together 
with Afghan subunits. They are located in the population center 
of Narin, where an artillery regiment that had gone over to the 
enemy's side is deployed." 
  "We'll help you," replied S. L. Sokolov, "we'll assign one 
or 
two Soviet subunits to joint actions. But I feel that the return 
of the artillery depots is only part of the mission. After all, 
not all subunits of the artillery regiment went over to the 
rebels. We need to restore its combat worthiness by relying upon 
subunits that have remained faithful to the revolution. In 
addition, you will probably need to provide assistance in 
restoring local bodies of government. By the way, the subsequent 
situation in the country may require joint actions of us in a 
number of cases. We need to prepare for this. It would be right 
for us to take joint steps right now to establish friendly 
relations between the personnel of our armies." 
  We subsequently met on several occasions with the Afghan 
Minister of Defense to resolve the most diverse issues, and in 
each instance there was full understanding of the existing 
problems on his part. 
  (To be continued) 
  COPYRIGHT: "Voyenno-istoricheskiy zhurnal", 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42433 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94032" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> GENERAL ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> DOCTRINAL ISSUES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Offensive on Defending Enemy From Direct Contact </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0176A Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 9, Sep 93 
(signed to press 20 Aug 93) pp 30-35 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0176A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Candidate of Military Sciences, Lecturer, </F>
Colonel N. Yants and Major P. Dulnev: "From Direct Contact"] 
  [Text] It is important for a commander who is 
organizing an offensive against a defending enemy from direct 
contact with him to skillfully select the staging area, conduct 
the required redeployment, create the combat formation and 
precisely plan the battle. That is what is discussed in the 
following article. 
  Quantitative and qualitative changes in weapons, and also 
views on the nature of a modern combined arms battle, require a 
more rational selection of the methods to transition to the 
offensive. An offensive under conditions of direct contact with 
the enemy from the position of the defense will be most typical 
for subunits at the beginning of a war. 
  Redeployment of the battalion is conducted to concentrate 
the 
main personnel and equipment on the axis of the offensive and 
the occupation by subunits of a staging area in the designated 
areas. It must be simple in concept and be carried out in short 
periods of time with accomplishment of measures to deceive the 
enemy, as a rule, at night with strict observance of the mode of 
activity of the defending subunits. In this case, the battalion 
occupies a staging area [iskhodnyy rayon] and the company -- a 
jumping-off position [iskhodnaya pozitsiya]. Furthermore, a tank 
battalion can occupy an assembly area [vyzhidatelnaya pozitsiya]. 
  First echelon motorized-rifle platoons and companies are 
located in the first trench and their armored personnel vehicles 
[BMP's] (armored transport vehicles [BTR's]) at fire positions 
alongside their subunits or 50 meters behind them. When it is 
impossible for armored personnel vehicles (armored transport 
vehicles) to reach the leading edge without being detected, they 
can be located jointly with the coordinating tank subunit at its 
attack or assembly area. 
  The company's command-observation post is prepared at a 
distance of 200 meters from the attack position and the 
battalion's command-observation post -- at a distance of up to 
300 meters behind the first echelon companies. The grenade 
launcher platoon occupies fire positions at that same depth and 
the antitank subunit -- at a distance of up to 100 meters. 
  A staging area is assigned to the battalion with the 
calculation of ensuring the concealed disposition of subunits, 
their least possible vulnerability from all types of weapons, 
and favorable conditions to transition to the offensive. A 
staging area is assigned to a first echelon motorized-rifle 
battalion in the axis of its impending offensive within the 
first position and, to a second echelon battalion -- normally 
within the second position. 
  A motorized-rifle company's attack position consists of a 
trench, the connecting trenches adjacent to it, and the fire 
positions of BMP's (BTR's) and other weapons that are attached 
to the company. In the process, a first echelon motorized-rifle 
company is normally located in the first trench and the 
battalion's second echelon company (reserve) occupies an attack 
position in the second and third trenches. It is advisable to 
leave in place the subunits that were in the battalion's second 
echelon within the assigned action area from which they advance 
to the final coordination line. 
  Tank subunits' attack positions can be designated at a 
distance of 2-4 km from the leading edge of the enemy defense 
under conditions that ensure their concealment from visual 
surveillance and communications intercept. Otherwise, they are 
located at the assembly area (5-7 km). That distance (with the 
skillful utilization of terrain) caused the least vulnerability 
of tanks from all types of enemy weapons. 
  The mortar (artillery) battery's fire position is usually 
selected at that distance in order to ensure maximum utilization 
of its fire capabilities. It can be up to 500 meters from the 
first echelon companies' rear boundary. 
  A battalion that is occupying the defense in direct contact 
with the enemy conducts a concealed redeployment. The battalion 
commander defines its sequence and time periods in his orders. 
  A battalion commander issued the following order for 
occupying a staging area for an offensive at a Northwestern 
Group of Forces exercise (see the diagram). 


  "The mortar battery and the grenade launcher platoon 
should occupy the fire positions indicated from 21:00 to 23:00 
on 15.03. At the same time, the antitank platoon should deploy 
at the line of fire positions behind the second trench in the 
gap between 7th and 8th motorized-rifle companies. 
  "7th and 8th motorized-rifle companies occupy the 
staging area at 23:00 on 15.03. Armored personnel vehicles 
occupy fire positions behind their subunits. Driver-mechanics, 
gunners and deputy platoon commanders remain in their BMP's. The 
remaining personnel complete the engineering works of the 
staging area. 
  "Until the initiation of the attack, 9th 
motorized-rifle company remains in the previous defensive 
position and advances on its axis after 7th motorized-rifle 
company seizes the defensive position at hill 97.3. 
  "During the redeployment, the tank battalion (less a 
tank company) is concentrated at the assembly area northwest of 
Serovo. Advance to the final coordination line during the period 
from "Ch" -- 0.22 to "Ch" --0.04. 
  "The 1st tank platoon remains at the positions occupied 
and accomplishes fire missions through direct fire during the 
period of preparation fire for the assault. With the 2nd 
motorized rifle battalion's transition to the attack, the 
platoon occupies its place in the 7th motorized-rifle company's 
combat formation. 
  Conclude occupying the staging area by 04:00 on 
15.04." 
  On the night prior to the offensive, the motorized-rifle 
companies arrive at the attack positions. Guns and other weapons 
that have been assigned to conduct direct fire, occupy prepared 
fire positions. They are located in prepared shelters and 
advance to conduct fire against assigned targets with the 
initiation of preparatory fire for the assault. 
  At the attack position, subunits are at readiness to repel a 
possible enemy offensive and observe the prescribed conduct 
regime both on the forward edge and in the depth. 
  The battalion commander's work procedures to organize the 
offensive will depend on the content of the mission received, 
the nature of the probable enemy's operations, the availability 
of time and other factors. With the occupation of the attack 
position, the battalion commander organizes surveillance and 
security, assigns the missions of repelling a possible enemy 
attack and also strikes of enemy aviation and airmobile teams to 
the companies and weapons, issues orders for additional engineer 
preparation of positions and lines, while devoting special 
attention to painstaking camouflage and accomplishment of 
measures for protection of subunits from precision-guided 
weapons. 
  During an offensive from a position of direct contact with 
the enemy, the battalion commander conducts a large portion of 
the work for the organization of the battle in the field (making 
decisions, the commander's reconnaissance, assignment of combat 
missions, organization of coordination, and effective engagement 
of the enemy). In the process, special attention is devoted to 
the commander's reconnaissance -- a distinctive type of 
reconnaissance of the enemy and terrain at the attack position. 
  At the previously mentioned exercise, the battalion 
commander 
began it from a topographical and tactical orientation after 
which he reported the latest data on the enemy to those 
assembled. In the process, while utilizing terrain features 
(orientation points), he precisely defined the trace of the 
forward edge of the enemy defense, the disposition of enemy 
defensive positions and weapons, especially antitank weapons -- 
ATGM's, guns, dug-in tanks, and BMP's, and indicated which 
targets are being destroyed by the senior commander. 
  The terrain and enemy defense were most painstakingly 
studied 
in the depth of the immediate objective. The battalion commander 
directed the attention of his subordinates to the presence and 
nature of obstructions and obstacles, hidden accesses, open 
flanks and gaps that must be exploited during the transition to 
the attack. 
  At the commander's reconnaissance, he indicated on which 
front the battalion is advancing, the first echelon companies, 
their attack positions and combat missions and the axis of 
concentration of the primary efforts. Officers inscribed on 
working maps the revealed weapons, surveillance posts and other 
enemy targets that were subjected to destruction by artillery 
fire and also guns and tanks assigned for direct fire, ATGM's 
and grenade launchers. 
  In the field, the battalion commander indicated the 
positions 
of organic and attached weapons, the locations of passages in 
obstacles, locations for tanks to pass through, the procedures 
for marking them, time for breaching obstacles and their 
installation. The leader of the exercise who was present at the 
commander's reconnaissance on the whole approved this procedure 
of its conduct. 
  Precise assignment of combat missions to subunits is an 
important task in the commander's work for organizing the 
battle. They are disseminated to commanders in oral form through 
the field order or field instruction, as a rule, immediately 
after the commander's reconnaissance. Only that information is 
disseminated that subordinates really need to clarify the 
mission, assess the situation, make decisions, organize 
coordination and prepare subunits for battle. 
  Under current conditions, especially high demands are made 
on 
the organization of coordination while preparing an offensive. 
The task of the commander and staff consists of precisely 
coordinating the combat efforts of a large number of personnel 
and equipment. It is important that the orders for coordination 
did not duplicate the field order but developed the issued 
instructions and made them more specific. 
  The experience of the examined exercise attests that the 
most 
effective method of organizing coordination is when the 
commander not only issues the required orders but also listens 
to the reports of commanders of subordinate and attached 
subunits on operating procedures with a subsequent run-through 
of the most probable events of the impending battle. 
  After issuing the field order, the battalion commander 
reported the goal and work procedures to the officers and 
determined which questions there were on the organization of 
coordination and how he should resolve them. Then, the 
operations of subunits during the redeployment were coordinated 
in detail: Procedures were established for companies (platoons) 
to occupy attack positions for the offensive (2nd 
motorized-rifle battalion commander's orders were cited above). 
  By running-through the tactical events, the officer 
persistently strived for everyone to precisely master the 
procedures for destruction of enemy weapons and personnel at 
defensive positions during the period of preparation fire for 
the assault. He played out urgent situations in the event the 
enemy conducted counter preparation. The operations of tank 
crewmen with artillery and combat helicopters on the procedures 
for conducting fire during the transition to the attack and with 
motorized-riflemen when tanks were passing through the attack 
position were especially painstakingly coordinated. 
  The following were attained as a result of the battalion 
commander's orders, a run-through of the tactical events, and 
the reports of subordinates: A common understanding of the 
missions and the techniques to accomplish them; painstaking 
coordination of effective engagement of the enemy (by aviation, 
artillery, our own weapons and neighbors' weapons) against 
targets, facilities, axes, lines and time. The appropriate 
adjustments were made to the operations of the antiaircraft 
subunit for the cover of the battalion from enemy air strikes 
and issues of flight safety of friendly aircraft during flyovers 
in the fire zone, and measures were clarified for the 
comprehensive support of the battle of battalion subunits and 
communications between them. 
  After the dissemination of missions, planning of the 
offensive battle and organization of coordination, the primary 
goal of the battalion commander, his deputies and the battalion 
staff -- is practical work in subordinate subunits. It is 
carried out by verifying locally the precise accomplishment of 
the issued field order, company commanders' knowledge of the 
opposing enemy, and also their understanding of their missions. 
Assistance was rendered in supplying them with everything 
necessary, detected discrepancies were eliminated on the spot 
and questions that arose were resolved as a result of monitoring 
the timeliness and quality of the accomplishment of measures to 
prepare for battle. 
  Great significance was assigned to the preparation of the 
staging area. It was equipped in an engineering sense while 
considering the redisposition of the battalion's combat 
formation after redeployment and also ensuring reliable 
protection of subunits from enemy precision-guided weapons. 
  An instructive example of the conduct of such measures -- is 
the engineer preparation of the staging area for an offensive of 
54th Rifle Division subunits in the East Prussian Operation 
(January 1945). The position they occupied was prepared with 
three trenches that were connected by a thick network of 
passageways. One more trench, which was 120-150 meters from the 
first, was dug to close with the enemy. Work to remove friendly 
minefields was carried out during the five days prior to the 
offensive. Preparation of passageways in enemy obstacles and 
minefields was conducted during the night prior to the offensive 
through the efforts of combat engineer squads and 4-5 automatic 
riflemen were assigned to cover each of them. 
  With the initiation of preparation fire for the assault, 
subunits that are in direct contact with the enemy use their 
weapons to destroy and suppress enemy weapons and personnel in 
defensive positions in the first position. While observing the 
results of the fire, the battalion commander assigns missions to 
the weapons to destroy the survivors and newly detected enemy 
targets and monitors the timeliness of the preparation of 
passageways in minefields. 
  During the course of preparation fire for the assault, tank 
subunits advance and deploy in combat formation for the 
transition to the attack. Armored personnel vehicles advance 
behind them. During the attack, when tanks approach, 
motorized-rifle subunit soldiers on foot prepare for it, based 
upon the commanders' order, and dart out of their trenches 
(foxholes) and, following the tanks, attack the enemy after the 
tanks have passed the attack positions. During an attack in 
armored personnel vehicles (armored transport vehicles), 
motorized-rifle subunits disembark personnel in armored 
personnel vehicles (armored transport vehicles) during the 
preparation fire for the assault. 
  The seizure of enemy defensive positions in the first 
position and exploitation of the offensive into the depth is 
conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Field Manual 
and depending on the developing situation. 
  In conclusion, let us stress that the redeployment of 
subunits during an offensive from a position of direct contact 
with the enemy is a multi-stage, strictly regulated task and 
only comprehensively trained commanders are capable of 
successfully carrying it out. 
  COPYRIGHT: VOYENNYY VESTNIK No 9 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42434 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94033" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> GENERAL ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> DOCTRINAL ISSUES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Commentary on European Security Issues </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  PM1701163594 Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA in Russian 15 Jan 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> PM1701163594 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Aleksandr Golts article under the "Topic of the Week" </F>
rubric: "Security Becoming a Topic of Speculation"] 
  [Text] It seems that international and domestic events 
alike had conspired to take a back seat during the sleepy 
holiday period at the beginning of the year, only to burst forth 
uncontrollably last week. It was then that the new parliament 
began work and the Russian Government was reorganized. There 
was also the NATO Council session in Brussels whose decisions 
directly affect Russia. As well, of course, as the U.S. 
President's visit, which not only comprised talks with Boris 
Yeltsin but also the more or less sensational tripartite meeting 
involving Leonid Kravchuk. 
  I have no doubt that the opening of the Federal Assembly has 
the greatest significance for the country. At the same time I 
do not think that what is presently taking place in both 
chambers really submits itself to analysis. At the moment, 
whichever way you look at it, we have the same confusion and 
struggle as before, but not so much between political policies 
as personal ambitions. 
  At the same time, the week's events point to one fairly 
alarming and completely developed trend in international 
relations. What is more, it appeared in the midst of events 
which, paradoxically, were for the most part fairly positive. 
What I mean is the approval in Brussels of the U.S. 
"Partnership for Peace" project; as well as the signing in 
Moscow of the tripartite documents, which, in the opinion of one 
high-ranking Russian diplomat, should finally draw a line under 
the question of the fate of nuclear weapons on Ukrainian 
territory. 
  NATO has indeed proposed an extremely wise solution to the 
problems of the security of East European states. Of those 
states which demanded their immediate admission to the North 
Atlantic bloc, attributing this demand to the growing threat 
from Russia which, they claim, might emerge as an imperial 
force. But several statements by leaders of East European 
countries give reason for caution by dint of their hysterical 
fervor and the fact that they are clearly out of touch with the 
situation as it is. I must remind you that the Polish President 
stated that a refusal by the West to produce a clear plan and 
schedule for his country's admission to the North Atlantic bloc 
would be a "great tragedy" which may give rise to a "second 
Yugoslavia" in Europe. All this leads to the conclusion that 
there are considerations behind these attempts to force their 
way into NATO which bear no direct relation to problems of 
security. 
  In my view a strange kind of inferiority complex can be seen 
here. After the Warsaw Treaty and CEMA ceased to exist, the 
East European states "cast off their Soviet chains" and 
discovered to their surprise that they were of no great interest 
to the outside world as partners. They have ended up on the 
sidelines of the main European and global processes. For 
example, no room was found for them in the "single Europe" which 
for the moment remains restricted to West Europe. The countries 
of the European Union, in creating a single economic area, are 
painstakingly surrounding it with a barrier of taxes, tariffs, 
and other restrictions. They certainly do not intend to allow 
any outsiders in. Other economically developed states like, for 
example, the United States or Japan, are showing even less 
interest in cooperation. They have their own priorities. 
  In this situation, speculation in the problems of security 
has, not to mince words, presented a real opportunity to draw 
attention to themselves and to raise their international status. 
For the extremist pronouncements which can be heard in Russia 
at present do not, of course, improve our image, but it is, to 
say the least, silly to perceive them as a real threat to 
anybody's security. But it has emerged that, by using the 
bugaboo of imperial Russia and portraying themselves as 
potential victims, it is nevertheless possible to alarm the 
West. Consequently, it is possible under the pretext of a dire 
military and political need to first of all attempt to integrate 
themselves into its defense structure, and only later into its 
economic structure. After all, you treat your neighbors one way 
but your allies in a completely different way. 
  Ukraine also suffers from this very complex, but it is 
aggravated still more by economic collapse. All talk of Russia 
being a threat, which Kiev used as a pretext to limit its 
progress toward adopting a nonnuclear status, can be explained 
first and foremost by an urge to win for itself economic and 
financial advantages which have nothing to do with Ukraine's 
security. 
  Nevertheless, those who speculated in security in order to 
try and enhance their status, got their share of attention from 
the U.S. President. When Bill Clinton held talks in Prague, he 
tried to persuade the East European leaders to adopt partnership 
for peace. Stopping over in Kiev, he tried to persuade Leonid 
Kravchuk to agree to give up his nuclear warheads. Is it, 
however, possible to consider the matter closed? 
  Alas, no. The real reasons for speculation in security have 
simply not been resolved. Indeed, the East European countries 
now have the opportunity to integrate themselves into NATO's 
structures by an evolutionary process; but by no means into 
West Europe's economic structures. But the capital which 
Ukraine has been promised in accordance with the agreement, 
however large it might be, will not pull it back from the 
economic abyss. Consequently, it is still possible that 
speeches about the Russian threat will be heard again. 
  Maybe we will not just hear speeches. After all, it is not 
out of the question that they may attempt to provoke Moscow in 
order to reinforce in some way what at the moment seem like 
absolutely unfounded claims of its aggressiveness. We also had 
an opportunity to see how this is done this week. I refer to 
the provocation involving the arrest of Russian generals in 
Latvia. I am prepared to believe that this was inspired by a 
local nationalist petty tyrant. However, by some strange law, 
violent actions which might put Russia in a bad light occur in 
the Baltic states precisely on the eve of or during the visits 
of U.S. Presidents. 
  Nor is it out of the question that someone in the future 
will 
attempt to go along the well-trodden path of provocation. This 
is dangerous. Because, by speculating in security and playing 
games with military force, it is necessary to continually raise 
the stakes. You do not know where you will stop and whether you 
will indeed stop at all. 
  It is very likely that the attempts by individual states to 
turn problems of security into a means of attaining other 
economic and political goals may prove to be the same kind of 
challenge to global stability as local conflicts have already 
become. I think that both Russia and its Western partners 
should see this threat. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42435 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma005___94034" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> GENERAL ISSUES </F>
<F P=101> FOREIGN MILITARY AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Computerized Neural Networks: Foreign Military Applications </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0179A Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 9, Sep 93 
(signed to press 20 Aug 93) pp 85-88 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0179A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article based on foreign press materials by Colonel V. </F>
Georgiyevich: "Computers and Neurocomputers in Artillery"] 
  [Text] Creation of neurocomputers "is only 
a small part of Pentagon efforts to turn `intelligent' weapons 
into weapons of `genius'." From an ABC television 
report. 
  The appearance of precision weapons fundamentally changed 
forms of warfare and allowed U.S. specialists to speak of a 
genuine S&amp;T revolution in military affairs. The new weapons 
required sophisticated control, guidance and navigation systems, 
which must function at a rate and with a precision going beyond 
human capabilities. Electronics, which under present conditions 
is represented by sophisticated computer systems and automated 
command and control and weapon control systems, came to man's 
aid. Computer technology is the material and S&amp;T basis of 
these 
systems. In creating it, engineers always dreamed of devices 
which would be able to solve not only complex mathematical 
problems, but also diverse problems of logic to perfection and 
at great speed. 
  According to military specialists, a considerable gap 
presently has formed between the rapid development of missile 
and artillery weapons and the increased mobility and striking 
power of troops on the one hand and artillery fire control 
systems on the other. 
  With the appearance of third-generation computer technology 
in the first half of the 1960's, West German military 
specialists began designing automated field artillery fire 
control systems, which became operational in the FRG Army as the 
Falke automated control system. Substantial deficiencies were 
revealed from this system's operation at the battery-battalion 
level because of the low degree of automation and imperfection 
of equipment being used. 
  The FRG Ministry of Defense developed and began implementing 
a comprehensive program at the end of the 1970's for upgrading 
Army command and control and communications systems. New systems 
for automated control of tube artillery and MLRS combat 
operations also are being introduced within its framework. They 
include high-speed, fourth-generation digital computers and 
modern gear equipped with microprocessors. The main advantages 
of these automated control systems are a minimum reaction time 
of artillery subunits to new targets and increased resistance to 
jamming, survivability and operating reliability under combat 
conditions. 
  It is proposed to include field artillery automated control 
systems in the Army HEROS-1 tactical command and control, 
communications and intelligence system. Much attention is being 
given to solving the problem of interfacing with similar systems 
of other armies. The foreign press notes that FRG automated 
artillery control systems also will interwork excellently with 
the French ATILA, U.S. AFADTS and British BATES. In the opinion 
of military specialists, this will significantly simplify 
collection, storage and generalization of intelligence, permit 
supporting a broad exchange of information on friendly and enemy 
troops, and if necessary enable using allied weapons for 
delivering mass strikes against enemy groupings. 
  New automated systems for control of self-propelled [SP] 
artillery battery fire--IFAB, regimental and battalion artillery 
fire--ADLER, towed artillery fire--ABACUS, rocket artillery 
fire--ARES, artillery target location equipment--AOR, 
meteorological support--ATMAS and aerial reconnaissance assets 
are being developed within the scope of a program for gradual 
development (progressing over time) of the full equipment 
complex. We will dwell briefly on the first two. 
  The IFAB (Integrierte Feurerleitmittel fur Artillerie 
Batterien) is intended for calculating settings for fire for 
effect and fire control of a battery of M109A36 155-mm SP 
howitzers. It consists of the M1136A2 mobile artillery 
observation post, mobile fire control post, ground target 
acquisition radar, and Aurora, a system for automatically laying 
guns on the target. 
  The IFAB performs tasks of reconnoitering the enemy and 
terrain and observing friendly troop operations; reconnoitering 
targets and determining their coordinates, nature, size, and 
degree of cover and protection; performing a topographic survey 
of each battery piece; receiving and transmitting data and 
calculating settings for fire for effect; preparing commands for 
commencing fire; and automatically laying guns on the target. 
  In addition, the mobile observation post observes 
the battlefield and results of fire, adjusts fire and provides 
communications with supported infantry formations. A number of 
requirements are placed on the mobile OP depending on the combat 
mission to be performed, the main ones being short reaction time 
to combat situation changes, determination of target coordinates 
with high accuracy (up to 20 m) and in no more than 20-30 
seconds, continuous determination of one's position, and 
automatic monitoring of the electronic equipment operation. 
  The main electronic equipment units are an optical target 
survey system with built-in laser rangefinder, land navigation 
unit, data input/output devices, monitors, radio and intercom. 
  The optical target survey system is regarded as 
the most important assembly of the mobile OP. This is what 
supports the computing of angles of gun elevation and deflection 
with the help of appropriate encoders. The periscope is coupled 
with a laser rangefinder controlled manually or by a knife 
switch. 
  The land navigation unit is intended for measuring 
distance covered and for continuously determining the vehicle 
heading using a gyroscope and current coordinates of the mobile 
OP location. The heading sensor is powered and its signals 
processed using the gyroscope's electronic circuits. The 
navigational computer converts incoming signals on target 
coordinates and performs a topographic survey. 
  All data necessary for this are input to the control device 
and light up on its display. 
  The data input/output device is a control device 
with indicator, keyboard and data transmission equipment. It 
supports compilation and storage of all fire control data in the 
form of coded messages in a 64-bit format. 
  The monitors consist of a control unit with 
display, an error light and two reflectors. The monitors 
automatically perform diagnosis and monitor correctness of 
operation of all electronic, electrical and mechanical systems. 
Errors and malfunctions in operation of systems as well as 
errors arising during data transmission are output in visual and 
audible form. 
  The radio and intercom consist of two transceivers 
for communicating with the battery and battalion, a telephone 
line for communicating with a forward observer, a radio for 
communicating with troops and an intercom for four operators. 
  The mobile fire control post includes the 
commander's control post and data processing post. The mobile 
fire control post supports artillery observers' communications 
with the tube artillery command post. 
  The commander's control post is accommodated in a 
motor vehicle in which the following are located: Data 
input/output devices with buffer storage having a capacity of 64 
alphanumeric symbols, radio communications equipment, and a 
place reserved for the ADLER automated control system terminal 
device. 
  The data processing post is outfitted in a tracked 
M113CAI APC and equipped with the Falke (Falcon) TP-84 computer, 
dot matrix printers, data input/output devices, a teletype, 
communications equipment and monitoring equipment. 
  The computer has an internal memory size of 32,000 18-bit 
words and a speed up to 200,000 operations per second. 
  The ground target acquisition radar is one of the 
main components of the automated control system and is designed 
for collecting and processing intelligence on enemy ground 
targets. 
  Information comes to the mobile fire control post and is 
communicated to appropriate artillery subunits using all the 
ADLER system command and control equipment. 
  RATAC and RASIT radars also are included in the FRG Army set 
of technical reconnaissance equipment. It is planned to install 
these radars in aircraft, helicopters and special tethered 
platforms to increase their effective range. 
  The Aurora autonomous automatic laying system was 
developed to determine location and automatically lay guns on a 
target in accordance with fire control post data. Therefore the 
guns are outfitted with navigational equipment and a gyrocompass. 
  Repeated surveys are made when firing against moving 
targets, 
and the fire control post computer automatically makes 
corrections to commands for commencing fire. 
  Use of the Aurora system permits a significant reduction in 
the time it takes for occupying battery firing positions and for 
commencing fire when moving on a march, and permits a 
substantial improvement in fire accuracy. 
<H5>  Analysis of IFAB Automated Control System Functioning </H5>
  In accordance with the authorized German Army organization, 
an artillery regiment consists of three battalions of M109A36 
155-mm SP howitzers (18 guns), a composite battalion of M110A2 
203-mm SP howitzers and H70 155-mm towed howitzers (36 guns), 
and a battalion with 16 110-mm LARS launchers, to which 240-mm 
MLRS launchers will be introduced additionally. 
  Military specialists and the Bundeswehr leadership state 
that 
each M109A36 155-mm SP howitzer is equipped with the DEA24A data 
input/output device for the gun commander, DA8A receiving 
display device for the gunner and DA12A display for the loader. 
Thus, a closed SP artillery fire control system is formed at the 
battery level which includes an artillery mobile armored OP, 
fire control post and gun. 
  It is believed that such a system acquires very great 
importance in connection with the planned reorganization of 
6-gun batteries into 9-gun batteries. It is presumed that each 
gun platoon (4 and 5 guns) will have its own control post, which 
will allow it to operate autonomously and substantially reduce 
the likelihood of damage from enemy fire. It is pointed out that 
the reaction time until counterbattery fire commences will be 
reduced fourfold. 
  The ADLER (Artillerie-Daten-Lage und Einsatz-Rechnerverbund) 
system is intended for preparation of firing data for tactical 
employment of artillery, for communications with higher field 
artillery command and control entities, and for supporting 
interworking with the HEROS-1 tactical battle management, 
intelligence and communications system and with field artillery 
automated control systems of the U.S., British and French armies. 
  It has been under development under Bundeswehr order by the 
firm of Elektrik System Gesellschaft (ESG) since the middle of 
1985. 
  While all IFAB, ABACUS and ARES battery fire control 
equipment is intended for improving accuracy and reducing time 
of preparing battery fire, ADLER equipment is used at the 
battalion-field level and must provide swift, comprehensive data 
evaluation and constant battlefield situation display and 
promptly monitor OP work using electronic data processing. 
  The technical level of all elements of the ADLER automated 
control system permits not only accelerating the performance of 
large-scale fire missions, but also economizing on ammunition 
while simultaneously increasing the number of targets engaged. 
  U.S. and FRG military specialists conducted field testing in 
June 1988 to determine the practical possibility of the ADLER 
automated control system interworking with the U.S. TACFIRE 
artillery fire control system. Prototypes of equipment, special 
software and a translator from one programming language to the 
other were used in the testing. To work out the interface of the 
two automated artillery fire control systems, 17 message 
formats, including intelligence and commence-fire orders, were 
transmitted between them over the communications channel. 
  U.S. and FRG specialists gave test results high marks and 
drew a very reassuring conclusion that they were an important 
step in providing mutual fire support of ground troops of all 
NATO member countries. 
  Full, comprehensive field testing of the ADLER command and 
information system were held in November 1988 and went very 
successfully according to Bundeswehr military specialists. 
  The new automated control system is to become operational 
with FRG Army artillery subunits in the first half of the 
1990's. It is proposed to outfit all artillery command posts 
with it at corps-division, artillery regiment-battalion and 
field artillery battalion-battery levels. 
  The possibility of practical use of fourth-generation 
computers in the ADLER field artillery automated control system 
indicates the wide use of miniature processors in them. It is 
expected that the 1990's will become the years of creation of 
fifth-generation computers, which will considerably surpass 
existing models in basic characteristics, above all in power. 
The Illiac IV high-speed computer project being developed under 
a U.S. Defense Department order can serve as a typical example 
in this respect. Parallel operation of 256 processors with a 
capacity of a billion is planned in this machine. Human contact 
with the intelligent interface system in such computers will 
occur in conventional language and programming will be in 
logical programming language. 
  Fifth-generation computers open up great opportunities for 
enhancing all spheres of human activity connected with 
information processing, including solving artificial 
intelligence problems. 
  Announcements by the Japanese firm of Fujitsu about creation 
of equipment (a neurocomputer) based on a model of a neural 
network for solving artificial intelligence problems are 
reassuring in this respect. It operates according to the 
principle of a human brain and can process the same amount of 
data as a hundred thousand neurons. As a comparison we will note 
that modern supercomputers can perform operations to an extent 
inherent to capabilities only of six brain neurons. 
  Western specialists assert that neurocomputers will be used 
widely in five years, above all in the military area in 
developing automatic systems for controlling spacecraft, troops, 
and modern weapons. In connection with this, a broad front of 
joint basic research by physicists, neurobiologists, electronics 
specialists, and specialists in brain theory and data processing 
has appeared in the United States, Japan, the FRG and other 
countries. All this indicates the objective reality of the 
appearance of a fundamentally new scientific direction whose 
practical realization will ensure a qualitative breakthrough in 
the area of developing and creating super-effective weapon 
systems. 
  COPYRIGHT: VOYENNYY VESTNIK No 9 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42436 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     Reforms and Life </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0165A Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
Special Edition (signed to press 20 Aug 93) pp 3-5 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0165A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lieutenant-General Yu. Krasnikov] </F>
  [Text] In connection with the end of the Soviet Union's 
existence, the destruction of its military-strategic space, the 
appearance of new sovereign states and armies, and the reduction 
of the armed forces of the Russian Federation, there is an 
urgent need to reform the engineer troops. The goal of such 
reforms is to create the most expedient organization and 
establishment both in peacetime and wartime; a substantial 
increase in the capabilities both of the engineer troops and 
combined-arms large units and units for carrying out engineer 
support missions and, above all, for field fortification 
activity and camouflage of troops and installations. The reforms 
will make it possible to provide the engineer troops with 
qualitatively new engineer munitions and equipment, including 
dual-purpose, with a simultaneous reduction in the nomenclatures 
of single-purpose models. And the most important thing is the 
advance engineer preparation of strategic areas and increasing 
the effectiveness of command and control systems of the engineer 
troops based on broad introduction of automated systems. 
  Today, large units, units, and institutions of the engineer 
troops of the armed forces of the Russian Federation are charged 
with complex and crucial tasks. Above all, these are: 

  -  maintaining combat and mobilization readiness of engineer 
large units, military units, and institutions; participating in 
cleaning up after accidents, catastrophes, and natural disasters 
and assisting the population; 
  -  clearing areas of explosive 
objects; 
  -  protecting bridges and other water engineering 
structures from drifting ice and floods; 
  -  and conducting 
defensive construction. 

    In wartime, the engineer troops carry out missions for 
ensuring the survivability and maneuver of troops in all stages 
of their combat activities. They pin down the maneuver of enemy 
troops and inflict losses on the enemy with engineer assets. The 
main missions: 

  -  are engineer reconnaissance of the enemy, terrain, and 
installations; 
  -  fortification of areas, lines, and positions 
occupied by troops and deployment areas of command 
posts; 
  -  setting up and maintaining artificial obstacles, 
including those installed by remote minelaying; preparing and 
maintaining troop avenues of advance; 
  -  equipping and maintaining 
crossings; 
  -  obtaining and purifying water and setting up 
water-supply points; 
  -  performing engineer measures for 
camouflaging troops; and others. 

    The main feature of the missions carried out by the engineer 
troops is the trend toward increasing the volume of work and 
complication of the conditions for carrying them out with a 
simultaneous reduction in the time periods. Here one cannot 
avoid changes in the organizational structure, development of 
military-technical policy, and determining the priority 
directions in the development of the theory and practice of 
engineer support. 
  As far as engineer munitions and equipment are concerned, 
they must correspond to the specific support missions inherent 
to each armed service (combat arm). The technical 
characteristics and properties of the combat equipment must be 
such that they make it possible to carry out any mission. In 
this regard, it calls for the development and series production 
of special engineer munitions and equipment intended only for 
the troops and dual-purpose engineer munitions and equipment (in 
the troops and the national economy); national economic assets 
taken for the troops for engineer support purposes. 
  One of the primary tasks is to achieve parity on the 
technical level with the engineer munitions and armament of NATO 
armies and superiority over them for the most important models 
by creating equipment on new physical principles. That is why 
the basic directions in the development of engineer 
reconnaissance equipment may become integrated multipurpose 
engineer reconnaissance equipment with automated information 
processing and transmission to automated command and control 
systems, which make it possible at various ranges to detect 
minefields and receive information about the terrain; creating 
engineer munitions with artificial intelligence components; and 
also developing remote minelaying engineer systems, including 
using rocket-propelled systems and airborne platforms. 
  This also includes the further development of means of 
camouflage of troops, armament, military equipment, and military 
installations from enemy ground, air, and space reconnaissance 
assets, integrated reconnaissance and strike systems and 
reconnaissance and fire systems; creating highly protected and 
robotized vehicles for laying troop movement routes in 
conditions of massive obstacles and destruction; performing work 
in areas of radioactive contamination of the terrain, including 
by the destruction of nuclear power plants; standardizing the 
bridge train equipment with the capability to set up bridge 
crossings and raft and ferry crossings on rivers having fast 
currents with a simultaneous increase in their traffic and 
load-carrying capacity. 
  Scientific research and experimental design work certainly 
will be conducted taking into account the creation of complexes 
(families) of vehicles on common base chassis, which will make 
it possible to standardize engineer munitions and equipment. 
  But, as we know, man runs the machines. Therefore, the 
following must be placed at the basis of operational training of 
engineer officers: 

  -  improving their knowledge in the area of military art and 
military engineering; 
  -  developing practical skills in planning 
and making sound decisions on engineer support of operations 
(combat) and communicating assignments to troops; 
  -  organizing 
coordination and comprehensive support of subordinate troops 
when they are accomplishing assigned missions; 
  -  arranging the 
work of bodies and control posts of the chief of the engineer 
troops (service) using modern equipment (automated command and 
control systems). 

    In the interests of reducing the decision-making time, as 
experience has shown, it is advisable to develop and introduce 
such methods which enable officers of the engineer troops to 
quickly conduct the necessary calculations and make sound 
decisions for organizing the execution of engineer support 
missions. It is to this end that the collective of authors under 
the direction of Lieutenant-General V. Vasilyev did a 
considerable amount of work, the results of which you will see 
in this issue of the journal. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42437 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     TMK-3 Trenching Machine </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0165B Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
Special Edition (signed to press 20 Aug 93) p 11 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0165B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel I. Zhurikhin and Major V. Karpov] </F>
  [Text] The TMK-3 trenching machine is designed to dig 
trenches in unfrozen and frozen ground in field fortification 
activities for troop positions. Its complement includes: A 
K-703MV (Kirovets) wheeled tractor, a non-bucket type rotary 
trenching device, and a turning bulldozer blade. Cutters with 
wear-resistant plates made of VK-15 alloy are installed on the 
bucket wheel. The bucket wheel unloads with the aid of two 
tray-type unloading devices on both sides of the trench being 
dug. The maximum dump of dirt from the center line of the trench 
is up to two meters. The equipment is controlled from the cab by 
means of a hydraulic drive. The GST-90 hydraulic transmission 
ensures an operating speed of 90 to 1600 meters/hour. The 
trenching device has a mechanical transmission with two 
operating speeds for the bucket wheel rotation. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Basic Specifications and Performance Characteristics of the TMK-3            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Engine power, kW                      |246                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Size of trench in unfrozen ground, me-|                                      | 
|ters:                                 |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|depth                                 |1.1-1.5                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|width at bottom                       |0.6                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|width at top                          |1.1                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Size of trench in frozen ground, mete-|                                      | 
|rs:                                   |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|depth                                 |1.1-1.5                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|width                                 |0.6                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Technical productivity:               |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|in unfrozen category II-III ground, m |330-800                               | 
|[.sup]3[/]/hr                       |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|in frozen ground, m[.sup]3[/]/hr    |90-150                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed, km/hr                  |44                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight, t                             |25.77                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Dimensions, mm:                       |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|length                                |9675                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|width                                 |3370                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|height                                |4160                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Crew size                             |2                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42438 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     UKFS General-Purpose Fortification Equipment </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0165C Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
Special Edition (signed to press 20 Aug 93) p 12 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0165C </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Captain I. Kazakov] </F>
  [Text] The general-purpose fortification equipment is 
design to erect various types of fortifications for protection 
of personnel at troop positions in short periods of time. 
  The UKFS is used to erect the following: Light overhead 
trench covers for protection against shell fragments and 
recesses in emplacements for firing assault rifles, machineguns, 
grenade launchers, and antitank missile systems; shelters for 
protection against shell fragments in observation structures for 
the platoon (company) commander; covered slit trenches and 
dugout shelters. 
  The set includes six main and five supplemental components. 
  The components can be made from steel or duraluminum pipe 30 
mm in diameter with a wall thickness of 3 mm in a regular 
machine shop without using any complicated production equipment. 
  The grid base covered with sacking, canvas, ground sheet 
fabric, reinforced polyethylene film, and so forth is used as 
the cover. 
  Structures from the UKFS are erected by the troops manually 
and do not require the use of means of mechanization. Compared 
to structures made of lumber, the labor-intensiveness of 
erecting them is 2-2.5 times less, and they can be erected on 
any category of soil. 


Basic Specifications of UKFS 

Number of standard size elements           11 

Number of structures that can be           10 
assembled from them 

Time to assemble one structure, minutes    15-30 with a 2-man crew 

Transportability                           in packing by types of structures 
                                           on combat equipment (BMP, BTR, 
                                           tank) and on motor transport of 
                                           support subunits 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42439 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     `Lifter' Container-Type Modular Fortification Structure </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0165D Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
Special Edition (signed to press 20 Aug 93) p 13 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0165D </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Major V. Vypiraylov] </F>
  [Text] The `Lifter' container-type modular fortification 
structure is designed for the protection, work, and rest of 
personnel at command and control facilities. 
  It consists of a work area and an entrance made in the form 
of a framework with a protective airtight door, two entrance 
locks situated inside the framework of the structure, and a 
pre-lock attached to it on hinges. The `Lifter' can be used in 
three positions: Buried, half-buried (with soil sprinkled on 
it), and on the surface. 
  The structure is equipped with heating, ventilation, and 
lighting equipment. The work area has equipment for personnel to 
work and rest. 


Basic Specifications of `Lifter' Container-Type Modular Fortification 
Structure 

Dimensions, meters                       6.0x3, 15x2.3 

Usable area, square meters               14.0 

Weight (with internal equipment),        6.0 
tonnes 

Capacity                                 7 people 

Transportability                         on KAMAZ-53212 motor vehicle 

Erection time, hours                     1.5-2.0 

Crew for erection                        3 men with EOV-4421 excavator and 
                                         KS-3572 vehicle-mounted crane 

Number of times it can be used           20 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42440 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     Method for Calculating a Formation (Unit) Man-Made Obstacle System </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0174B Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 1993 
Special Edition (signed to press 20 Aug 93) pp 14-17 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0174B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Candidate of Military Sciences, Lecturer, </F>
Colonel I. Kozachok and Colonel A. Logachev: "Method for 
Calculating a Formation (Unit) Man-Made Obstacle System"] 
  [Text] This method is designed for a formation (unit) 
engineering services chief to conduct an expanded calculation of 
the manpower and equipment required to create a system of 
man-made obstacles when the decision has been made for engineer 
support of a battle. 
  The method permits him to determine the manpower and 
equipment requirements to create obstacles, to manufacture 
rubble, and to assess the effectiveness of the system of 
obstacles that has been created. 
  The following data may be required to conduct the 
calculations: 

  -  the enemy disposition of forces in the zone of action; 
  -  the 
formation (unit) combat formation and its composition; 
  -  the 
length of the defensive frontage that is accessible for enemy 
troop operations on the axes -- on the enemy's main axis of 
attack [napravleniye glavnogo udara] (MAA) and on the other axis 
of attack [napravleniye drugogo udara] (OAA); 
  -  the required 
density of the obstacles; 
  -  the availability of time, manpower and 
equipment to create the obstacle system. 



  Table 1. The Required Quantity of Landmines and Demolition Materials To 
Create a Formation Man-Made Obstacle System 

Axis            During Preparation of   During the Course   Total 
                a Defense               of a Battle 

Main axis of    TM-62 [antitank         TM-62 -2,880        TM-62 - 14,880 
attack (MAA)    mines] - 12,000 

                PMN [antipersonnel                          PMN - 4,000 
                fragmentation mines] 
                - 4000 

                OZM-72 [antipersonnel                       OZM-72 - 160 
                fragmentation mines] 
                - 160 

                MON-90 [antipersonnel                       MON-90 - 80 
                mines with 
                directional 
                fragmentation] -80 

                TM-83 [antitank         TM-83 - 19          TM-83 - 51 
                mines] - 32 

                PTrM [antitank mines]                       PTrM - 16 
                - 16 

                VV [explosives] - 4     explosives - 2.88   explosives 6.88 
                tonnes                  tonnes              tonnes 

Other axis of   TM-62 [antitank         TM-62 -2,520        TM-62 - 11,520 
attack (OAA)    mines] - 9,000 

                PMN [antipersonnel      TM-83 - 16          PMN - 2,400 
                fragmentation mines] 
                - 2,400 

                OZM-72 [antipersonnel   VV - 2.52 tonnes    OZM-72 -120 
                fragmentation mines] 
                - 120 

                MON-90 [antipersonnel                       MON-90 - 60 
                mines with 
                directional 
                fragmentation] -60 

                TM-83 [antitank                             TM-83 - 40 
                mines] - 24 

                PTrM [antitank mines]                       PTrM - 12 
                - 12 

                Explosives -- 2.4                           explosives 4.92 
                tonnes                                      tonnes 


<H3>  2.1. Determination of the Required Quantity of Landmines and 
Demolition Materials To Install the Obstacles </H3>
  The quantity of landmines and demolition materials required 
to create the system of man-made obstacles while preparing the 
defense is determined based upon the known density of the 
obstacles and the length of the defensive frontage that is 
accessible for enemy troop operations and in accordance with 
Table 2-1. The calculations are conducted first for the main 
axis of attack and then for the other axis. The results are 
summarized in the table below. 


Table 2.1. The Quantity of Landmines and Demolition Materials on Tactical Obstacles 
During Preparations for Battle (km) and the Quantity of Landmines and Demolition 
Materials (in thousands) 

Required     Landmines and     Length of Defensive Frontage That Is Accessible for 
Density of   Demolition        Enemy Troop Operations on the Axis, km 
Obstacles    Materials 
on the 
Axis 

                               8         12        16        20       24        30 

0.1          TM-62 [antitank   0.6       0.9       1.2       1.5      1.8       2.25 
             mines] 

             PMN-2             0.2       0.24      0.4       0.5      0.6       0.75 
             [antipersonnel 
             fragmentation 
             mines] 

             OZM-72            0.008     0.012     0.016     0.2      0.024     0.003 
             [antipersonnel 
             fragmentation 
             mines] 

             MON-90            0.004     0.006     0.008     0.01     0.012     0.015 
             [antipersonnel 
             mines with 
             directional 
             fragmentation] 

             TM-83 [antitank   0.0016    0.0024    0.0032    0.004    0.0048    0.006 
             mines] 

             PTrM [antitank    0.0008    0.0012    0.0016    0.002    0.0024    0.003 
             mines] 

             Explosives,       0.2       0.24      0.4       0.5      0.6       0.75 
             tonnes 

0.3          TM-62             1.8       2.7       3.6       4.5      5.4       6.75 

             PMN-2             0.6       0.72      1.2       1.5      1.8       2.25 

             OZM-72            0.024     0.036     0.048     0.6      0.072     0.009 

             MON-90            0.012     0.018     0.024     0.03     0.036     0.045 

             TM-83             0.0048    0.0072    0.0096    0.012    0.0144    0.018 

             PTrM              0.0024    0.0036    0.0048    0.006    0.0072    0.009 

             Explosives,       0.6       0.72      1.2       1.5      1.8       2.25 
             tonnes 

0.5          TM-62             3.0       4.5       6.0       7.5      9.0       11.25 

             PMN-2             1.0       1.2       2.0       2.5      3.0       3.75 

             OZM-72            0.04      0.06      0.08      0.1      0.12      0.15 

             MON-90            0.02      0.03      0.04      0.05     0.06      0.075 

             TM-83             0.008     0.012     0.016     0.02     0.024     0.03 

             PTrM              0.004     0.0       0.008     0.01     0.012     0.015 

             Explosives,       1.0       1.206     2.0       2.5      3.0       3.75 
             tonnes 

0.7          TM-62             4.2       6.3       8.4       10.5     12.6      15.75 

             PMN-2             1.4       1.68      2.8       3.5      4.2       5.25 

             OZM-72            0.056     0.084     0.112     1.4      0.168     0.021 

             MON-90            0.028     0.042     0.056     0.07     0.084     0.105 

             TM-83             0.0112    0.0168    0.0224    0.028    0.0336    0.042 

             PTrM              0.0056    0.0084    0.0112    0.014    0.0168    0.021 

             Explosives,       1.4       1.68      2.8       3.5      4.2       5.25 
             tonnes 

1.0          TM-62             6.0       9.0       12.0      15.0     18.0      22.5 

             PMN-2             2.0       2.4       4.0       5.0      6.0       7.5 

             OZM-72            0.08      0.12      0.16      0.2      0.24      0.3 

             MON-90            0.04      0.06      0.08      0.1      0.12      0.15 

             TM-83             0.016     0.024     0.032     0.04     0.048     0.06 

             PTrM              0.008     0.012     0.016     0.02     0.024     0.03 

             Explosives,       2.0       2.4       4.0       5.0      6.0       7.5 
             tonnes 

1.2          TM-62             7.2       10.8      14.4      18.0     21.6      27.0 

             PMN-2             2.4       2.88      4.8       6.0      7.2       9.0 

             OZM-72            0.096     0.144     0.192     0.24     0.288     0.036 

             MON-90            0.048     0.072     0.096     0.12     0.144     0.18 

             TM-83             0.0192    0.0288    0.0384    0.048    0.0576    0.072 

             PTrM              0.0096    0.0144    0.0192    0.024    0.0288    0.036 

             Explosives,       2.4       2.88      4.8       6.0      7.2       9.0 
             tonnes 

1.5          TM-62             9.0       13.5      18.0      22.5     27.0      33.75 

             PMN-2             3.0       3.6       6.0       7.5      9.0       11.25 

             OZM-72            0.12      0.18      0.24      0.3      0.36      0.45 

             MON-90            0.06      0.09      0.12      0.15     0.18      0.225 

             TM-83             0.024     0.036     0.048     0.06     0.072     0.09 

             PTrM              0.012     0.018     0.024     0.03     0.036     0.045 

             Explosives,       3.0       3.6       6.0       7.5      9.0       11.25 
             tonnes 

1.7          TM-62             10.2      15.3      20.4      25.5     30.6      38.25 

             PMN-2             3.4       4.08      6.8       8.5      10.2      12.75 

             OZM-72            0.136     0.204     0.272     0.34     0.408     0.051 

             MON-90            0.068     0.102     0.136     0.17     0.204     0.255 

             TM-83             0.0272    0.0408    0.0544    0.068    0.0816    0.102 

             PTrM              0.0136    0.0204    0.0272    0.034    0.0408    0.051 

             Explosives,       3.4       4.08      6.8       8.5      10.2      12.75 
             tonnes 

2.0          TM-62             12.0      18.0      24.0      30.0     36.0      45.0 

             PMN-2             4.0       4.8       8.0       10.0     12.0      15.0 

             OZM-72            0.16      0.24      0.32      0.4      0.48      0.6 

             MON-90            0.08      0.12      0.16      0.2      0.24      0.3 

             TM-83             0.032     0.048     0.064     0.08     0.096     0.12 

             PTrM              0.016     0.024     0.032     0.02     0.048     0.06 

             Explosives,       4.0       4.8       8.0       10.0     12.0      15.0 
             tonnes 


  For less precise calculations, you can determine the 
required 
quantity of landmines and demolition materials not by axes but 
by the total width of the front of likely armor approach terrain 
along the formation's entire defensive zone. 
  The required quantity of landmines and demolition materials 
that are installed during the course of the battle is determined 
according to that same initial data in accordance with Table 2.2. 


Table 2.2. The Quantity of Landmines and Demolition Materials in Tactical Obstacles 
During Preparations for Battle 

Required     Landmines      Length of Defensive Frontage That Is Accessible for 
Density of   and            Enemy Troop Operations on the Axis (km) and the 
Obstacles    Demolition     Quantity of Landmines and Demolition Materials (in 
on the       Materials      thousands) 
Axis 

                            8         12        16        20       24        30 

0.1          TM-62          0.24      0.36      0.48      0.6      0.72      0.9 
             [antitank 
             mines] 

             TM-83          0.0016    0.0024    0.0032    0.004    0.0048    0.006 
             [antitank 
             mines] 

             Explosives,    0.24      0.36      0.48      0.6      0.72      0.9 
             tonnes 

0.3          TM-62          0.72      1.08      1.44      1.8      2.16      2.7 

             TM-83          0.0048    0.0078    0.0096    0.012    0.0144    0.018 

             Explosives,    0.72      1.08      1.44      1.8      2.16      2.7 
             tonnes 

0.5          TM-62          1.2       1.8       2.4       3.0      3.6       4.5 

             TM-83          0.008     0.012     0.016     0.02     0.024     0.03 

             Explosives,    1.2       1.8       2.4       3.0      3.6       4.5 
             tonnes 

0.7          TM-62          1.68      2.52      3.36      4.2      5.04      6.3 

             TM-83          0.0112    0.0168    0.0224    0.028    0.0336    0.042 

             Explosives,    1.68      2.52      3.36      4.2      5.04      6.3 
             tonnes 

1.0          TM-62          2.4       3.6       4.8       6.0      7.2       9.0 

             TM-83          0.016     0.024     0.032     0.04     0.048     0.06 

             Explosives,    2.4       3.6       4.8       6.0      7.2       9.0 
             tonnes 

1.2          TM-62          2.88      4.32      5.76      7.2      8.64      10.8 

             TM-83          0.0192    0.0288    0.0384    0.048    0.0576    0.072 

             Explosives,    2.88      4.32      5.76      7.2      8.64      10.8 
             tonnes 

1.4          TM-62          3.36      5.04      6.72      8.4      10.08     12.6 

             TM-83          0.0224    0.0336    0.0448    0.056    0.0672    0.084 

             Explosives,    3.36      5.04      6.72      8.4      10.08     12.6 
             tonnes 

1.5          TM-62          3.6       5.4       7.2       9.0      10.8      13.5 

             TM-83          0.024     0.036     0.048     0.06     0.072     0.09 

             Explosives,    3.6       5.4       7.2       9.0      10.8      13.5 
             tonnes 


  Summing up the quantity of munitions required to install 
obstacles while preparing the defense and during the course of a 
battle provides the desired value -- the required quantity of 
landmines and demolition materials to create a system of 
man-made obstacles. 
  The recommendations set forth in Table 2-3 need to be 
utilized in calculations in those cases when the required 
density of the obstacles on the axes has not been specified. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Table 2.3. Recommended Densities of Tactical Obstacles                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                         |Unit                     |Formation                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|During preparations for  |1.0-1.4                  |1.5-2.0                  | 
|battle                   |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|During the course of a b-|0.3-0.4                  |1.1-1.2                  | 
|attle                    |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Comment: The first number is for the main axis of attack (MAA); the second n-| 
|umber is for the other axis of attack (OAA).                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The number of engineer subunits needed to reinforce the 
formation during preparations for (during the course of) a 
battle is determined from the expression: 
  Dengrco[.sup]rf[/] = (D[.sup]MAA[/] x La[.sup]MAA[/] 
+ D[.sup]OAA[/] x La[.sup]OAA[/]/Cengrco x Tco) - Nengrco, 
(1) 
  where: D[.sup]MAA[/], D[.sup]OAA[/] -- is the required 
density of the minefields being installed on the main and other 
axis of enemy attack; 
  La[.sup]MAA[/] La[.sup]OAA[/] -- the length of 
defensive frontage that is accessible for enemy troop operations 
on the main and other axis of enemy attack, respectively, in 
kilometers; 
  Cengrco -- the calculated capabilities of an engineer 
company to install minefields (3 km per day -- when preparing 
the defense when not in contact with the enemy, 1.5 km per day 
under conditions of direct contact with the enemy, 3.2 km per 
day during the course of a battle); 
  Tco -- the time allotted for the creation of obstacles 
while preparing the defense, in days (during the course of a 
battle Tco = 1 day); and, 
  Nengrco[.sup]f[/] -- the number of calculated engineer 
companies in a formation (unit), Table 2.4. 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Table 2.4. Number of Calculated Engineer Companies in a Formation (Unit) --| 
| Number of Engineer Companies                                              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Unit, formation   |While Preparing a Defense            |During the Course | 
|                  |                                     |of a Battle       | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                  |Not in Contact Wi-|Under Conditions  |                  | 
|                  |th the Enemy      |of Direct Contact |                  | 
|                  |                  |With the Enemy    |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Unit              |0.8               |0.3               |0.8               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Formation         |4.5               |2.0               |6.0               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


<H5>  2.2. Assessment of the Effectiveness of Obstacles </H5>
  The assessment of the effectiveness of obstacles is 
conducted 
according to two criteria: Losses of enemy tanks and BMP's 
[armored personnel vehicles] in the obstacles and the rate of 
advance reduction ratio. 
  Losses of tanks and BMP's are determined according to the 
formula: 
  N[.sup]T[/] = (D[.sup]MAA[/] x La[.sup]MAA[/] + 
D[.sup]OAA[/] x La[.sup]OAA[/]) x N, (2) 
  where: N -- is the enemy tank and BMP loss standard per 1 
kilometer of obstacles, in units per kilometer (this is accepted 
as being equal to 0.75/1 km). 
  The enemy rate of advance reduction ratio is determined 
according to the axes from the expression: 
  Rarr[.sup]MAA[/](Rarr[.sup]OAA[/]) = 1 + 1.5D x V/L, (3) 
  where: V - is the prescribed enemy advance rate (it is 
advisable to utilize 3 kph in the calculations); and, 
  L -- is the depth of the formation's (unit's) defense, in 
kilometers. 
  An example of the calculation of a formation man-made 
obstacle system that was prepared when not in contact with the 
enemy. 
  Initial data: 
  During preparations of the defense (not in contact with the 
enemy): 
  D[.sup]MAA[/] = 2.0, D[.sup]OAA[/] = 1.0, 
  L[.sup]MAA[/] = 8 km, D[.sup]OAA[/] = 12 km, 
  Tco = 2 days, L[.sup]def[/] = 30 km. 
  During the course of a battle: D[.sup]MAA[/] = 1.2, 
D[.sup]OAA[/] = 0.7. 
  D[.sup]MAA[/] = 1.2, D[.sup]OAA[/] = 0.7. 
  Solution: 
  1. The quantity of landmines and demolition materials 
required to create a system of man-made obstacles while 
preparing the defense is determined according to Table 2.1, 
initially on the main axis of attack and then on the other axis. 
The results are noted in Table 1. 
  2. The number of engineer subunits required to reinforce a 
formation during preparation for the defense is determined from 
the expression (1): 
  Dengrco[.sup]rf[/] = (2.0 x 8 + 1.0 x 12)/(3.0 x 2) - 4.5 
= 0.1 
  3. The number of engineer subunits required to reinforce a 
formation during the course of a battle is determined in a 
similar manner: 
  Dengrco [.sup]rf[/] = (1.2 x 8 + 0.7 x 12)/(3.0 x 2) -3.2 
= 0.2. 
  Because the results are close to zero in both cases, 
reinforcement of a division with engineer subunits is not 
required. 
  4. Tank and BMP losses are determined using the formula (2): 
  N[.sup]T[/] = [(2.0 +1.2) x 8] = [(1.0 = 0.7) x 12] x 0.75 
= 34. 
  5. The enemy advance rate reduction ratio is determined from 
the expression: 
  Rarr[.sup]MAA[/] = 1 + 1.5 x (2.0 + 1.2) x 3.0/30 = 1.48. 
  (Rarr[.sup]OAA[/]) = 1 + 1.5 x (1.2 + 0.7) x 3.0/30 = 
1.29. 
  COPYRIGHT: VOYENNYY VESTNIK No 10 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42441 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     KFZ-1 High-Explosive Shaped Charge </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0165E Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
Special Edition (signed to press 20 Aug 93) pp 19-20 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0165E </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Major A. Yakubchik] </F>
  [Text] The KFZ-1 high-explosive shaped charge is designed 
for accelerated demolition of roads, airfield runways, and 
emplaced objects, and working frozen ground by the explosive 
method. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Composition of KFZ-1                                                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Stowage box--launching equipment      |1                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|ID-120 rocket motor                   |1                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Z-23 high-explosive charge            |1                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|VZ-ZOM firing mechanism               |1                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|KZ-5 shaped charge                    |1                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Accessories                           |1 set                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The KFZ-1 charge is assembled and set up at the place of use 
by a two-man crew. The charge is actuated electronically using a 
communication control line 100 meters long. The electric pulse 
transmitted over the control line actuates the pyrotechnic 
cartridge of the rocket motor. The rocket motor is started from 
the pyrotechnic cartridge. After the motor achieves the required 
reaction force, the KZ-5 shaped charge is detonated. The 
shaped-charge jet of molten material thus formed creates a 
borehole in the ground, which the high-explosive charge enters 
under the action of the motor's reaction force. The 
high-explosive charge detonates at a depth of 1.5-2 meters and 
leads to the destruction of the buried object and formation of a 
crater. 
  Depending on the task to be carried out, the KFZ-1 charge 
can 
be used alone or as part of a group of charges. The number of 
charges in the group is limited only by the capabilities of the 
current source. 


Basic Specifications 

Weight of charge in stowage box, kg      76 

Dimensions of charge in stowage box: 

length, mm                               1560 

width, mm                                382 

height, mm                               335 

Thickness of seasonally frozen ground    up to 2 
that can be broken up, meters 

Destruction of objects installed in      up to 3.5 
the ground, depth in meters 

Size of crater formed: 

diameter, meters                         5-7 

depth, meters                            1.5-1.8 

Preparation time, minutes                5 

Method of actuation                      electrical 

Crew size                                2 

Temperature range of usage, degrees C    -40 to +50 

Guaranteed shelf life, years             10 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42442 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     BUM Impact Drilling Machine </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0165F Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
Special Edition (signed to press 20 Aug 93) p 21 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0165F </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Engineer V. Konyakhin] </F>
  [Text] The machine is designed for drilling boreholes in 
rock and wells in frozen and unfrozen ground when doing engineer 
work. 
  It consists of a KamAZ-4310 base chassis and operating 
equipment, which includes a distribution box with an oil pump 
and compressor, a traversing platform on which rifle equipment 
is installed, and the drilling mechanism with the working 
instrument. 
  The machine used the design of a modern impact-rotary method 
of breaking up rock. The impact frequency is 83-94 Hz. 
  The impact drilling machine can be successfully used in 
fortification of troop positions by the explosive method in 
conditions of frozen ground and in rock. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Basic Specifications of the BUM                                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Engine power, kW                      |154                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Parameters of borehole drilling:      |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|diameter, mm                          |70 and 46                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|depth, m                              |2.8                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|drilling speed, m/min                 |0.4-1.1                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Parameters of well drilling:          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|diameter, mm                          |300 and 150                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|depth, m                              |9.0 and 4                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|drilling speed, m/min                 |0.5-1.5                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum travel speed, km/hr           |85                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight, t                             |15.4                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Dimensions:                           |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|length, mm                            |7540                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|width, mm                             |2550                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|height, mm                            |3390                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Crew size                             |3                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42443 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     Method of Calculating Forces and Assets for Crossing Enemy Obstacles </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0165G Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
Special Edition (signed to press 20 Aug 93) pp 22-25 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0165G </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel V. Sanko, candidate of military sciences </F>
and docent, and Colonel (Res) A. Shakin, doctor of technical 
sciences and docent] 
  [Text] The methods are intended for operational calculation 
of the volumes of obstacles in a large unit's zone of advance, 
the required number of lanes, and the necessary amount of forces 
to cross them. 
  To make the calculations, the chief of the engineer service 
will require the following initial data: 
  --the enemy grouping in the zone of advance; 
  --the battle formation of the large unit (unit) of our 
troops; 
  --the offensive front; 
  --the length of armor terrain; 
  --the available forces and assets for clearing lanes in 
obstacles. 
<H3>  3.1. Determining the Volumes of Obstacles and Rubble Placed 
by the Enemy in the Zone of Advance </H3>
  The opposing enemy grouping is determined in percentages of 
a 
division and is adjusted using the coefficient of accounting of 
the enemy (Table 3.1). Depending on the reinforcement of the 
enemy division with engineer units, the volumes of obstacles in 
the zone of advance are determined according to Table 3.2. 
  The distribution of obstacles by lines is determined by 
multiplying the obtained values by the coefficient of obstacle 
distribution (Table 3.3). 
  Formula 3.1. is used to determine the density of minefields 
(conventional and remotely installed) being erected by the enemy 
to the depth of defense of the first-echelon division depending 
on the day the engagement is conducted (Table II.3.4). 
D[.sup]mflddef[/]-(L[.sup]mfld[/]+0.5xL[.sup]rmfld[/]) 
xK[.sup]cap[/]/L[.sup]acc[/]. (3.1) 
  The density of the minefields on the lines of the enemy 
defense is determined by formula 3.1 by multiplying by the 
corresponding coefficient of distribution of obstacles by lines 
(Table II.3.3). 
D[.sup]i[/]-(L[.sup]mfld[/]xK[.sup]i[/][.sup]mfld[/]+0.5x 
L[.sup]rmfld[/]xK[.sup]i[/][.sup]rmfld[/])xK[.sup]cap[/]/ 
L[.sup]acc[/]. (3.2) 
  In expressions 3.1 and 3.2: 
  L[.sup]mfld[/] and L[.sup]rmfld[/] are the length of 
conventional and remotely installed minefields, respectively, in 
km; 
  K[.sup]cap[/] is the coefficient of the decrease in enemy 
capabilities for erecting obstacles depending on the day the 
engagement is conducted; 
  K[.sup]i[/][.sup]mfld[/] and 
K[.sup]i[/][.sup]rmfld[/] are the coefficients of 
distribution of obstacles by lines; 
  L[.sup]acc[/] is the length of the zone of advance 
accessible for troop operations. 
<H3>  3.2. Determining the Required Number of Lanes in the 
Minefields </H3>
  Depending on the density of the obstacles erected by the 
enemy and the battle formation used by the large unit, tables 
3.5 and 3.6 are used to determine the required number of lanes 
in minefields in front of the forward edge and in the depth of 
the enemy defense. 
<H3>  3.3. Determining the Required Amount of Forces for Clearing 
Lanes in Minefields and Rubble </H3>
  The number of combat engineer platoons (mineclearing 
platoon) 
necessary for clearing lanes in minefields in front of the 
forward edge of the defense and in the depth of the enemy 
defense is determined from the calculation that one platoon 
simultaneously makes 2-3 lanes and 6-8 lanes in a day. 
  The number of combat engineer platoons (mineclearing 
platoons, obstacle-clearing platoons) for assignment to the 
obstacle-clearing team (obstacle-clearing detachment) is 
determined according to the number of battalions (regiments) in 
the first echelon at the rate of up to a platoon for one 
obstacle-clearing team and one to two platoons for one 
obstacle-clearing detachment. 
<H5>  Assessing the Effectiveness of Crossing Obstacles </H5>
  To assess the effectiveness of crossing obstacles, it is 
necessary to determine the coefficient of supply with engineer 
subunits, equal to the ratio of the number of available platoons 
(N[.sup]ep[/]) to the required number (N[.sup]er[/]: 
  K[.sup]supp[/]=N[.sup]ep[/]/N[.sup]er[/]. (3.3) 
  Table 3.7. is used to determine the coefficient of the 
decrease in the rate of advance, the relative losses of armored 
equipment on the obstacles, and the time for accomplishing the 
day's mission. 
<H5>  Attachment: Tables for Calculation of Overcoming Obstacles </H5>

------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Table 3.1. Coefficient of Accounting of the Enemy                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Strong Enemy                          |Weak Enemy                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1.0-1.2                               |0.4-0.6                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 




Table 3.2. Volumes of Minefields and Rubble Erected by the Enemy in the Zone of Advance 

Proportion    Length of conventional minefields             Minefields       Number of destroyed bridges                   Length of destroyed sections 
of enemy                                                    laid by remote                                                 of roads, km 
division                                                    means, 
forward of                                                  mines/km 
the 
offensive 
front of 
our troops 

laid by       reinforcement    reinforcement    laid by     reinforcement    reinforcement    laid by     reinforcement    reinforcement 
division      of division by   of division by   division    of division by   of division by   division    of division by   of division by 
forces, km    one engineer     two engineer     forces,     one engineer     two engineer     forces,     one engineer     two engineer 
              battalion, km    battalions, km   km          battalion, km    battalions, km   km          battalion, km    battalions, km 


0.1           7                9                13          4/3              1                1           2                0.2              0.5     0.8 

0.2           13               19               26          8/7              1                2           3                0.4              1.0     1.5 

0.3           19               29               40          11/10            2                3           4                0.6              1.5     2.3 

0.4           26               37               53          15/14            2                4           6                0.8              2.0     3.1 

0.5           33               17               66          19/18            3                5           7                1.0              2.5     3.9 

0.6           39               56               79          23/22            3                6           8                1.3              2.9     4.6 

0.7           46               66               92          27/25            4                7           10               1.5              3.4     5.4 

0.8           52               73               105         30/29            4                8           11               1.7              3.9     6.2 

0.9           59               85               118         34/32            5                9           13               1.9              4.4     6.9 

1.0           65               94               132         38/36            5                10          14               2.1              4.9     7.7 




Table 3.3. Coefficient of Distribution of Obstacles by Lines 

Areas, Lines          Conventional        Remotely Laid     Demolitions 
                      Minefields          Minefields 

Staging area                              0.05-0.10 

Moving up routes                          0.10-0.15 

Forward edge of       0.15-0.20           0.30-0.40         0.10-0.15 
enemy defense 

Depth of              0.4-0.45            0.15-0.20         0.40-0.45 
first-echelon 
brigades 

Depth of defense of   0.35-0.40           0.10-0.15         0.35-0.40 
second-echelon 
units 




Table 3.4. Coefficient of Decrease in Enemy Capabilities for Erecting 
Obstacles Depending on Day of Conducting Engagement 

Days of            Conventional         Remotely Laid      Demolitions 
Operations         Minefields           Minefields 

Day 1              0.8-0.9              0.8-0.9            0.9-1.0 

Day 2              0.7-0.8              0.7-0.8            0.8-0.9 

Day 3              0.7-0.8              0.7-0.8            0.8-0.9 

Day 4              0.6-0.7              0.6-0.7            0.7-0.8 




Table 3.5. Required Number of Lanes in Enemy Minefields in Front of 
Forward Edge of Defense 

Density of       Number of companies in first-echelon large unit 
Enemy 
Minefields 

12               18        24        30        36        42 

0.1              2         2         3         3         4         5 

0.2              3         4         5         6         8         9 

0.3              4         6         8         9         11        13 

0.4              5         8         10        12        15        17 

0.5              6         9         12        15        18        21 

0.6              8         11        15        18        22        26 

0.7              9         13        17        21        26        30 

0.8              10        15        19        24        29        34 

0.9              11        17        22        27        31        38 

1.0              12        18        24        30        36        42 




Table 3.6. Required Number of Lanes in Enemy Minefields in Depth of Defense 

Density of     Number of Companies in Large Unit's First Echelon 
Enemy 
Minefield 

4              6       8       10      12      14      18      24 

0.5            2       3       4       5       6       7       9       12 

0.6            3       4       5       6       8       9       11      15 

0.8            4       5       7       8       10      12      15      20 

1.0            4       6       8       10      12      14      18      24 

1.2            5       8       10      12      15      17      22      29 

1.4            6       9       12      14      17      20      26      34 

1.6            7       10      13      16      20      23      29      39 

1.8            8       11      16      18      22      26      33      44 

2.0            8       12      16      20      24      28      36      48 

2.5            10      15      20      25      28      36      45      60 

3.0            12      18      24      30      36      42      54      72 

3.5            14      21      28      35      42      49      63      84 

4.0            16      24      32      40      48      56      72      96 




Table 3.7. Indicators of Effectiveness of Crossing Obstacles 

Effectiveness          Coefficient of Supply with Subunits 
Indicator 

0.25                   0.50          0.75          1.00 

Coefficient of         0.60          0.70          0.75          0.85 
decrease in rate of 
advance 

Losses of tanks and    7             5.5           4.5           4.2 
BMP's on enemy 
obstacles, percent 

Time to carry out      17            14            13            12 
day's mission 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42444 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     IMR-2M Obstacle-Clearing Engineer Vehicle </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0165H Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
Special Edition (signed to press 20 Aug 93) p 26 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0165H </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lieutenant-Colonel N. Babin] </F>
  [Text] The obstacle-clearing engineer vehicle is designed 
for supporting troops' advance through areas of destruction, 
including on terrain with radioactive and chemical contamination. 
  They are successfully used in civil defense formations to 
clean up after massive destruction and large industrial 
accidents. 
  The vehicle consists of the following: A tank base chassis, 
a 
telescoping boom with a universal scoop-type operating element, 
a universal bulldozer attachment, and a track-clearing mine 
sweeper. Its operating equipment makes it possible to clear 
cross-country routes on moderately rough terrain, in light 
forests, and on virgin snow; dig up roots, knock down trees, and 
clear away tree blowdowns, rock barriers, and industrial rubble. 


Basic Specifications of IMR-2M 

Engine power, kW                           618 

Maximum speed of travel, km/hr             60 

Productivity: 

when laying cross-country routes           2-12 

when doing excavating work,                up to 400 
m[.sup]3[/]/hr 

when clearing passages in tree blowdowns   300-400 
and rock barriers, m/hr 

Boom capacity, t                           2 

Weight, t                                  42.6 

Dimensions in the transport 
configuration: 

length, mm                                 9440 

width, mm                                  3370 

height, mm                                 3660 

Crew size                                  2 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42445 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     UR-77 Mineclearing Vehicle </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0165I Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
Special Edition (signed to press 20 Aug 93) p 27 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0165I </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Major N. Kutsenko] </F>
  [Text] The UR-77 mineclearing vehicle is designed for 
clearing lanes in minefields by the explosive method during the 
course of troop combat operations. 
  It consists of the base vehicle (2S1) with launching 
equipment and a basic load of two mineclearing charges. The 
mineclearing charges are housed in a dispenser in the vehicle 
and are fed to the minefield through the air using rocket motors. 
  The launching equipment with the load of charges and the 
rocket motors are located in a protected armored case. 
  The UR-77 is used as part of a combat engineer squad to 
clear 
lanes during preparatory fire for an assault on the forward edge 
of the defense, when advancing deep in the enemy defense, and on 
the opposite bank of a water obstacle. 
  The charges are launched onto the minefield and detonated by 
the vehicle commander-operator without leaving the vehicle. In 
doing so, the vehicle can be on land or afloat. 
  The mineclearing vehicle has high maneuverability and is 
air-transportable. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Basic Specifications of the UR-77                                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Type of charges used                  |UZP-77, UZ-67                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Length of charge, meters              |93                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Length of charge feed, meters:        |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|UZP-77                                |200 and 500                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|UZ-67                                 |200 and 350                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Size of lane in antitank minefield, m-|                                      | 
|eters:                                |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|width                                 |up to 6                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|length (UZ-67)                        |75-80                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|length (UZP-77)                       |80-90                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Lane clearing time, minutes           |3-5                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Crew size                             |2 (commander-operator, driver-mechani-| 
|                                      |c)                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Travel speed, km/hr:                  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|over highways                         |up to 60                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|over broken terrain                   |up to 30                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|afloat                                |up to 5                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42446 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     UR-83P Mineclearing Unit </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0165J Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
Special Edition (signed to press 20 Aug 93) p 28 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0165J </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonels A. Averchenko and S. Savitskiy] </F>
  [Text] The UR-83P portable mineclearing unit is designed 
for clearing lanes in minefields by the explosive method during 
the course of combat operations. 
  It consists of a guide, base, anchoring device, two 
dispensers, and a spare parts, tools, and accessories kit. It is 
equipped with one UZP-83 mineclearing linear charge. The 
mineclearing charge is contained in two sectional dispensers on 
the ground and feed to the minefield through the air by rocket 
motors. 
  The UR-83P is used as part of a combat engineer squad. 
  The charge is launched to the minefield by the squad 
commander from a shelter no closer than 50 meters from the 
mineclearing unit. 
  The charge it detonated remotely by a mechanical-action 
fuze. 
  The design of the mineclearing unit permits its use from 
amphibious warfare ships when landing amphibious assault forces, 
from assault river-crossing equipment when crossing water 
obstacles, and also from a truck or trailer bed. 


Basic Specifications of UR-83P 

Type of mineclearing charges used          UZP-77 

Length of charge, meters                   114 

Distance of charge feed (according to      440 
head section of charge), meters 

Size of lane in antitank minefield, 
meters: 

length                                     115 

width                                      up to 6 

Time for assembling and arming unit with   90 
UZP-83 charge by forces of combat 
engineer squad, minutes 

Transportability                           UR-83P with UZP-83 charge set is 
                                           transported on ZIL-131 vehicle 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42447 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     UDM Universal Heavy Construction Vehicle </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0165K Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
Special Edition (signed to press 20 Aug 93) p 31 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0165K </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Major V. Afanasyev] </F>
  [Text] The UDM universal heavy construction vehicle is 
designed for preparing and maintaining troop movement routes. 
Its operating equipment includes a loader or double-jaw fork and 
a swinging dozer blade. 
  When preparing troop movement routes, the vehicle performs 
the following types of work: Working and moving soil; making 
crossings over ditches, craters, and ravines; laying 
cross-country routes on terrain with low forest growth, brush, 
and rocks; laying cross-country routes over unpacked snow and 
clearing snow off roads; erecting crossing ramps; digging 
ditches; and loading bulk materials. 
  When equipping the UDM with a double-jaw device, it becomes 
possible to perform additional work such as clearing 
obstructions, piling and stacking lengthy objects (logs, pipe, 
and so forth), and loading lengthy objects and rubble into 
transport vehicles. 


Basic Specifications 

Base                                       K-702MV UDM wheeled tractor 

Engine power, kW                           246 

Productivity: 

laying cross-country route 

over semibroken terrain, km/hr             up to 2 

over unpacked snow up to 1.0 meter deep,   up to 4 
km/hr 

filling in holes and craters,              125 
m[.sup]3[/]/hr 

digging ditches, m[.sup]3[/]/hr             90 

loading bulk material into transport       120 
vehicles, m[.sup]3[/]/hr 

Maximum travel speed, km/hr                44 

Weight, tonnes                             21.2 

Dimensions, mm: 

length                                     10,150 

width                                      3,360 

height                                     3,735 

Crew size                                  2 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42448 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     ADZM Air-Transportable Earth-Moving Machine </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0165L Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
Special Edition (signed to press 20 Aug 93) p 32 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0165L </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lieutenant-Colonel Yu. Baran] </F>
  [Text] The air-transportable ADZM earth-moving machine is 
designed for preparing routes for troop movement and maneuver 
and also for mechanizing earth-moving operations. Engineer 
subunits of mobile forces are equipped with it. 
  The machine consists of the following: Base chassis, 
universal bulldozer equipment, excavation equipment, hydraulic 
drive for operating equipment, and a set of engineer equipment 
and supplies (motorized drill, heat drill, explosive charges). 
  The machine's design, the composition of its operating 
equipment, and the set of engineer equipment and supplies make 
it possible to dig ditches and trenches in category I-IV soil, 
lay cross-country routes in brush and over unpacked snow, and 
clear lanes in roadblocks of rock or rubble. 
  The ADZM can be transported in the cargo compartments of 
IL-76 aircraft, MI-26 helicopters, and also suspended externally 
from these helicopters. 


Basic Specifications of the ADZM 

Productivity: 

filling in craters and ditches,            80-90 
m[.sup]3[/]/hr 

digging ditches: 

with excavator equipment, m[.sup]3[/]/hr    30-40 

with bulldozer equipment, m[.sup]3[/]/hr    50-70 

digging trench 1.5 meters deep,            25-35 
m[.sup]3[/]/hr 

preparing movement routes, km/hr           6-7 

clearing snow from roads, km/hr            3-4 

Shovel capacity, m[.sup]3[/]                0.25 

Weight, tonnes                             13.4 

Crew size                                  2 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42449 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94014" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     Methods of Calculating Crossing of Water Obstacles in Battle </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0165M Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
Special Edition (signed to press 20 Aug 93) pp 33-38 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0165M </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lieutenant-Colonel A. Kolesnichenko, candidate </F>
of military sciences and senior scientific associate, and Col G. 
Panyushkin, candidate of military sciences] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  One Must Remember! </H5>
  Successful crossing of a water obstacle is possible if: 
  1. Crossing of the first echelon on a wide front at the 
required times is ensured. 
  2. Bridge crossings are prepared by no later than 
H-hour+2.* 
  3. Crossings are prepared in a timely manner on routes of 
movement and maneuver of troops with crossing capacities 
corresponding to crossing capacities of troop routes. 
  4. Repeated duplication of crossings is accomplished. 
  5. Reserve of crossing forces and assets is allocated. 
  6. Measures for camouflage and concealment of crossings 
are conducted. 
  7. Maneuver by crossing forces and assets is prepared. 
  The first two points pertain only to a forced crossing of a 
water obstacle during the course of a counteroffensive 
(offensive) engagement. 
  *On wide and large water obstacles, ferry (assault-ferry) 
crossings with traffic capacities ensuring crossing within the 
prescribed times may be set up instead of bridge crossings. 
  The methods are intended for consolidated calculation of 
crossing several water obstacles in fighting and in dislocation 
of troops. 
  The make it possible to determine the time for crossing 
troops over a water obstacle, the time for constructing 
low-level bridges and piling lines, and calculate the maneuver 
of crossing forces and assets along the front (at one water 
obstacle) and from one water obstacle to another. 
  A particular feature of these methods is the fact that they 
make it possible to conduct the calculation without using 
formulas, graphs, or nomographs based on pre-developed tables 
contained in the attachment. 
  The chief of the engineer service may require the following 
data to conduct the calculations: 

  -  what the battle formation of the large unit (unit) will be 
before each water obstacle; 
  -  the average rate of advance or 
required times for crossing of the large unit (unit); 
  -  the 
characteristics of water obstacles on forced crossing sectors 
and at spots where routes intersect a water obstacle; 
  -  the 
distance of crossings from line of contact of the sides at the 
staging area; 
  -  the types, number, characteristics, and locations 
of existing crossings; 
  -  the types, number, characteristics, and 
locations of crossings provided by the senior commander and also 
the times for crossing them; 
  -  the supply of bridge structures by 
the start of executing the mission and the possible pace of 
their preparation or the available amount of lumber; 
  -  the forces 
and assets allocated for preparing and maintaining the 
crossings. 

    Before the chief of the engineer service begins the 
calculation, he must take into account the recommendations which 
if carried out will make it possible to ensure crossing of the 
water obstacles by the troops. 
<H3>  5.1. Methods of Consolidated Calculation of Crossing Water 
Obstacles in an Counteroffensive (Offensive) Engagement </H3>
  The calculation should be made in the following sequence. 
  5.1.1. Make the calculation of crossing the first water 
obstacle from the forward edge of the defense. To do this, 
determine: 

  -  the time required for crossing first- and second-echelon 
subunits (Table 5.1); 
  -  the forces and assets that can be used on 
a water obstacle, including taking into account a maneuver from 
other areas (from other water obstacles): 
  -  the forces and assets 
that must be distributed to prepare and maintain crossings at 
the water obstacle and in reserve; 
  -  the time for constructing 
low-level bridges and piling lines (tables 5.2 and 5.3). 

    In fact, after accomplishing this point, complexes of 
crossings will be formed at forced crossing sectors and at 
places where the routes intersect water obstacles. (A complex of 
crossings includes the primary and several alternate crossing.) 
The must be plotted on a work map. 
  Next, based on the availability of forces and assets, the 
situation at hand, and the time of completing construction of 
low-level bridges, determine the method of crossing troops 
(assault-ferry-bridge or assault-ferry). 
  To do this, one must know the estimated time for crossing 
first- and second-echelon units (tables 5.4 and 5.5). The same 
tables can also be used to calculate the crossing of first- and 
second-echelon large units having a battle formation depth of 
15-18 km. In this case, the crossing time obtained using the 
table must be increased 2-2.5-fold. 
  If the time obtained is greater than the required time and 
the coefficient of mission performance is less than 0.8 
(coefficient of mission performance is defined as the ratio of 
the required crossing time to the estimated time) or 
concentration of efforts is necessary on the axis of the main 
thrust, redistribute forces and assets (taking into account the 
possible maneuver of them along the front) (Table 5.6). Again, 
determine the estimated time for crossing first-echelon large 
units (units). The recalculation is accomplished until the 
coefficient of mission performance reaches 0.8-1.0. 
  After this condition has been fulfilled and the bridge 
crossings have been prepared in a timely manner (at least two or 
three for an army or corps; at least one for a division, 
brigade, or regiment), further calculation of crossing a water 
obstacle may not have to be done--a formation, large unit, or 
unit may execute the crossing at the required times. 
  5.1.2. Determine the time of free the crossing forces and 
assets at the first obstacle. 
  If the time obtained is greater than the required time and 
the coefficient of mission performance is less than 0.6 
(coefficient of mission performance is defined as the ratio of 
the time required for crossing to the estimated time) or it is 
necessary to concentrate efforts on the axis of the main thrust, 
redistribute the forces and assets taking into account the 
possible maneuver of them along the front (Table 5.6). 
  5.1.3. Determine the time of freeing the crossing forces and 
assets, making it possible to execute a maneuver to the next 
water obstacle (Table 5.7). 
  5.1.4. Make a calculation of crossing subsequent water 
obstacles (done similarly to the estimate of crossing the first 
water obstacle) taking into account the maneuver of crossing 
forces and assets from the previous water obstacle. 
  5.1.5. Allocate forces and assets for preparing and 
maintaining crossings on routes lateral to the front. 
  The effect of crossing conditions differing from normal 
(summer, daylight, lack of causes complicating the crossing) is 
taken into account by the coefficients of conditions, the values 
of which are given in Table 5.8. 
<H3>  5.2. Methods of Consolidated Calculation of Crossing Water 
Obstacles in a Defensive Engagement </H3>
  It is recommended to perform the calculation in the 
following 
sequence. 
  5.2.1. Determine the necessary system of crossings with 
reference to the hydrographic network in the defensive area and 
the planned network of routes. 
  Determine the necessary degree of duplication of each 
crossing in the defensive area. In doing so, it is recommended 
to accomplish the following: On the main movement and maneuver 
routes, at least a two-fold duplication; on routes of advance to 
the line for executing a counterattack, duplication is at the 
rate of one alternate crossing for two primary crossings. 
Duplication may not have to be done on withdrawal routes from 
the defensive area. 
  5.2.2. Make a calculation of crossing each water obstacle. 
To 
do this, determine: 

  -  the required capacities of crossings in accordance with 
the capacities of the routes (roughly 200-250 units/hr for a 
large unit and 100-200 units/hr for a unit); 
  -  the crossing forces 
and assets, and distribute them for preparing and maintaining 
complexes at the intersection of routes with the water obstacle 
and to the reserve; 
  -  the time for constructing low-level bridges 
and piling lines (tables 5.2 and 5.3); 
  -  the traffic capacities of 
crossings being prepared (Table 5.9), compare them with the 
required capacities, and if necessary redistribute forces and 
assets taking into account the possibility of a maneuver from 
other areas (Table 5.6). 

    5.2.3. If necessary, make a calculation of the maneuver of 
crossing forces and assets to another water obstacle (Table 5.7). 
  5.2.4. Make a calculation of crossing the next water 
obstacles (done similarly to the estimate of crossing the first 
water obstacle). 
<H3>  5.3. Methods of Consolidated Calculation of Crossing Water 
Obstacles During Displacement of Troops </H3>
  The calculation should be performed in the following 
sequence. 
  5.3.1. Make the calculation of crossing the first of the 
planned water obstacles. To do this, determine: 

  -  the required traffic capacities of the crossings in 
accordance with the traffic capacities of the routes (roughly 
200-250 units/hr for a large unit and 100-200 units/hr for a 
unit); 
  -  the crossing forces, and distribute them for preparing 
and maintaining crossing complexes at the intersection of routes 
with the water obstacle in question and to the reserve (the 
crossing complex includes a primary and several alternate 
crossings); 
  -  the time for constructing low-level bridges and 
piling lines (tables 5.2 and 5.3); 
  -  the traffic capacities of the 
crossings being prepared (Table 5.9), compare them with the 
required capacities, and (if necessary) redistribute the forces 
and assets taking into account the possibility of a maneuver 
from other areas (Table 5.6). 

    5.3.2. If necessary, make a calculation of the maneuver of 
crossing forces and assets to the next water obstacle (Table 
5.7) and use the column "Time Executing Maneuver"). 
  5.3.3. Make a calculation of the crossing of subsequent 
water 
obstacles (done similarly to the calculation of the crossing of 
the first water obstacle, taking into account the possible 
maneuver of crossing forces and assets from one water obstacle 
to another). 
  5.3.4. Allocate forces and assets for preparing and 
maintaining crossings on routes lateral to the front. 
<H5>  Attachment: Table for Calculating Crossing of Water Obstacles </H5>


Table 5.1. Required Time for Crossing of Troops 

Subunit           On Counteroffensive (Offensive)               During Displacement 

Rate of Advance, km/hr                                  Number of Routes 

1.0               1.5    2.0    2.5    3.0    4.0    1      2        3 

First-echelon     9      7      6      5      4      3 
unit or forward 
detachment 

Second-echelon                                              2        1        0.7 
unit 

Large unit        15     10     7      6      5      4      4        2        1.5 
(depth of 
battle 
formation 15 
km) 

Large unit        25     17     13     10     8      6      10       5        3.5 
(depth of 
battle 
formation 25 
km) 




Table 5.2. Estimated Time of Constructing Low-Level Bridge (with availability 
of at least 80 percent of required number of bridge structures) 

Width of     25    50    75    100    150    200    300    400    500    600 
Water 
Obstacle, 
meters 

Forces,      Duration of Construction, hrs 
Assets 

engineer     4     8     12    15     18     28     40     52     66     78 
platoon-1 

engineer     4     5     5     8      9      14     20     26     33     39 
platoon-2 

engineer     4     4     5     5      7      9      13     18     22     26 
platoon-3 

engineer     4     4     5     5      6      7      10     13     16     20 
platoon-4 

Notes. 1. Length of bridge is taken as 10 meters greater than width of water 
obstacle when water obstacle width is under 50 meters and as 20 meters 
greater when width is 50 meters or more. 

2. Time of construction of piling lines is equivalent to the time of 
constructing bridges. 




Table 5.3. Estimated Time of Constructing Low-Level Bridge (with preparation of 
more than 20 percent of the required number of bridge structures) 

Number of     25    50    75    100    150    200    300    400    500    600 
bridge 
structures 
to be 
prepared, 
meters 

Assets        DUration of Construction, hrs 

LRV-1         23    41    58    75     110    144    213    282    351    420 

LRV-2         15    23    32    41     58     75     110    144    179    213 

LRV-3         12    18    23    29     41     52     75     98     121    144 

LRV-4         10    15    19    23     32     41     58     75     92     110 

LRV-5         9     12    15    18     23     29     40     52     64     75 

Notes: 1. Bridge structures are prepared in the form of decking units. 

2. It is taken into account that delivery of the bridge structures by the last 
trip will take 4 hours. 

3. The time for constructing the piling lines is equal to the time for 
constructing the bridges. 

LRV--high-capacity gangsaw 




Table 5.4 (part one) Length of Time of Crossing a Unit by the Assault-Ferry Method 

Width, m           50                          100                         200 

Current, m/s       0.5    1.0    1.5    2.0    0.5    1.0    1.5    2.0    0.5    1.0    1.5    2.0 

Forces, Assets     Duration of Crossing, hrs 

rcap-1    mru      7.7    8.9    18     23     7.7    9.8    20     26     9.0    12     23     31 

tu        7.5      8.7    12     15     9.0    9.6    13     17     10     11     16     21 

rcap-2    mru      6.5    8.6    19     23     7.0    9.4    21     28     8.1    11     24     29 

tu        6.0      6.9    10     13     6.9    8.0    14     17     8.0    9.0    13     19 

pp-1      mru      6.5    7.4    14     17     6.2    7.9    15     19     6.9    8.9    17     21 

tu        6.1      6.8    9.0    12     6.9    7.4    9.8    13     7.8    8.4    11     15 

pp-1,     mru      5.8    7.4    14     17     6.2    7.9    15     19     6.9    8.9    17     21 
rcap-1 

tu        5.5      6.8    9.0    12     6.9    7.4    9.8    13     7.8    8.4    11     15 

pp-2      mru      5.7    7.2    13     16     6.0    7.5    14     17     6.8    8.6    16     20 

tu        5.3      6.4    8.5    11     6.5    7.0    9.4    12     7.5    8.0    10     14 

pp-2,     mru      2.5    3.2    5.5    6.7    2.7    3.2    5.9    7.3    3.0    3.6    6.7    8.4 
rcap-1 

tu        2.3      3.0    3.9    4.8    3.1    3.2    4.2    5.3    3.5    3.7    4.8    6.2 

pp-2,     mru      2.3    2.9    5.3    6.5    2.4    3.1    5.7    7.1    2.8    3.5    6.5    8.2 
rcap-2 

tu        2.0      2.7    3.5    4.4    2.8    2.9    3.8    4.9    3.1    3.3    4.4    5.8 

pp-3,     mru      4.3    4.3    5.1    6.1    4.5    4.6    5.4    6.5    5.0    5.1    6.0    7.4 
rcap-1 

tu        3.1      3.2    3.8    4.7    3.3    3.3    4.1    5.3    3.7    3.8    4.7    6.3 

pp-4,     mru      3.3    3.3    4.0    4.7    3.4    3.5    4.2    5.0    3.8    3.8    4.6    5.5 
rcap-1 

tu        1.8      1.8    2.2    2.8    1.9    1.9    2.3    3.2    2.1    2.2    2.7    3.9 

mru--motorized rifle unit; tu--tank unit; pp--pontoon platoon; rcap--rivercrossing assault platoon 




Table 5.4 (part two) Length of Time of Crossing a Unit by the 
Assault-Ferry Method 

Width, m           400                         600 

Current, m/s       0.5    1.0    1.5    2.0    0.5    1.0    1.5    2.0 

Forces, Assets     Duration of Crossing, hrs 

rcap-1    mru      12     15     30     42     14     17     38     53 

tu        14       15     20     28     17     18     25     35 

rcap-2    mru      11     15     31     42     13     19     38     55 

tu        9.5      13     20     27     12     16     23     32 

pp-1      mru      8.4    11     21     26     10     13     24     33 

tu        9.6      11     14     19     11     13     17     23 

pp-1,     mru      8.4    11     21     26     10     13     24     33 
rcap-1 

tu        9.6      11     14     19     11     13     17     23 

pp-2      mru      8.1    10     20     24     9.4    12     22     30 

tu        9.0      9.5    13     18     10     12     16     21 

pp-2,     mru      3.6    4.5    8.2    11     4.2    5.3    9.8    13 
rcap-1 

tu        4.2      4.6    6.0    7.8    4.8    5.4    7.0    9.4 

pp-2,     mru      3.3    4.3    8.0    10     3.9    5.1    9.4    12 
rcap-2 

tu        3.8      4.2    5.5    7.4    4.4    4.8    6.5    8.8 

pp-3,     mru      6.0    6.1    7.3    9.3    6.8    7.3    8.5    11 
rcap-1 

tu        4.5      4.8    5.9    7.8    5.3    5.6    7.1    9.6 

pp-4,     mru      4.5    4.6    5.5    6.7    5.1    5.2    6.3    7.7 
rcap-1 

tu        2.5      2.7    3.4    4.9    2.9    3.1    4.0    5.9 

mru--motorized rifle unit; tu--tank unit; pp--pontoon platoon; 
rcap--rivercrossing assault platoon 




Table 5.5 (part one) Length of Time of Crossing a Unit by the Assault-Ferry-Bridge Method 

Width, m                    50                          100                         200 

Current, m/s                0.5    1.0    1.5    2.0    0.5    1.0    1.5    2.0    0.5    1.0    1.5    2.0 

Forces, Assets              Duration of Crossing, hrs 

rcap-1, bridge-1     mru    1.2    1.3    1.7    1.7    1.2    1.3    1.8    1.8    1.3    1.5    1.9    1.9 

tu          1.2      1.3    1.3    1.3    1.3    1.3    1.4    1.4    1.4    1.4    1.5    1.5 

rcap-2, bridge-1     mru    1.1    1.2    1.6    1.6    1.1    1.2    1.7    1.7    1.2    1.4    1.8    1.8 

tu          1.1      1.2    1.2    1.2    1.2    1.2    1.3    1.3    1.3    1.3    1.4    1.4 

rcap-3, bridge-1     mru    1.0    1.1    1.4    1.4    1.0    1.1    1.5    1.5    1.1    1.2    1.6    1.7 

tu          1.0      1.0    1.1    1.1    1.0    1.1    1.1    1.2    1.2    1.2    1.3    1.3 

pp-1, rcap-1,        mru    1.0    1.2    1.6    1.6    1.1    1.2    1.6    1.7    1.2    1.3    1.8    1.8 
bridge-1 

tu          1.1      1.1    1.2    1.2    1.2    1.2    1.3    1.3    1.3    1.3    1.4    1.4 

pp-1, rcap-2,        mru    1.0    1.1    1.5    1.5    1.0    1.1    1.5    1.5    1.1    1.2    1.7    1.7 
bridge-1 

tu          1.0      1.1    1.1    1.1    1.1    1.1    1.2    1.2    1.1    1.2    1.3    1.3 

pp-2, rcap-3,        mru    0.9    1.0    1.3    1.3    0.9    1.0    1.3    1.4    0.9    1.1    1.5    1.5 
bridge-1 

tu          0.9      0.9    1.0    1.0    0.9    1.0    1.1    1.1    1.0    1.1    1.1    1.2 

pp-3, rcap-1,        mru    1.4    1.4    1.5    1.5    1.5    1.5    1.5    1.6    1.6    1.6    1.7    1.8 
bridge-1 

tu          1.1      1.1    1.2    1.2    1.1    1.1    1.2    1.2    1.3    1.3    1.4    1.4 

pp-4, rcap-1,        mru    1.2    1.2    1.2    1.3    1.2    1.2    1.3    1.4    1.3    1.3    1.4    1.5 
bridge-1 

tu          0.9      0.9    1.0    1.0    1.0    1.0    1.0    1.0    1.0    1.0    1.1    1.2 

pp-4, rcap-2,        mru    1.2    1.2    1.3    1.4    1.3    1.3    1.4    1.4    1.4    1.4    1.5    1.6 
bridge-1 

tu          1.0      1.0    1.0    1.1    1.0    1.0    1.1    1.1    1.1    1.1    1.2    1.3 

crossing    mru      1      2.0    2.0    2.0    2.0    2.1    2.1    2.1    2.1    2.3    2.3    2.3    2.3 
over 
bridges 

2           1.0      1.0    1.0    1.0    1.1    1.1    1.1    1.1    1.1    1.1    1.1    1.1 

tu          1        1.6    1.0    1.0    1.0    1.6    1.6    1.6    1.6    1.8    1.8    1.8    1.8 

2           0.8      0.8    0.8    0.8    0.8    0.8    0.8    0.8    0.9    0.9    0.9    0.9 

mru--motorized rifle unit; tu--tank unit; pp--pontoon platoon; rcap--rivercrossing assault platoon 




Table 5.5 (part two) Length of Time of Crossing a Unit by the 
Assault-Ferry-Bridge Method 

Width, m                    400                         600 

Current, m/s                0.5    1.0    1.5    2.0    0.5    1.0    1.5    2.0 

Forces, Assets              Duration of Crossing, hrs 

rcap-1, bridge-1     mru    1.8    2.0    2.7    2.8    2.4    2.8    3.9    3.9 

tu          1.9      2.0    2.0    2.1    2.7    2.8    3.0    3.0 

rcap-2, bridge-1     mru    1.6    1.9    2.5    2.6    2.1    2.5    3.5    3.6 

tu          1.7      1.8    1.9    1.9    2.2    2.3    2.5    2.8 

rcap-3, bridge-1     mru    1.4    1.6    2.2    2.3    1.8    2.2    3.0    3.1 

tu          1.5      1.6    1.7    1.8    1.9    2.0    2.3    2.4 

pp-1, rcap-1,        mru    1.6    1.8    2.5    2.5    2.2    2.4    3.3    3.5 
bridge-1 

tu          1.7      1.8    1.8    2.0    2.3    2.4    2.5    2.6 

pp-1, rcap-2,        mru    1.4    1.6    2.2    2.3    1.8    2.2    3.0    3.1 
bridge-1 

tu          1.5      1.6    1.7    1.8    2.1    2.0    2.3    2.4 

pp-2, rcap-3,        mru    1.2    1.4    2.0    2.1    1.6    1.8    2.6    2.9 
bridge-1 

tu          1.4      1.4    1.5    1.6    1.6    1.8    2.1    2.2 

pp-2, rcap-1,        mru    2.1    2.1    2.2    2.4    2.7    2.7    3.0    3.2 
bridge-1 

tu          1.6      1.6    1.8    1.8    2.2    2.2    2.4    2.7 

pp-4, rcap-1,        mru    1.7    1.7    1.8    2.1    2.1    2.3    2.4    2.7 
bridge-1 

tu          1.3      1.4    1.4    1.6    1.7    1.7    2.0    2.2 

pp-2, rcap-3,        mru    1.8    1.8    2.0    2.1    2.4    2.4    2.6    2.9 
bridge-1 

tu          1.4      1.5    1.5    1.7    1.8    1.8    2.1    2.3 

crossing    mru      1      3.2    3.2    3.2    3.2    4.7    4.7    4.7    4.7 
over 
bridges 

2           1.6      1.6    1.6    1.6    2.4    2.4    2.4    2.4 

tu          1        2.4    2.4    2.4    2.4    3.5    3.5    3.5    3.5 

2           1.2      1.2    1.2    1.2    1.8    1.8    1.8    1.8 

mru--motorized rifle unit; tu--tank unit; pp--pontoon platoon; 
rcap--rivercrossing assault platoon 




Table 5.6. Calculating Maneuver by Crossing Forces Along Front 

Distance between         5      10     15     20     30     40     50     60     70     80     90     100    120    150 
crossings by air, km 

When Moving:             Duration of Maneuver, hrs 

over coastal route       4.5    5      6      6      7      8      9      10     11     12     13     14     16     18 
lateral to the front 

over divisional route    6      6.5    7      7.5    8      8.5    9      10     10     11     12     13     14     16 
lateral to the front 

over army route          10     11     11     12     12     13     14     15     15     16     16     17     19     22 
lateral to the front 

over water               2      2.5    3.5    4      5.5    7.0    8.0    9.0    10     12     13     15     17     20 
(V[.sup]current[/]=0.5 
m/s) 

over water               2.5    3.5    4.5    5.0    5.5    7.0    9.0    11     15     17     19     21     24     28 
(V[.sup]current[/]=1.5 
m/s) 

by helicopter            2.5    2.5    2.5    2.5    3.0    3.0    3.0    3.0    3.0    3.0    3.0    3.0    3.5    4.0 

Notes: 1. Maneuver time includes time for taking down the crossing. 

2. Conclusion of the maneuver is concentration of subunit in the assembly area for equipment. 




Table 5.7. Calculating Maneuver by Crossing Forces from One Water Obstacles to Another 

Distance between   10           20    30    20    30    40    60    20    30    40    60    40    60    80 
water obstacles, 
km 

Rate of advance,   10           10    10    20    20    20    20    30    30    30    30    40    40    40 
km/day 

                   Time of Operation of Troops in Area Between Water Obstacles (Astronomical), hrs 

                   10           34    58    10    29    34    58    7     10    28    34    10    29    34 

Units, Subunits    Time 
                   Executing 
                   Maneuver, 
                   hrs 

River-crossing     4            5     6     5     6     7     9     5     6     7     9     5     7     11 
assault 

Pontoon-bridge     5            6     5     6     7     8     10    6     7     8     10    6     8     12 

Engineer           5            6     5     6     7     8     10    6     7     8     10    6     8     12 
bridge-building 

Note: Maneuver time includes time for taking down the crossing. 




Table 5.8. Coefficients of Crossing Conditions 

Crossing Conditions                      Coefficient of Conditions 

1. Drifting ice with density of          up to 1.5 
0.3-0.4 

2. Poor visibility (night, fog, smoke)   up to 1.3 


3. Radioactive (chemical)                up to 1.25 
contamination of banks (personnel work 
in protective gear) 




Table 5.9. Traffic Capacity of Crossing Sites 

Types of       Width, m 
Crossing 

50             100      200      300      400      500      600 

               Traffic capacity of crossing sites, units/hr 

Floating       304      296      267      228      190      157      129 
bridge 

Low-level      283      205      183      154      127      103      84 
bridge 

Permanent      263      378      330      270      216      171      135 
bridge 

Submerged      341      302      292      277      264      252      242 
bridge 

Ford           100      96       90       81       72       59       45 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42450 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     PP-91 Bridge Train </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0165N Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
Special Edition (signed to press 20 Aug 93) p 39 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0165N </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonels P. Khmelyuk and A. Malyshev, senior </F>
scientific associate] 
  [Text] The PP-91 bridge train is designed for erecting 
bridge and ferry crossings over water obstacles. 
  The set includes 32 river, 4 shore, and 8 motor sections, 4 
towing launches, 4 flooring sections, and auxiliary equipment 
that can be transported on KrAZ-260G bridge-train motor vehicles 
and ZIL-4334 launch vehicles. 
  In the opened position, each river section is a finished 
section of floating bridge or ferry 7.2 meters long. To use the 
section after unloading it from the vehicle into the water, it 
is only necessary to close two deck and four bottom locking 
devices. The capacity of one river section is 22.5 tonnes. 
  A shore section is distinguished from a river section by the 
slope of the deck and by the stronger design of the pontoons. 
Floating bridges and ferries can be assembled from the river and 
shore sections by connecting them using the docking devices on 
transoms. The obliquely symmetrical position of these devices 
makes it possible to connect the river sections regardless of 
how the transoms are positioned relative to one another. Motor 
sections are arranged between the river sections. Each river 
section is equipped with anchor winches with anchors to secure 
the bridges in a current and ramps for making entrances to the 
ferries. 
  Floating bridges and ferries have high floodability, ensured 
by the large number of water-displacing sections, each of which 
consists of four pontoons divided into two watertight 
compartments. The good repairability of the sections makes it 
possible to restore them quickly in field conditions. 
  The PP-91 bridge train makes it possible to bring all troop 
equipment across virtually any water obstacle. Based on its 
specifications, the bridge train has nothing similar to it in 
the world practice of bridge building. 
  It can be successfully used without design modifications in 
various sectors of the national economy, especially when 
building and restoring permanent bridges, when erecting 
temporary crossings in logging, in agricultural work, and also 
when cleaning up after natural disasters in areas of extensive 
flooding. 
  The PP-91 is delivered to consumers in various complete 
sets. 


Basic Specifications of the PP-91 

Floating bridges 

Carrying           60                 90                 120 
capacity, tonnes 


Length from        268                185                141 
bridge train 
set, meters 

Width of           6.55               10.11              13.77 
roadway, meters 

Set up time,       30                 60                 50 
minutes 

Ferries 

Carrying           90                 180                360 
capacity, tonnes 


Number of          8                  4                  2 
ferries from set 


Travel speed,      14                 12                 12 
km/hr 

Size of loading    13.77x146.55x57.6                      13.77x57.6 
platform, meters 


Assembly time,     15                 20                 25 
minutes 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42451 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94016" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     PTS-2 Amphibious Tracked Carrier </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0165O Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
Special Edition (signed to press 20 Aug 93) p 40 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0165O </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by V. Zhabrov, senior scientific associate] </F>
  [Text] The PTS-2 amphibious tracked carrier is designed for 
assault crossing of artillery systems; transport of wheeled and 
tracked artillery prime movers, armored personnel carriers, 
motor vehicles, various cargo, and personnel over water 
obstacles. 
  It has a crew cab with local armor plating, an air 
filtration 
plant, cargo platform, winch, equipment for digging in (which 
can be used for digging shelters and preparing slopes to the 
water), water pumping equipment (emergency and dehumidifying 
pumps), and maritime equipment supporting use of the carrier at 
wave action up to three points. The PTS-2 is also equipped with 
a roentgen meter (measures the dose rate of gamma radiation 
inside the cab), sanitation equipment, two-way external and 
internal communications equipment, standardized automatic 
firefighting system, and observation and orientation instruments. 
  The equipment to be carried across is loaded and unloaded on 
land over ramps through the folding tailboard. Self-propelled 
equipment is loaded (unloaded) under it own power; towed 
equipment is loaded using the winch. 
  A wheeled trailer can be used with the carrier for 
simultaneous crossing of a prime mover (on the carrier) and 
artillery system (on the trailer). It permits operation at an 
outside air temperature of up to +40 degrees and a current up to 
2.5 meters/second. It can be transported by rail, sea, and air 
without dismantling the equipment. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Basic Specifications of the PTS-2                                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Full weight, tonnes                   |24.2                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Crew size                             |2                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Carrying capacity on land and water,  |12                                    | 
|tonnes                                |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Size of cargo platform, mm:           |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|length (to rear wall of cab)          |8,225                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|width                                 |2,870                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Dimensions, mm:                       |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|length (in transport configuration)   |11,990                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|width (at tracks)                     |3,300                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|height (at tent arc)                  |3,170                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Engine:                               |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|make                                  |V-46-5                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|power, kW (hp)                        |522 (710)                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Top speed, km/hr:                     |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|on land                               |60                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|on water (loaded)                     |11.7                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Fuel range:                           |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|on land (highway), km                 |500                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|on water, hrs                         |15                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Winch pull, tonnes                    |10                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42452 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     OPS-5 Water Distillation Plant </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0165P Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
Special Edition (signed to press 20 Aug 93) p 46 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0165P </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lieutenant-Colonel A. Voskresenskiy] </F>
  [Text] The OPS-5 water distillation plant was accepted into 
troop supply in 1990 to replace the OPS plant and is designed to 
desalinate, neutralize, and purify water. Unlike 
thermocompression desalination of water, the OPS-5 uses the 
highly productive progressive method of membrane isolation of 
the media--reverse osmosis. 
  The technology of reverse osmosis desalination of water is 
noted for high reliability and simplicity of design, and makes 
it possible to decrease the size characteristics and 
power-intensity of the plant. Depending on the salt content of 
the source water and the depth of its demineralization, the 
OPS-5 plant provides for a stepped desalination, making it 
possible to do deep demineralization of water and obtain lightly 
mineralized water of up to 1-2 grams/liter. 
  The plant ensures complete purification of water by treating 
it with chlorine-containing preparations with subsequent 
dechlorination in a sorption filter. 
  The plant includes water purification and desalination 
equipment, a power-generating unit, a PLVS laboratory, RDV-5000 
reservoirs, reagents, and a spare parts, tool, and accessories 
kit. All equipment in the OPS-5 plant is arranged on one 
KRAZ-260G base chassis. The power-generating unit is actuated 
from the vehicle's transfer gearbox. 
  The OPS-5 plant's output for desalination of water is twice 
as high as the OPS plant, and the power consumption has been cut 
40 percent. 
  The OPS-5 plant can be used in areas experiencing a shortage 
of fresh water, on seagoing vessels, and also in emergencies and 
ecological catastrophes. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Basic Specifications of the OPS-5                                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Base                                  |KRAZ-260G motor vehicle               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Output for water with following salt  |                                      | 
|content:                              |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|2-6 g/l, cubic meter/hr               |6-5                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|5-18 g/l, cubic meter/hr              |5-3                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|18-35 g/l, cubic meter/hr             |3-18                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Set-up time until receipt of desalina-|2                                     | 
|ted water, hrs                        |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Shut-down time, hr                    |1                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Fuel consumption, l/hr                |22                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight, t                             |21.6                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Crew size                             |4                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42453 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     Method of Calculating Volume of Engineer Camouflage Measures </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0165Q Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
Special Edition (signed to press 20 Aug 93) pp 47-49 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0165Q </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel A. Antonov, candidate of military </F>
sciences and docent, Colonel (Rer) I. Shapkin, candidate of 
technical sciences and docent, and Major V. Gladkov] 
  [Text] This method makes it possible to estimate the volume 
and effectiveness of camouflage measures. 
  Calculation of the labor intensity of engineer camouflage 
measures, taking into account the specific conditions and the 
tactical situation at hand, is done by the formula: 
  W=W[.sup]m[/]x(1-K[.sup]nc[/])-W[.sup]tsc[/], (1) 
  where W[.sup]m[/] is the labor input (volume) of 
camouflage measures, in man-hours; 
  K[.sup]nc[/] is the extent natural camouflage is used 
for concealing objects; 
  W[.sup]tsc[/] is the volume of tasks carried out in the 
interests of the large unit (unit) by forces and assets of the 
senior chief, in man-hours. 
  The extent of natural camouflage is used for concealing 
objects is determined by assessing the concealing properties of 
the terrain of the corresponding area according to a 
topographical map and calculating by the formula: 
K[.sup]nc[/]=N[.sup]obc[/]xK[.sup]cp[/]/N[.sup]tu[/], 
(2) 
  where N[.sup]obc[/] is the number of objects concealed by 
natural camouflage; 
  N[.sup]tu[/] is the total number of objects in the 
large unit (unit); 
  K[.sup]cp[/] is the indicator of the concealment 
properties of the natural camouflage (Table 7.1). 


Table 7.1. Indicator of Concealment Properties of Natural Camouflage, K[.sup]cp[/] 

Type of       Months 
Forest 

1             2       3       4      5      6       7      8      9      10      11     12 

Coniferous    1.0     1.0     1.0    1.0    1.0     1.0    1.0    1.0    1.0     1.0    1.0    1.0 

Deciduous     0.5     0.5     0.6    0.8    0.9     1.0    1.0    1.0    0.9     0.8    0.8    0.5 

Mixed         0.75    0.75    0.9    0.9    0.95    1.0    1.0    1.0    0.95    0.9    0.9    0.75 


  The number of forces involved in carrying out the engineer 
camouflage and simulation measures is: 
  N[.sup]f[/]=W/T[.sup]ct[/], (3) 
  where W is the labor intensity of the tasks to be performed, 
in man-hours; 
  T[.sup]ct[/] is the time for performing the camouflage 
tasks, in hours. 
  After making the calculations, the chief of the engineer 
service of the large unit (unit) must assess the effectiveness 
of the planned camouflage measures. 
  The following are considered the basic criteria of 
effectiveness: Probability of detection of single and group 
objects; survivability of troops (objects). 
  A tank, infantry fighting vehicle [BMP], gun, and so forth 
are considered single objects. 
  One method of determining the quantitative probability of 
detection of single objects is according to a nomograph (Figure 
7.1). The probability of detection of an object by aerial 
reconnaissance is determined depending on the type and 
conditions of conducting reconnaissance and the camouflage 
technique. 


<FIG ID=JPRS-UMA-006C-26A>           Figure 7.1. Nomograph for determining </FIG>



  Example. Determine the probability of 
detection of a tank in a pit camouflaged by local means on the 
terrain with a degree of cover of K[.sup]ct[/]=15 percent 
(determined according to a map) by aerial and photo 
reconnaissance from medium altitude. 
  The course of accomplishing the task is shown in the 
nomograph by a broken line. As a result, the probability of 
detection is P[.sup]o[/]=0.65. 
  Group objects such as a subunit, unit, or large unit usually 
become the targets of reconnaissance and destruction. 
  For these objects, it is important to assess the 
effectiveness of engineer camouflage measures not only according 
to the probability of detection but also according to 
survivability. 
  According to the nomograph (Figure 7.2.), the probability of 
detection and the survivability of a group object over time are 
determined depending on the time of the year, degree of cover of 
the terrain, and the nature of measures conducted for camouflage 
and fortification. 


<FIG ID=JPRS-UMA-006C-27A>           Figure 7.2. Nomograph for determining </FIG>



  Example. A motorized rifle unit occupied an 
assembly area that was prepared with fortifications. It was 
summer. The degree of cover of the terrain was 
K[.sup]ct[/]=20 percent. The equipment had been camouflaged 
with natural camouflage and standard screens; personnel were in 
dugout shelters. 
  Determine the probability of detection (P[.sup]o[/]) 
and survivability (q) of the unit 10 hours after occupying the 
area. 
  The course of solving the task is shown in the nomograph by 
the broken line. As a result, the probability of detection is 
P[.sup]o[/]=0.56, and q=0.8. 
  After determining the method (technique) of camouflage and 
simulation, the chief of the engineer service makes the decision 
to involve units (subunits) to perform engineer camouflage and 
simulation measures. Subsequently, as part of the monitoring 
group he determines the completeness and quality of the tasks 
performed. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42454 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     KSZ Combat Engineer Protective Clothing Set </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0165R Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
Special Edition (signed to press 20 Aug 93) p 50 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0165R </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel P. Olenin and Lieutenant-Colonel N. </F>
Salamakhin] 
  [Text] The protective clothing set is designed to protect 
the combat engineer from injury by the explosion of 
antipersonnel mines when conducting reconnaissance and clearing 
an area of landmines by hand. 
  The kit enables the combat engineer to search for and 
destroy 
(disarm) antipersonnel mines. 
  The KSZ includes a jacket with a cushioning climate layer, 
trousers, a hood, a visor, shoe covers, and a respirator. 
  The jacket, trousers, hood, and shoe covers are made of a 
large number of layers of ballistic fabric. A differentiated 
change in the protective properties of the clothing is ensured 
by using removable metal armor elements with varied levels of 
strength. 
  The protective clothing is recommended for use, depending on 
the conditions of the task being carried out, as a full set or 
without individual components, with additional reinforcement or 
without reinforcement. Three basic variants are formed: The base 
variant for protection against small fragments; a reinforced 
variant for protection against small fragments; and a 
bulletproof variant for protection against directional mines. 
  The design features of the clothing make it possible to be 
used in a temperature range of -35 to +35 degrees C and to fire 
small arms. 
<H5>  Basic Specifications of the Protective Clothing Set </H5>
  Protective properties of the base variant: 
  --against explosion of high-explosive antipersonnel mines to 
a distance of 1 meter; 
  --against bullets from a Makarov pistol from a distance of 
10 meters. 
  Protective properties of the base variant with additional 
armored protection: 
  --against explosion of POMZ-2 fragmentation-type 
antipersonnel mines at a distance of 2 meters; 
  --against explosion of MON-50 fragmentation-type 
antipersonnel mines at a distance of 15 meters; 
  --against bullets from Kalashnikov 7.62-mm and 5.45-mm 
assault rifles from a distance of 15 meters. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42455 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94020" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     MDK-3 Excavating Machine </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0165S Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
Special Edition (signed to press 20 Aug 93) p c4 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0165S </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article] </F>
  [Text] The MDK-3 is designed for digging ditches for 
sheltering armament, equipment, and personnel when preparing 
positions for troops and command and control facilities. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Basic Characteristics                                                        | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Productivity, m[.sup]3[/]/hr        |up to 800                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Size of ditches that can be dug:      |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|width, meters                         |3.7                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|depth, meters                         |up to 3.5                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Base chassis                          |MT-T multipurpose combination prime m-| 
|                                      |over-carrier                          | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Fuel range, km                        |500                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Machine preparation time, minutes     |5                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Full weight, tonnes                   |39.5                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Dimensions in transport position, mm  |10,220x3,730x4,040                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Crew size                             |2                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Operating equipment                   |dozer blade, ripper, road harrow      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Communications equipment              |R-124 intercom, R-123 radio set       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 



</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42456 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94021" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     Listing of Articles Not Translated </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0165T Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian Special Edition 
Oct 1993 (signed to press 20 Aug 93) </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0165T </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] 
  Appeal to Readers (V. Kuznetsov)p 2 
  Method of Calculating Fortification Preparation of Defensive 
Areas (S. Cherkasov)pp 7-10 
  Method of Calculating Time for Preparing a Route (A. 
Kachanov)pp 29-30 
  Method of Calculating the Equipment of Water Supply Points 
and Water Extraction Points (V. Malyshev, V. Telegin)pp 
41-45 
  Basic Calculations of Engineer-Technical Support (B. Savich, 
E. Vysotskiy)pp 51-53 
  ED 16-1230-AI Mobile Electric Power Station (M. 
Khoptyar)p 54 
  T-10.32-8 (T-10.32-9) Automated Radio-Controlled Bulldozer 
(M. Royev, V. Shamordin)pp 55-56 
  RIL-DT Engineer Straightedge (Road, Tactical) (I. Polyakov, 
V. Parfenyuk)pp 57-61 
  RIL-MI Engineer Straightedge (Low-Level Bridges) (A. 
Kolesnichenko)pp 62-66 
  RIL-PR Engineer Straightedge (Demolition Work) (I. 
Kazachok)pp 67-72 
  RIL-VT Engineer Straightedge (Water Extraction and 
Purification, Tactical) (V. Malyshev, V. Telegin)pp 73-77 
  RIL-Ya Straightedge (Yu. Dorofeyev, V. Kupayev, A. 
Markin)pp 78-87 
  RIL-RT Engineer Straightedge (A. Saprykin)pp 88-90 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42457 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma006___94022" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Military Herald No 10, 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   10 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     Publication Data </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0165T Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK in Russian No 10, Oct 93 
Special Edition (signed to press 20 Aug 93) </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0165T </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOYENNYY VESTNIK </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] 
  English title: MILITARY HERALD 
  Russian title: VOYENNYY VESTNIK 
  Editor: V.I. Rudenko 
  Publishing house: Izdatelstvo "Krasnaya zvezda" 
  Place of publication: Moscow 
  Date of publication: October 1993 
  Signed to press: 20 August 1993 
  COPYRIGHT: VOYENNYY VESTNIK No 10 1993 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42458 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma007___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Bulletins of Foreign S&amp;T Information </ABS>
<DATE1>   16 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     BULLETINS OF FOREIGN S&amp;T INFORMATION </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94A50006A Moscow BYULLETEN INOSTRANNOY NAUCHNOY I 
TEKHNICHESKOY INFORMATSII in Russian No 39, 41, 42, 1992, pp </F>



<TEXT>
1-55, 1-64, 1-55 
<F P=103> 94A50006A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow BYULLETEN INOSTRANNOY NAUCHNOY I 
TEKHNICHESKOY INFORMATSII </F>

 Language: <F P=105>Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Bulletin of Foreign Scientific and Technical Information No </F>
39 (2597), 29 September 1992; No 41 (2599), 13 October 1992; No 
42 (2600), 20 October 1992, published by the Information and 
Operational Scientific-Technical Information Agency: "Bulletin 
of Foreign Scientific and Technical Information, Series 1: THE 
NATURAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY"] 
<H5>  [No 39, 29 September 1992, pp 1-55] </H5>
  [Text] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42459 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma007___94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Bulletins of Foreign S&amp;T Information </ABS>
<DATE1>   16 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<F P=101>   AVIATION AND COSMONAUTICS </F>
<H3> <TI>   "Mosaeroshow-92" Russian Aerospace Exhibition (Survey) </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  11111111 </F>
<F P=103> 11111111 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:CSO 

  [Text]The "Mosaeroshow-92" Russian International Aerospace 
Exhibition took place on 11-16 August 1992 in the Moscow suburb 
of Zhukovskiy. The Flying-Research Institute (LII) imeni M.M. 
Gromov, Aviaeksport Association, and the German firm Glahe 
International organized it. The exhibition received experts and 
journalists from 11 through 14 August and everyone who wished to 
attend on 15 and 16 August, and an air show was conducted on 16 
August in honor of Air Force Day. 
  The exhibition took place at an airfield belonging to LII, 
the main VPP [runway] of which is 5,500 meters long. There are 
no such large airfields in Europe, and only the airfield at 
Edwards Air Base in the United States can be compared to it. 
Russia spent 85 million rubles [R] to organize the air show, of 
which R60 million was spent on construction of roads and city 
infrastructure and R25 million on development of the exhibition 
complex itself. A portion of the expenditures was covered by the 
cost of entry tickets. With the price of a ticket at R30, the 
amount of proceeds from entry payments totaled more than R8 
million and, considering the lease payments by the exhibitors, 
we can assume that a large portion of the cost of the exhibition 
complex was covered. 
  The "Mosaeroshow-92" organizers managed to develop the 
aerospace exhibition complex in a record short period of time 
(3.5 months). The exhibition complex hardly lags behind the most 
famous aircraft exhibition complex in the world at Le Bourget 
(near Paris). 
  The opportunity that was offered to domestic aerospace 
enterprises to show their items at "Mosaeroshow-92" completely 
meets the assigned task to market domestic products. This 
opportunity is valuable first of all for the producers and 
developers of aircraft equipment, few of whom are capable of 
systematically participating in foreign exhibitions. 
  According to data cited in a KRASNAYA ZVEZDA interview with 
OKB [Experimental Design Bureau] imeni A.I. Mikoyan general 
designer R.A. Belkov, in 1991 not a single aircraft from their 
OKB was sold abroad. A dramatic decline in exports was observed 
in the entire domestic defense industry in 1991. A certain bias 
on the part of a number of potential foreign purchasers 
regarding Russian arms as a result of their unsuccessful 
employment during the course of the Persian Gulf War is among 
the primary causes of this, as well as the lack of 
sophistication of domestic sales structures and possible 
pressure on the Russian Government by the United States. 
Exhibitions of the "Mosaeroshow-92" type will help to disperse 
the bias arising from inadequately thorough analysis of combat 
operations and knowledge of Russian equipment. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Comparative Statistics of the Largest International Air Shows                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|            |Mosaeroshow-|Paris-91    |Farnborough-|ILA-92      |Dayton-92   | 
|            |92          |            |90          |            |            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Duration of |6           |11          |8           |7           |6           | 
|the exhibit-|            |            |            |            |            | 
|ion, in days|            |            |            |            |            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of d-|4           |            |            |            |4           | 
|ays for exp-|            |            |            |            |            | 
|erts        |            |            |            |            |            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Total numbe-|283         |1,721       |780         |460         |206         | 
|r of firms  |            |            |            |            |            | 
|and organiz-|            |            |            |            |            | 
|ations      |            |            |            |            |            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of d-|214         |            |117         |            |184         | 
|omestic fir-|            |            |            |            |            | 
|ms and orga-|            |            |            |            |            | 
|nizations   |            |            |            |            |            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of f-|69          |            |            |            |22          | 
|oreign firm-|            |            |            |            |            | 
|s and organ-|            |            |            |            |            | 
|izations    |            |            |            |            |            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of p-|11          |38          |17          |23          |            | 
|articipatin-|            |            |            |            |            | 
|g countries |            |            |            |            |            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of a-|114         |190         |115         |220         |            | 
|ircraft dis-|            |            |            |            |            | 
|played      |            |            |            |            |            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of v-|280,000     |450,000     |240,000     |300,000     |9,000       | 
|isitors     |            |            |            |            |            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Total exhib-|            |382,000     |275,000     |110,000     |889,100     | 
|ition area, |            |            |            |            |            | 
|m[.sup]2     |            |            |            |            |            | 
|[/]      |            |            |            |            |            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Area of ope-|160,000     |147,445     |            |            |            | 
|n flight li-|            |            |            |            |            | 
|ne ramps, m |            |            |            |            |            | 
|[.sup]2[/]|            |            |            |            |            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Area of cov-|20,000      |83,230      |            |40,000      |26,570      | 
|ered buildi-|            |            |            |            |            | 
|ngs, m[.sup]2|            |            |            |            |            | 
|[/]      |            |            |            |            |            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of c-|36          |            |342         |60          |27          | 
|overed buil-|            |            |            |            |            | 
|dings       |            |            |            |            |            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  There were 114 aircraft (from super-light aircraft to 
aircraft armed with strategic missiles, a wide-fuselage 
passenger aircraft, and the Buran shuttle craft) exhibited at 
"Mosaeroshow-92", practically exclusively Russian and Ukrainian 
developments, except for several Czech aircraft and Polish 
helicopters. There were no Western aircraft. However, many 
Western firms, while not displaying their products, sent 
representative delegations to assess the prospects of joint 
projects with CIS enterprises. 
  Many items (the Tu-160 and Tu-22M3 strategic bombers, the 
Yak-41M (Yak-141)--the first supersonic vertical take-off and 
landing aircraft in the world--the Il-102 ground attack 
aircraft, the MiG- 29K carrier-based fighter aircraft, the 
Su-27IB fighter-bomber, and the Ka-50 single-seat combat 
helicopter) were demonstrated for the first time. Models of 
air-to-air and air-to-surface aircraft weapons, including the 
latest weapons, and also aircraft equipment were presented and 
were accompanied by such detailed information for the first 
time. Demonstrations of domestic PVO [air defense] and PRO 
[antiballistic missile] missile systems became a sensation. 
  One of the conclusions that may be reached based on the 
results of the exhibition is that there are general purpose 
aircraft in Russia. Recently formed design firms specializing in 
light motorized aircraft displayed their products along with 
veteran OKB's that have expanded their sphere of activity, 
having developed a number of models of general purpose aircraft. 
We can note an excessive turn toward business aviation to the 
detriment of PANKh aviation (for employment in the national 
economy), specifically agricultural aviation, as a "childhood 
disease" of Russian general purpose aviation. 
  During the air show on the exhibition's closing day, 130,000 
spectators saw group and formation aerobatic maneuvers. Quite a 
few exotic acts were demonstrated, like the ejection of a 
manikin in flight at low altitude, low altitude aerial 
refueling, vertical take-off, and extinguishing a fire from an 
Il-76. Unfortunately, this also did not occur without losses. 
During the air show, while ejecting a manikin during take-off at 
low altitude from the rear cockpit of a Su-7UB aircraft this 
aircraft was lost (the pilot successfully ejected). Prior to the 
beginning of the exhibition (on 28 June) during rehearsal of an 
act involving two Yak-38 aircraft carrying a flag, one of them 
was also lost due to engine failure and the pilot was 
automatically ejected when the attitude of the aircraft exceeded 
permissible limits (at the show the flag was transported by a 
Yak-38 aircraft and an Mi-8 helicopter). The cause of the engine 
failure is thought to be hot exhaust gases from another aircraft 
that were reflected from the ground into the air intake. 
  "Mosaeroshow-92" permitted Russian experts to expand 
business 
contacts with foreign partners. A number of contracts were 
signed with foreign and domestic aircraft companies. Managers of 
the OKB imeni A.I. Mikoyan conducted preliminary negotiations 
with the British firm GEC Avionics on the possibility of 
large-scale modernization of the avionics of MiG-21 aircraft, 
which are widely operated in the world despite their age, signed 
an agreement on the creation of an SP [joint venture] with a 
German firm to render assistance in the operation of the 
MiG-29's that are in the German inventory, and conducted 
preliminary negotiations on the sale of MiG-29's to Malaysia, 
and MiG-29's and MiG-31's to Portugal, South Korea, and 
Switzerland. Attempts to convince Germany to purchase an 
additional number of MiG-29 aircraft in an improved variant 
instead of the West European EFA fighter aircraft are 
continuing. The OKB imeni P.O. Sukhoy also conducted 
negotiations with South Korea regarding the possible sale of 
Su-27 fighters, signed a protocol of intentions with Erbas 
Industries on certification of the Su-26 sports-aerobatics 
aircraft in France, and signed a contract with the French firm 
Thomson on cooperation in the sphere of development of onboard 
and navigation equipment for civil aircraft. A preliminary 
agreement was reached on the sale abroad of the S-300PMU, 
S-300V, and Tor ZRK [surface-to-air missile systems]. 
  The signing of an agreement between Russian International 
Airlines-- Aeroflot, the Aviation Complex imeni S.V. Ilyushin, 
and Voronezh Aircraft PO [Production Association] on the 
delivery to Aeroflot, beginning in 1995, of 20 Il-96M aircraft 
equipped with engines from the American firm Pratt &amp; Whitney 
and 
equipment from Rockwell- Collins, took place on the day the air 
show opened (the aircraft's first flight is planned in March 
1993 and they propose deliveries beginning in 1995). At the same 
time, the receipt of an order for three Il-96M aircraft from 
Uzbek National Airlines was announced. The next day the signing 
of an agreement took place between Aeroflot, Rockwell-Collins, 
and the Aviation Complex imeni S.V. Ilyushin for the delivery of 
the TCASII collision warning system on already operating Il-86 
aircraft. And Honeywell, a leading Western firm, formed a new 
Russian firm named Honeywell Aviation Control Moscow to equip 
passenger aircraft with the latest flight-control and navigation 
equipment systems and delivered the first shipment for the new 
Tu-204 airliner. The former socialist countries and China 
displayed interest in the exhibition and the restoration of 
cooperation with these countries is considered possible. 
  Allied Signal, an American concern that sent the most 
impressive delegation (30 experts) among Western firms to 
"Mosaeroshow-92," is already carrying out a number of joint 
programs with Russian partners, and at the exhibition the firm 
Bendix, which is part of the concern, signed an agreement with 
Aircraft Equipment NII [Scientific Research Institute] on joint 
development and production of avionics for existing and future 
Russian aircraft. This is the first major joint project of 
Western and Russian enterprises for aircraft avionics. They 
initially propose to install liquid crystal displays [ZhKI] 
developed by Bendix in Il-96, Il-114, and Tu-204 passenger 
aircraft which are being produced for the Russian domestic 
market--this should be the first application of liquid crystal 
displays on series aircraft. Liquid crystal displays will be 
utilized as flight regime optimization systems on the listed 
aircraft. In the future they plan to develop complete flight- 
control and navigation systems based on liquid crystal displays 
for the Yak-42M, Yak-46, and Be-200 aircraft. 
  Allied Signal's projects that have already been carried out 
jointly with Russia have been associated with other directions 
of the concern's activities: for example, Garrett, the concern's 
subsidiary enterprise, has begun to realize a major joint 
program with Omsk Motor Building Design Bureau [MKB] to develop 
a new VSU [auxiliary power unit] oriented on Russian aircraft 
(which have different required air flows than Western aircraft) 
and that includes Garrett's turbine along with a compressor and 
other auxiliary components of Omsk MKB. Allied Signal's 
large-scale presence is associated with the concern's 
fundamental policy for expansion of cooperation with the CIS as 
a result of the capacity of the CIS aircraft manufacturing 
industry and the outlook for its domestic market. In the opinion 
of Steffenhagen, representative of the concern's Frankfurt 
department responsible for ties with Russia, an enormous and as 
yet unrealized potential is hidden in Russian industry. With 
quite limited technical capabilities, Russian engineers propose 
solutions that frequently are better than Western solutions. 
Furthermore, in his opinion, Russia outstrips the West in 
certain spheres of materials technology. 
  An agreement on the creation of a scientific-research 
technical center in the Moscow suburbs, at which they propose 
employing Russian scientists and engineers, was announced at a 
press conference organized by the Department of Aviation 
Industry, Aviaeksport, and Boeing, the largest American 
aerospace corporation. The joint document was signed on 13 
August by Corporation Senior Vice President B. Cosgrove and 
Department of Aviation Industry General Director A. Bratukhin. 
It is anticipated that the center will already be able to begin 
operating in 1993. Initially, five Boeing engineers and 
approximately 12 Russian scientists will work at the center. In 
the near future they will have to determine the precise location 
of the new institution (possibly on the territory of TsAGI 
[Central Aero-Hydrodynamics Institute]) and compose a list of 
problems. According to Bratukhin's statement, the possible 
spheres of research include "promising directions of practical 
aerodynamics." 
<H5>  1. Military Aircraft </H5>
<H5>  Aircraft of the OKB imeni A.N. Tupolev </H5>
<H5>  The Tu-160 Aircraft </H5>
  The Tu-160 multi-mission strategic bomber, accepted into the 
inventory in 1985 and is considered to be the best in the world 
in its class at the present time, was demonstrated for the first 
time on a ramp and in flight. The bomber was manufactured based 
upon an integral design with smooth matching of the wing and 
fuselage. The variable geometry wing ensures flight according to 
various profiles for the aircraft while preserving high 
specifications at both supersonic and also subsonic speed. The 
aircraft has an all-moving vertical and horizontal tail and an 
analog FBW [fly-by-wire control system]. The power plant 
consists of four NK-32 TRDDF [turbojet bypass engines with 
afterburner] engines (4 x 250 kN [kilonewtons]) that are located 
in two pods under the fixed portions of the wing and have 
variable air intakes with a vertical panel. 
  BREO [avionics] includes a strike-navigation system that 
includes an astronavigation system, INS [inertial navigation 
system], PrNK [navigation/attack system], and a radar that is 
designed to detect ground-based and naval surface targets at a 
great distance, an optical-electronic bomb sight, and improved 
active and passive electronic warfare systems. The total number 
of digital processors on board the aircraft exceeds 100. The 
navigator work station consists of eight TsVM [digital 
computers]. 
  The bomber is equipped with a probe and drogue aerial 
refueling system (in the nonoperating position the hose is 
retracted into the nose section of the fuselage in front of the 
pilots' cockpit). The crew consisting of four men is seated in 
K-36DM ejection seats. The crew cockpits are equipped with 
electro-mechanical displays and displays on ELT [cathode ray 
tubes--CRT]. There is a sleeping area for pilot crew rest, a 
toilet, and a galley area to heat food. 
  Various payloads with a total weight of up to 22,500 kg, 
including two drum launchers, each of which can carry six 
strategic cruise missiles with a range of more than 3,000 km, 
drum launchers each armed with 12 RKV-500B short-range guided 
missiles, thermonuclear and conventional bombs (including 
guided), mines, and other weaponry can be located in the two 
weapons bays. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Comparative Specifications of the Tu-160 and B-1B Aircraft                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Type of Aircraft         |Tu-160                   |B-1B                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing span, meters        |35.6/55.7                |23.8/41.7                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft length, m       |54.1                     |44.8                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Height, m                |13.1                     |10.4                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing sweep angle, degrees|20/65                    |15/67.5                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum take-off weight, |275,000                  |205,900[.sup]**[/]     | 
|kg                       |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum landing weight,  |155,000                  |                         | 
|kg                       |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum payload weight,  |45,000                   |34,000                   | 
|kg                       |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Type of engines          |NK-32                    |F101-GE-102              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum thrust, kN       |4 x 250                  |4 x 136                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed, kph       |2,200                    |1,270                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Service ceiling, m       |15,000                   |15,000                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum rate of climb, m-|60-70                    |                         | 
|ps                       |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Operational range, km    |12,300[.sup]*[/]       |10,900[.sup]***[/]     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off run, m          |2,200[.sup]*[/]        |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Landing run, m           |1,600                    |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum operational G-lo-|2.0                      |                         | 
|ad                       |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weaponry:                |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Cruise missiles          |12 x Kh-55               |No[.sup]****[/]        | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Short-range guided missi-|24 x RKV-500             |24 x AGM-64              | 
|les                      |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Bombs                    |Free-fall                |KAB [guided aircraft bom-| 
|                         |                         |bs]                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|[.sup]*[/] With a take-off weight of 275,000 kg.                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|[.sup]**[/] Maximum take-off weight 216,370 kg, however, there have not be-| 
|en any reports on flights of aircraft with that take-off weight              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|[.sup]***[/] With weaponry consisting of eight AGM-64 SRAM guided missiles,| 
| eight M61 nuclear bombs, and a PTB [self- sealing fuel cell] with 9,000 kg  | 
|of fuel in the third bomb bay.                                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|[.sup]****[/] In the future, the possibility is being allowed to equip the | 
|aircraft with ALCM cruise missiles (eight on a drum launcher and 14 on exter-| 
|nal suspension points), in this case operational range on an optimal profile | 
|will be reduced to 7,200 km.                                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  Structurally, the Tu-160 is close to the American Rockwell 
B-1B strategic bomber and was accepted into the inventory at 
approximately the same time as the American aircraft, in 
comparison with which it has a greater take-off weight and 
combat payload weight and also higher LTKh [flight technical 
specifications]. 
  At the same time, special systems directed at reducing the 
aircraft's radar cross section [RCS] have been more widely 
employed on the B-1B: fixed-geometry S-shaped air intakes and 
radar- absorbing coatings that reduce the RCS (the minimum RCS 
in the course plane is approximately 3 m[.sup]2[/]). At the 
same time, a more pronounced integral configuration than in the 
B-1B bomber, low placement of the cockpit, and an all-moving 
vertical tail, in which the slot between the vertical stabilizer 
and rudder which increases the RCS has been eliminated, promotes 
the reduction of the Tu-160 aircraft's RCS. 
  Unlike the American aircraft, the Tu-160 aircraft is armed 
both with short-range weaponry and with long-range cruise 
missiles (they are only proposing to reequip the B-1B aircraft 
to deliver cruise missiles and also nonnuclear free fall bombs 
and also guided bombs). 
  The assembly of Tu-160 bombers is being carried out at Kazan 
Aircraft Plant. In accordance with the initial plans, they 
proposed to produce a series of 100 Tu-160 aircraft, however, 
reports have recently appeared about a reduction, based upon 
financial considerations, of the number of bombers ordered to 40 
(100 B-1B bombers have been built and they plan to build 20 B-2 
bombers in the United States). 
  In the words of CIS Air Force Commander in Chief P.S. 
Deynekin, under the conditions of economic crisis and 
restrictions on financing aircraft programs caused by it, 
long-range aviation needs a cheaper variant of a strategic 
bomber that has improved operational specifications. 
<H5>  The Burlak Aircraft System </H5>
  One of the possible spheres of employment of the Tu-160 
aircraft is its utilization in the Burlak system, which is 
designed to place light artificial earth satellites into 
near-earth orbit. The system consists of the Tu-160 mother 
aircraft and a solid-fueled cruise missile developed at the 
Raduga MKB [Motor Building Design Bureau]. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Burlak Aircraft System                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of a payload placed into low c-|                                      | 
|ircular orbits:                       |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Polar, kg                             |300-500                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Equatorial, kg                        |500-700                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of a payload placed into circu-|                                      | 
|lar orbits with an altitude of 1,000  |                                      | 
|km or elliptical (with a perigee of 20|                                      | 
|0 km and an apogee of 8,500 km)       |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Polar, kg                             |50-150                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Equatorial, kg                        |120-220                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum dimensions of the payload, m  |1.9 x 1.2 x 1.2                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Volume of the payload compartment, m  |1.75                                  | 
|[.sup]3[/]                          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  Employment of the aircraft system excludes the need to 
develop new or lease existing expensive test ranges or ground 
launch complexes; supports the formation of practically any 
plane of orbit, execution of launches from any acceptable--from 
the point of view of ensuring safety--location of the earth, 
regardless of time of day and climactic or weather conditions; 
reduces average energy expenditures for the launch of an 
equivalent payload by a factor of 2-3 in contrast to a ground 
launch; and also reduces unfavorable impacts on the ecology. The 
missile preparation devices and the system as a whole are 
autonomous, mobile, and ensure an efficient launch of a 
commercial payload. 
<H5>  The Tu-142M3 Heavy Antisubmarine Warfare Aircraft </H5>
  The Tu-142M3 heavy antisubmarine warfare aircraft, which is 
produced at Taganrog and is a modification of the Tu-95 
strategic bomber, the first flight of which occurred in 1952 and 
adoption into the Air Force inventory in 1956, was demonstrated 
on the ramp. 
  Besides the Tu-142, the Tu-114 passenger aircraft, the 
Tu-126 
DRLO [AWACS] aircraft, a reconnaissance-target designation 
aircraft designed for coordination with surface combatants and 
submarines that are equipped with long-range antiship cruise 
missiles, an airborne command post aircraft, and also various 
flying laboratories for developing engines, weaponry, and 
onboard equipment were developed based on the Tu-95. 
  The Tu-142M3 aircraft is capable of conducting combat with 
submarines of all types (including modern nuclear submarines) at 
a range of up to 5,000 km from the basing airfield, and is 
equipped with various equipment including a magnetometer, a 
powerful radar that has 360 surveillance in the lower 
hemisphere, and a large number of droppable acoustic buoys. 
There is an onboard ASU [automated command and control system] 
to process information on targets. 
  The Tu-142M3 aircraft's weaponry includes antiship guided 
missiles, torpedoes, and depth charges, and also eight Kh-35 
antiship missiles on two underwing pylons. The aircraft is 
equipped with an aerial refueling probe and flight duration can 
reach 17 hours. A variant has been developed to equip the bomber 
with equipment that permits the aircraft to be used to airlift 
cargoes weighing up to 20 tonnes. 
  Tu-142 aircraft of various modifications are being used in 
Russia's naval aviation and are being built at the Taganrog 
Aircraft Plant. Eight Tu-142M aircraft have been delivered to 
the Indian Navy. 
<H5>  The Tu-95MS Bomber </H5>
  The Tu-95MS Bomber, which was demonstrated in flight, can be 
armed with six 2,500 km range RKV-15B cruise missiles located on 
an internal drum launcher and also with nuclear and conventional 
free fall bombs. The weight of the payload in the bomb bay is 
12,000 kg. Defensive weaponry of the Tu-142 and Tu-95MS aircraft 
includes two GSh-23 cannons that are installed in the tail of 
the aircraft (the cannon has been standardized with the cannon 
used on the Il-76 and Il-78 aircraft). Four NK-12MV TVD 
[turboprop engines] (4 x 15,000 horsepower) are utilized as a 
power plant. Tu-95MS aircraft are built at an aircraft plant at 
Samara. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Tu-95MS Strategic Bomber                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing span, m                          |50.0                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft length, m                    |49.1                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Length of fuselage:                   |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Without aerial fueling probe, m       |45.0                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|With aerial fueling probe, m          |46.9                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Diameter of fuselage, m               |2.9                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft height, m                    |13.3                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing area, m[.sup]2[/]              |311.1                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum take-off weight, kg           |185,000                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum flying weight (with aerial re-|190,000                               | 
|fueling), kg                          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of empty aircraft, kg          |90,000                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum landing weight, kg            |135,000                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of fuel, kg                    |74,000                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed, kph                    |910                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum Mach speed                    |0.82                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Service ceiling (with six cruise miss-|9,100                                 | 
|iles), m                              |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Operational range (with six cruise mi-|11,000                                | 
|ssiles), km                           |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off speed, kph                   |300                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Landing speed, kph                    |270                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  A mock-up of the Tu-2000 experimental VKS [spacecraft], 
designed for flights both in the atmosphere and also in near 
space, was displayed on the ramp of the NTK [Scientific 
Technical Combine] imeni A.N. Tupolev. The aircraft is equipped 
with supersonic PVRD [ramjet engines] installed in a ventral pod 
and is manufactured based upon a "tail-less" design with a delta 
wing that has a leading edge wing extension. Liquid hydrogen is 
used as fuel. 
  They plan to develop a hypersonic passenger aircraft and 
also 
aircraft of other classes based upon the experimental aircraft. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Tu-2000 Spacecraft                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing span, m                          |14                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft length, m                    |55-60                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum take-off weight, tonnes       |70-90                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


<H5>  The Tu-22M3 Bomber </H5>
  At "Mosaeroshow-92" the ANTK [Aircraft Scientific Technical 
Combine] imeni A.N. Tupolev, TsAGI, and LII displayed an 
aircraft-laboratory based on the Tu-22M3 bomber (known in the 
West as Backfire), which is designed for flight research of 
natural laminarization of sweptwing flow of next generation 
passenger aircraft. The goal of the tests is: 
  --to determine the mechanism of the shift of the boundary 
layer on sweptwings under full-scale Reynolds numbers; 
  --to more precisely define theoretical developments and 
improve calculation methods; 
  --to determine the requirements for manufacturing technology 
and the quality of the surface of laminarized wings; and, 
  --to determine the requirements for operating 
characteristics 
of laminarized wings under various climactic conditions. 
  Measurements must be conducted in the Mach range from 0.6 to 
0.82; Reynolds numbers (14-30) x 10[.sup]0[/]; angles of wing 
sweep along the leading edge from 17 to 30; and flight 
altitudes from five to 10 km. Sections on both outer wing panels 
have been modified for research. They propose beginning the 
tests immediately after completion of the exhibition. Pressure 
distribution, the location of the shift point from the laminar 
boundary layer to turbulence layer, and surface friction will be 
determined in flight. 
  The Tu-22M3 bomber has been in the Russian Air Force and 
Navy 
inventory since 1981 and is in series production at the Kazan 
Aircraft Plant (in accordance with the protocol to the SALT II 
Treaty between the USSR and United States the rate of production 
has been restricted to 30 aircraft per year). The Tu-22M3 
aircraft and preceding modifications of the Tu-22M and Tu-22M2 
are the further development of the Tu-22 bomber and the first 
long-range bomber with a variable geometry wing. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Tu-22M3 Aircraft                                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing span, m                          |34.3/23.3                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft length, m                    |42.46                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft height, m                    |11.08                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing area, m[.sup]2[/]              |165                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum take-off weight, kg           |124,000                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Landing weight, kg                    |78,000                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of fuel, kg                    |50,000                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed, kph                    |2,300                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Operational range, km                 |7,000                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Combat radius (depending on combat pa-|1,500/2,500                           | 
|yload and flight profile), km         |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Service ceiling (at Mach 1.3), m      |14,000                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The aircraft is equipped with NK-25 turbojet bypass engines 
with afterburner (2 x 250 kN, an NK-22 engine with maximum 
afterburner thrust of 2 x 220 kN has been installed on the 
Tu-22M2), a long- range radar that ensures detection of 
ground-based and naval surface targets, an optical-electronic 
bomb sight, and an INS. The crew of four men is seated in KT-1 
ejection seats. The aircraft has active and passive electronic 
warfare systems. 
  Kh-22 guided missiles, designed to destroy naval surface or 
stationary ground-based targets, are located under the fuselage 
in a semirecessed position. Another two missiles of the same 
type are located on underwing pylons. Six RKV-500B short-range 
guided missiles or their antiship modifications can be placed on 
a drum launcher in the weapons bay. Bomb weapons with a total 
weight of up to 24,000 kg are suspended in the weapons bay on 
two ventral and two underwing multiclamp bomb holders and can 
include up to 69 bombs of 250 kg or eight 1,500 kg bombs. 
  Defensive weaponry consists of one modernized GSh-23 cannon 
(23 mm, 4,000 rounds per minute, two GSh-23 cannons with a rate 
of fire of 3,400 rounds per minute have been installed on the 
Tu-22M2) with a remote control system that has television and 
radar channels. 
<H5>  Aircraft of the OKB imeni P.O. Sukhoy </H5>
<H5>  Variants of the Su-27 Fighter Aircraft </H5>
  The Su-27K and Su-27UB aircraft, variants of the well-known 
Su-27 single-seat twin-engine fighter-interceptor, were 
exhibited on the ramp of the OKB imeni P.O. Sukhoy. The basic 
Su-27 aircraft and the Su-27IB, one of its latest modifications, 
were demonstrated in flight. 
  The Su-27's modern aerodynamic configuration, powerful and 
efficient bypass turbojet engines, large fuel reserve, broad 
range of altitudes and flight speeds, highly effective avionics 
system, and modern guided missile weaponry ensures its high 
effectiveness while intercepting airborne targets. Since the 
very beginning, the Su-27 was developed as the first domestic, 
statically unstable fighter aircraft with a fly-by-wire control 
system (FBW) that provides the aircraft's artificial stability 
for pitch, bank, and yaw. The fly- by-wire control channels are 
located throughout the entire extent of the aircraft. 
  A high thrust-to-weight ratio, the availability of the 
fly-by-wire control system with automatic restriction of the 
aircraft's permissible angle of attack and the maximum G-load 
while flying, the adaptive wing, the weapons control system with 
the use of an optical-electronic radar and helmet-mounted target 
designation system, and also powerful weaponry permit the Su-27 
interceptor to confidently conduct close, maneuvering air combat. 
  The AL-31F turbojet bypass engine with afterburner, 
developed 
at the OKB imeni A. M. Lyulka and installed on the Su-27, is the 
first world-level bypass engine in our country. The AL-31F 
operates in a wide range of altitudes and flight speeds and 
smoothly operates in regimes of a deep surge of the air intake 
at Mach 2 under conditions of a flat, normal, or inverted spin. 
The surge elimination systems, automatic engine start in flight, 
and auto continuous ignition of the primary chamber and 
afterburner ensure the reliability of the power plant while 
employing onboard weaponry. 
  An effective electronic combat system is utilized on the 
aircraft which consists of the Sorbitsiya-S active jammer (its 
foreign equivalent is the AN/ALQ-135). Armament consists of a 
built-in GSh- 30-1 cannon (30 mm, 1,500 rounds per minute, 150 
rounds), up to 10 air-to-air missiles, including the R-27 
medium-range guided missile and the R-73 close-range guided 
missile. 
  In 1986-1988, 27 time-to-climb and horizontal flight 
altitude 
world records were set in the interceptor variant of the Su-27 
that has the designation P-42 (with R-32 turbojet bypass engines 
with afterburner, 2 x 133.37 kN, 2 x 136 kN). 
  The year 1969 marks the beginning of the development of the 
aircraft and the first flight of the T-10-1 prototype aircraft 
occurred on 20 May 1977. The Su-27 has been in the Russian Air 
Force inventory since 1984. In 1991, as a result of budget 
restrictions, the Air Force decided to develop a base Su-27 and 
develop a reconnaissance aircraft, a fighter-bomber, a jammer, 
an all-weather interceptor, etc. based upon it, to concentrate 
resources on combat aircraft, and to prevent the development of 
various types of aircraft with identical missions, and ceased 
purchases of MiG-29 aircraft. 
  In August 1992 the first Su-27 aircraft of a shipment of 24 
aircraft were transferred to China within the framework of a 
$1.5 billion contract at a price of $35 million per equipped 
aircraft. This is the first delivery of Russian weaponry to 
China in the last 30 years. Russian military instructor-pilots 
were to have provided retraining of 200 Chinese pilots for this 
type of aircraft, however, the Chinese refused the services of 
the Russian Air Force, explaining that they have their own 
instructors who underwent flight training in the Su-27 at a CIS 
aviation school. The Su-27 has been series produced at 
Komsomolsk-na-Amur since 1982 and the Su-27UB at Irkutsk since 
1986. 
  A coherent pulse-Doppler jam-proof radar, which has the 
capability to search and track targets in the background of the 
underlying surface, has been installed on the Su-27 (it provides 
track-while- scan and the simultaneous launch of guided missiles 
against two targets). A 36Sh optical radar system, developed at 
the Geofizika NPO [Scientific Production Association] and slaved 
to the helmet- mounted target designation system, supplements 
the radar and was demonstrated at the exhibition. The system is 
designed to determine the coordinates of contrasting thermal 
mobile targets and has the following technical specifications: 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the 36Sh Optical Radar System                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Search field, degrees                 |120 x 75                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Field of view, degrees                |60 x 10                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Detection range, km                   |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|In the rear hemisphere                |50                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|In the forward hemisphere             |15                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range measurement range, km           |0.3-3                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Coordinate measurement accuracy       |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|for azimuth, in minutes               |5                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|for range, in meters                  |10                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Angular velocity of automatic trackin-|more than 25                          | 
|g, degrees per second                 |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The specifications of the Su-27 aircraft variants that were 
demonstrated at the exhibition are presented in the following 
table. 


---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Comparative Specifications of Su-27 Aircraft Variants                     | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|              |Su-27         |Su-27IB       |Su-27K        |Su-27UB       | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Year of first |1977          |1990          |1987          |1985          | 
|flight        |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Year accepted |1984          |              |              |              | 
|into the inve-|              |              |              |              | 
|ntory         |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Dimensions:   |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing span, m  |14.7          |not available |14.7          |14.7          | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft leng-|21.935        |not available |21.935        |21.935        | 
|th, m         |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft heig-|5.932         |not available |5.932         |6.357         | 
|ht, m         |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing area, m  |62            |not available |62            |62            | 
|[.sup]2[/]  |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing sweep, p/|42            |not available |42            |42            | 
|k [leading ed-|              |              |              |              | 
|ge], degrees  |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Crew, men     |1             |not available |1             |2             | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Engines:      |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number        |2             |2             |2             |2             | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Model         |AL-31F        |AL-33K        |AL-31F        |AL-31F        | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Thrust, kN:   |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|With afterbur-|2 x 122.58    |2 x 125.53    |2 x 122.58    |2 x 122.58    | 
|ner           |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Without after-|2 x 74.53     |not available |2 x 74.53     |2 x 74.53     | 
|burner        |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight and pa-|              |              |              |              | 
|yload, kg     |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off weig-|              |              |              |              | 
|ht            |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum       |30,000        |44,360        |32,000        |30,500        | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Normal        |22,500        |not available |not available |24,000        | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Empty aircraft|16,000        |not available |not available |17,500        | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum comba-|6,000         |8,000         |6,000         |not available | 
|t payload     |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Internal fuel |9,400         |not available |not available |not available | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight data:  |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum fligh-|              |              |              |              | 
|t speed, kph: |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At high altit-|2,500         |not available |2,300         |2,125         | 
|ude           |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At sea level  |1,400         |not available |not available |not available | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum Mach  |2.35          |not available |2.17          |2.0           | 
|number        |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Service ceili-|18,500        |not available |17,000        |17,250        | 
|ng, m         |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum range,|3,900         |4,000         |3,000         |3,000         | 
| km           |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off run, |650           |not available |not available |750-800       | 
|m             |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Landing speed,|not available |not available |240           |not available | 
| kph          |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Landing run, m|620           |not available |not available |650-700       | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum opera-|9             |not available |8             |9             | 
|tional G-load |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The Su-27UB is a combat trainer fighter aircraft designed to 
retrain pilots into the Su-27 aircraft; it retains all the 
combat capabilities of the SU-27 (the weapons and weapons 
control systems have been completely preserved), and provides an 
outstanding field of view to the pilots from both cockpits. The 
seats are located in tandem in the two-seat cockpit. Series 
production has begun of an Su-27UB modification that is equipped 
with an aerial refueling system. In 1988 a Su-27UB completed a 
flight from Moscow-- Komsomolsk-na-Amur--Moscow, a distance of 
13,440 km, with four aerial refuelings and without landing. 
  The Su-27IB is a two-seat fighter-bomber with the seats 
located side by side. It is designed to destroy heavily defended 
point targets in any weather conditions, during the day or at 
night. It is capable of completing a flight in the terrain 
following mode. The Su-27IB is designed to replace the first 
variants of the Su-24 aircraft. It is similar to the American 
McDonnell-Douglas F-15E fighter-bomber. The Su-27IB took off for 
the first time on 13 April 1990 (test pilot A. Ivanov). It was 
publicly demonstrated for the first time at Machulishchi 
Airfield (near Minsk) during a meeting of the CIS member-states 
heads of state on 13 February 1992. At least two more years will 
be required to complete aircraft flight tests. The Su-27IB has 
an integral aerodynamic configuration and is manufactured 
according to a "triplane" with PGO [foreplanes] design. It is 
also distinguished by the utilization of a twin-wheel nose gear 
and reinforced main landing gear, and it does not have ventral 
fins. The cockpit is an armored capsule with the employment of a 
titanium alloy and armored glass, entry into the cockpit is 
through a folding ladder in the forward landing gear well. The 
cockpit is equipped with multifunction cathode ray tube displays 
and the seats are distinguished by their improved ergonomics. 
Approximately 30% of the weapons control system has been 
modified to support aircraft operations against ground-based 
targets. 
  The aircraft can be armed with two Kh-31 antiradiation 
missiles on suspension points under the engine air intakes, 500 
kg laser-guided bombs on internal underwing pylons, Kh-29T 
television-guided and Kh- 29L laser-guided air-to-surface guided 
missiles on the middle underwing pylons, with RVV-AE medium 
range air-to-air missiles on the external underwing pylons, and 
with R-73 infrared seeker dogfight missiles on the ends of the 
wing. KAB-150 and UAB-500 bombs can be installed (the bombs have 
laser, television, or infrared guidance). Guidance of the Kh-29 
guided missiles can be carried out using the helmet-mounted 
system. The 30 mm cannon has been retained in the starboard wing 
root extension and a retractable aerial refueling probe has been 
located in the port wing root extension. The aircraft's nose 
fairing has a flattened shape with developed side extensions and 
tapered edges. The nose fairing was manufactured from metal and 
was not equipped with instruments in the test model of the 
aircraft that was demonstrated. In the future, they propose 
installing a radar with a small antenna in it. 
  The Su-27K is a carrier-based fighter aircraft for defense 
of 
Navy ships from enemy offensive air weaponry. Work on the 
development of the carrier-based variant of the Su-27 aircraft 
began in 1977, the first flights of the Su-27 aircraft from a 
ground-based ski jump took place in the summer of 1982, and the 
first landing of a Su-27 on an arresting gear occurred on 1 
September 1985. The first flight of the Su-27K (T-10-1) test 
model occurred on 17 August 1987 (V.G. Pugachev). On 1 November 
1989, the Su-27K carried out a landing in aircraft fashion on 
the deck of the Admiral of the Fleet of the Soviet Union 
Kuznetsov heavy aircraft-carrying cruiser for the first time in 
the USSR and took off from the ship's deck using a ski jump. 
They proposed demonstrating the Su-27K for the first time in the 
West at the 1992 Berlin Aerospace Exhibition. The pre-series- 
production model was demonstrated at "Mosaeroshow-92." 
Completion of state testing was noted in July 1992 and the 
decision was made on series production. According to unofficial 
data, a contract has been concluded on the export sale of the 
Su-27K. 
  The Su-27K is manufactured based upon the "triplane" with 
PGO 
design that significantly expands the aircraft's maneuvering 
capabilities. The fighter is equipped with a folding wing and 
stabilizer. Automatically deflected wing leading edge 
mechanization permits it to carry out flights through an 
envelope of the drag polars, and the developed mechanization of 
the trailing edge increases lift by a factor of 1.5 during 
landing and substantially reduces landing speed. The cockpit 
seat has an increased angle of incline. The flight-navigation 
system provides automatic flight until touchdown on the ship's 
deck. The retractable aerial refueling probe is located ahead of 
the cockpit on the left side. The optical- electronic radar is 
located on the right if you are looking out from the cockpit (on 
the initial Su-27 it has a central location). The aircraft has a 
multichannel communications system and a developed electronic 
countermeasures system. 
  Besides the built-in 30 mm cannon, the Su-27K's weaponry 
includes the Moskvit long-range supersonic antiship guided 
missile (located on a ventral suspension point on a special 
tray) and up to 10 air- to-air missiles. The LII demonstrated a 
flying laboratory on the ramp that was developed based on the 
Su-27 aircraft to study active flight safety support systems of 
future maneuvering aircraft and optimal control of their 
trajectory movement. The flying laboratory is being utilized as 
part of the LMK-2405 flight-modeling system that also includes a 
ground test-adjustment stand. The flying laboratory is equipped 
with a complex control system that combines an experimental 
aircraft and engine control system and an experimental 
information and control element depiction system. 
Omnidirectional information exchange system is utilized for 
communications with a ground station. The flight test control 
system supports processing of external trajectory changes, 
radio- telemetry information, and also modeling and formation of 
the laws of control utilizing a ground stand. 
  Six Su-27 aircraft are part of the "Russian Warriors" 
acrobatic team that performs with success in Russia and abroad. 
Test pilot A. Kvochur, who performed at "Mosaeroshow-92" with 
demonstration flights in the Su-27, recently organized a new 
acrobatic team which is equipped with four Su-27 aircraft (two 
single-seat and two twin- seat aircraft with an aerial refueling 
system) that were painted using Western-manufactured paint. The 
aircraft were purchased at the plant (single-seat aircraft at 
Komsomolsk-na-Amur) at a price of R50 million per aircraft. The 
private insurance company Yupiter provided the funds for the 
acquisition of the aircraft. 
<H5>  The Su-24MR Reconnaissance Aircraft </H5>
  The Su-24MR specialized reconnaissance aircraft that was 
demonstrated for the first time was exhibited in Russian 
tricolors at the ramp of OKB imeni P.O. Sukhoy. This aircraft 
was developed based on the Su-24M frontal aviation bomber, has a 
variable swept wing, and is designed to provide reconnaissance 
information to ground troops and frontal aviation commanders 
and, on maritime axes, to the Navy. It can carry out 
comprehensive all-weather aerial reconnaissance during the day 
and at night in a wide range of altitudes and speeds to a depth 
of 400 km beyond the line of contact under the impact of enemy 
PVO [air defense] weapons systems. To carry out reconnaissance 
missions, the aircraft is equipped with the BKR-1 reconnaissance 
system which ensures a high probability of detection and 
identification of military equipment targets, including decoys 
and camouflaged targets. The Su-24MR aircraft can be employed 
for civilian purposes to assess radiation contamination of 
terrain and air near AES's [nuclear power plants], detection of 
spills of petroleum products on the ground and in the water, 
monitoring the state of forest areas and detection of forest 
fires, terrain mapping, etc. 
  Cameras for panoramic and oblique photography, a radar 
system, infrared and television reconnaissance have been 
installed onboard the aircraft and laser, radio-technical, and 
radiation reconnaissance equipment are located in removable 
external pods. The reconnaissance systems are controlled 
automatically and manually. The onboard navigation equipment 
supports the flight of the aircraft along a preprogrammed route, 
aircraft entry into the reconnaissance sector, and low-altitude 
flight with collision warning and fly around of obstacles. 
  The Shtyk side-looking radar, developed at Vega-M MNIIP NPO, 
has been installed in the aircraft nose section and the 
Krasnogorsk Plant-produced AP-402M panoramic camera--in the 
lower section, the A-100 oblique AFA [aerial camera] of that 
same plant--in the lower section of the fuselage right behind 
the cockpit, and the Geofizika NPO-developed infrared system--in 
the lower central section of the fuselage. A pod with the 
Shpil-2M laser device, developed at the radio optics scientific 
research institute, is hung on the central ventral suspension 
point, and a pod with the Efir-1M radiation reconnaissance 
device--on the right external underwing suspension point. 
  The Shtyk radar provides a view of a zone that is 24 
kilometers wide on each side from the line of flight with an 8 
kilometer-wide nonviewed section (directly under the aircraft), 
a flight altitude of 100-3,000 meters during radar 
reconnaissance, and resolution of 5-7.5 meters. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Su-24MR Aircraft                                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Dimensions:                           |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing span at sweep angle:             |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|16, m                            |17.63                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|69, m                            |10.36                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft length with the pitot tube, m|24.53                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft height, m                    |6.19                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing area at sweep angle              |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|16, m[.sup]2[/]                |55.16                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|69, m[.sup]2[/]                |51.0                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Engines:                              |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number                                |2                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Type                                  |Saturn NPO AL-21F3A                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Stand thrust                          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At full afterburner, kN               |2 x 112                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At maximum regime, kN                 |2 x 78                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weights and payloads:                 |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off weight                       |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum permissible, kg               |39,700                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Normal, kg                            |33,325                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Landing weight                        |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Extreme, kg                           |28,000                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum, kg                           |26,000                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Normal, kg                            |25,035                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Capacity of internal fuel tanks, lite-|11,700                                | 
|rs                                    |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight data:                          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Mach flight number at high altitude   |1.35                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum flight speed at an altitude o-|                                      | 
|f 200 m                               |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Without external fuel tanks, kph      |1,320                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|With the Shpil-2M and Efir-1M pods an-|1,200                                 | 
|d with two R-60 missiles, kph         |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Combat radius during a flight at an a-|                                      | 
|ltitude of 200 m with variable speed (|                                      | 
|670 kph in the section 200 km from th-|                                      | 
|e line of contact, 900 kph during the |                                      | 
|remaining section) with the Shpil-2M  |                                      | 
|and Efir-1M pods and with two R-60 mi-|                                      | 
|ssiles when the missiles are dropped  |                                      | 
|at the halfway point                  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Without external fuel tanks, km       |420                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|With two 3,000 liter capacity externa-|650                                   | 
|l fuel tanks and dropping the externa-|                                      | 
|l fuel tanks after the fuel has been  |                                      | 
|consumed                              |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Ferry flight range along the most adv-|                                      | 
|antageous profile with two 3,000 lite-|                                      | 
|r capacity external fuel tanks (with  |                                      | 
|dropping of the external fuel tanks a-|                                      | 
|fter the fuel in them has been consum-|                                      | 
|ed)                                   |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Without aerial refueling, km          |2,500                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|With one aerial refueling, km         |4,360                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum operational G-load            |6.5                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|VPKh [take-off and landing specificat-|                                      | 
|ions] on a BVPP [concrete runway] wit-|                                      | 
|h a wing sweep of 16, flaps set  |                                      | 
|at 34 and slats at 27       |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off run at normal take-off weigh-|1,100-1,200                           | 
|t, m                                  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Landing run at normal landing weight  |1,000-1,100                           | 
|with brake chute and wheel braking, m |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  There are no aircraft similar to the Su-24MR reconnaissance 
aircraft among foreign frontal aviation reconnaissance aircraft 
based upon comprehensiveness of the reconnaissance information 
obtained. For example, AN/AAS-18 infrared equipment, the 
AN/APQ-102 side-looking radar, and several aerial cameras for 
mapping and oblique photography from high and low altitudes are 
utilized on the RF-4C aircraft that make up the foundation of 
U.S. Air Force tactical reconnaissance aviation; the AIL 
AN/ALQ-61 or Litton AN/ALQ-25 pod systems are utilized for 
SIGINT reconnaissance, but there are no laser or radiation 
reconnaissance systems, and the American reconnaissance aircraft 
is lighter and, with a fixed swept swing, substantially lags 
behind the Su-24MR in flight range and speed at low altitudes. 
Based upon flight specifications, the British GR.1A Tornado 
reconnaissance aircraft, which was also modified from a fighter 
bomber with a variable sweep wing, approximates the Su-24MR but 
the GR.1A Tornado was conceived as a reconnaissance aircraft 
with retention of combat capabilities and is equipped only with 
the TIRRS panoramic and side-looking infrared reconnaissance 
system instead of cannons. 
  The collected photo information is delivered by dropping 
photo materials that have been exposed on board and the 
remaining reconnaissance information is efficiently transmitted 
to the ground via wideband and narrow band radio channels. All 
information is supplied with navigation data for tying it in 
with aircraft location coordinates and time. Reception, 
processing, and decryption of the obtained reconnaissance 
information at the ground site is conducted in real time. On the 
British GR.1A Tornado, the reconnaissance information received 
is recorded on videotape and can be reproduced on a small TV 
display in the navigator-operator's cockpit in near real time 
(the Tornado is the first aircraft in the NATO countries' air 
forces with this capability), however, during the Persian Gulf 
War in 1991, navigators rarely utilized the capability to 
monitor reconnaissance information because they were completely 
loaded down with carrying out navigation tasks and with 
monitoring the threat from enemy surface-to-air missile 
complexes. 
  External fuel tanks with a capacity of 3,000 liters each 
have 
been installed on the Su-24MR aircraft's internal underwing 
suspension points, two R-60 (AA-8 Aphid) close-range infrared 
seeking air-to- air missiles (for self-defense) have been 
installed on the left external underwing suspension point. 
<H5>  The Su-25 Ground Attack Aircraft </H5>
  The new Su-25TK aircraft was demonstrated at 
"Mosaeroshow-92." It was developed at the ANPK imeni P.O. Sukhoy 
based on the Su-25 ground attack aircraft which is being widely 
utilized by the air forces of the CIS countries, Czechoslovakia 
(50 ground attack aircraft have been delivered), Hungary (50), 
Iraq (25), the DPRK (20), and Syria (60), and has been produced 
at Tbilisi Aircraft Plant since 1976. 
  The first Su-25T flight took place in August 1984. By the 
end 
of 1991, eight of the 10 ordered test ground attack aircraft had 
been built. Series production of the aircraft is being 
established at a plant in Ulan-Ude. 
  The ground attack aircraft's fuselage approximates the 
configuration of the fuselage of the Su-25UB two-seater combat 
trainer aircraft. The avionics are located in a large capacity 
fuselage fairing. An increased capacity fuel tank that is 
screened by the engines from the sides has been installed in the 
central section of the fuselage. The experience of combat 
employment of Su-25 ground attack aircraft in Afghanistan has 
been realized in the aircraft design: the central section of the 
fuselage has been reinforced and the engines' IR signature has 
been significantly reduced. 
  Two Ufa Engine Building Production Association R-195 TRD 
[turbojet engines] (2 x 45 kN) have been installed on the 
Su-25T, which have increased thrust in contrast to the initial 
engines. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the R-195 Turbojet Engine                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Length, mm                            |7,880                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Diameter, mm                          |805                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Diameter of the outlet section of the |547                                   | 
|nozzle, mm                            |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Dry weight, kg                        |860                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum thrust, kN                    |45                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Average fuel consumption, kg/kgs per  |0.89                                  | 
|hour                                  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Temperature of the gas in front of th-|930                                   | 
|e turbine, C                     |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Air consumption, kg per second        |66                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Degree of air pressure increase       |9                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  It has an automated aircraft control system that ensures 
access to the target in simple and complex weather conditions at 
any time of the day with high accuracy. 
  The ground attack aircraft is equipped with an I-251 weapons 
aiming system that was developed by Krasnogorsk's Zenit OMZ for 
automatic identification and automatic tracking of small targets 
(tanks, motor vehicles, small craft, etc.), transmission of 
target designation and automatic guidance of guided missiles, 
and also for fire control. 
  The system consists of the Shkval day optical-electronic 
system located in the nose section of the aircraft, which 
includes television channels with fields of view of 27 x 36 and 
0.7 x 10 and 23-fold magnification, and also a laser 
rangefinder-target designator installed on a single platform 
that is stabilized for pitch, bank, and yaw and have angles of 
vertical guidance in a range from +15 to -80, and 
horizontal guidance from +35 to -35. Furthermore, the 
system also has automatic target tracking and target designation 
systems, guided missiles with self- homing, control of antitank 
guided missiles using laser guidance, sighting line 
stabilization, and a BTsVM [onboard digital computer]. For 
operations at night the I-251 system can be supplemented by the 
Merkuriy IR-imaging system, which is mounted in a pod installed 
on an external ventral suspension point. The pod's cross section 
is close to a right angle and its forward portion is covered by 
a hatch that protects the optics during take-off and landing. 
The IR system has a lens with wide and narrow (5.5 x 7.3) 
fields of view (the night channel's optical system is not 
stabilized). Detection range and target lock-on by the day 
channel television system is 10 km, the night system--somewhat 
less. 
  Video information of the day television channel and night 
channel with a narrow field of view is displayed on a monochrome 
CRT that has been installed in the right upper portion of the 
aircraft cockpit instrument panel and the night channel with the 
broad field of view--on an ILS [head-up display--HUD]. 
  The process of navigation and attacking a target has been 
automated to the maximum extent possible by the Su-25T. The 
aircraft automatically enters the target area, the television 
system, oriented beforehand in the required direction, begins to 
operate 10 km from it, then the pilot carries out monitoring of 
the selection and lock-on of the target, after which the system 
shifts to automatic tracking. After the pilot presses the combat 
button, the system carries out selection of the required 
munitions and conducts their launch. After the first run to the 
target, the aircraft can carry out a repeat run in the automatic 
mode or, based on the pilot's desire, return to base (the pilot 
can take control of the aircraft only directly prior to landing). 
  Based on the assessments of OKB imeni P.O. Sukhoy 
representatives, the Su-25TK aircraft with the I-251 weapons 
aiming system outstrips similar developments abroad by five to 
six years (only one foreign single-seat aircraft--the General 
Dynamics series 40 F-16C fighter- bomber--is being equipped with 
the LANTIRN optical-electronic system). 
  The Su-25T's defensive systems consist of an ELINT 
reconnaissance system, identification, suppression, and 
destruction of radars, and dispensing chaff using missiles with 
IR and radar guidance. Pods with 192 IR decoys and chaff and 
also an IR jamming generator in the tail section of the ground 
attack aircraft under the vertical stabilizer have been 
installed on the aircraft. 
  The SU-25TK aircraft's weaponry consists of Kh-58 
antiradiation guided missiles (in the future, they propose 
equipping it with the more powerful Kh-31P antiradiation 
missile), the Kh-25ML guided missile with a laser guidance 
system, and also the Vikhr antitank system which, according to 
the assertions of OKB representatives, has no equals in the 
world. The missile with a high supersonic speed and launch range 
of up to 10 km has a tandem shaped-charge warhead that is 
capable of piercing modern multilayer or active armor with an 
equivalent thickness of up to 1,000 mm (the guided missile can 
destroy the most powerful American M-1A2 Abrams tank in the 
forward projection). Thanks to the missile's high speed, several 
targets can be destroyed in a single run. An APU-8 aircraft 
launcher contains eight Vikhr guided missiles in a 
transport-launch canister that is hung under the aircraft wing. 
  The Su-25TK aircraft's typical combat load is 16 Vikhr 
guided 
missiles. 
  The guided missile's high specifications permit the complex 
to be employed not only against ground-based but also against 
airborne targets (a videotape that was shown during the 
exhibition showed how a Vikhr guided missile destroyed a Tu-16 
target-aircraft in the air). 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the APU-8                                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Length, mm                            |1,524                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Width, mm                             |720                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Height, mm                            |436                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of the unloaded device, kg     |60                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of the loaded device, kg       |535                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of missiles in the APU         |8                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The Su-25TK aircraft that was displayed on the ramp was 
armed 
with a new guided missile with a laser guidance system that was 
developed based on the S-25 heavy NAR [unguided rockets]. 
  Besides guided missile weapons, the ground attack aircraft 
can be equipped with 80-370 mm unguided rockets, conventional 
and guided aircraft bombs, and air-to-air missiles with an IR 
guidance system. 
  Built-in weaponry consists of a 30 mm cannon installed in 
the 
open under the fuselage (in contrast to the GSh-302 cannon 
employed on the Su-25 aircraft, the new gun supports a round 
with a higher muzzle velocity, and has greater range and firing 
accuracy). 
  The Su-25T was demonstrated for the first time at the 
international air exhibition in the Principality of Dubai 
(Arabian Peninsula) in the autumn of 1991. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Su-25TM Aircraft                                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing span, m                          |15.33                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft length, m                    |14.52                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Height, m                             |5.20                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum take-off weight, kg           |19,500                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of fuel in internal tanks, kg  |3,840                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum combat payload, kg            |4,360                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of weapons suspension points   |10                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed, kph                    |950                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Service ceiling, m                    |10,000                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range of combat employment altitudes, |30-5,000                              | 
|m                                     |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum operational G-load            |6.5                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Operating range with a 2,000 kg comba-|                                      | 
|t payload:                            |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At sea level, km                      |400                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At altitude, km                       |700                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Ferry range with external fuel tanks, |2,500                                 | 
|km                                    |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off and landing run on a dirt ru-|600-700                               | 
|nway, m                               |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Firmness of the ground of the dirt ru-|5-6                                   | 
|nway, kg/cm[.sup]2[/]               |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


<H5>  Aircraft of the OKB imeni S.V. Ilyushin </H5>
<H5>  The IL-102 Ground Attack Aircraft </H5>
  The Il-102 prototype ground attack aircraft developed at the 
OKB imeni S.V. Ilyushin was displayed at the exhibition for the 
first time. Work on the program began in the mid-1970's and was 
conducted simultaneously with the development of the T-8 (Su-25) 
aircraft at the OKB imeni P.O. Sukhoy. The Il-102 ground attack 
aircraft is the further development of the Il-40, the first 
Soviet ground attack aircraft with a turbojet engine, developed 
in 1953. Two Il-102 aircraft were built, one of which was 
intended for the conduct of static tests. The ground attack 
aircraft's first flight took place in 1982 and pilots S.G. 
Bliznyuk and V.S. Belousov conducted the flight tests (more than 
200 flights were conducted). The aircraft underwent state 
testing; however, a decision on series production was not made, 
which is partially explained by the presence in the Air Force 
inventory of the Su-25 aircraft, which has similar 
characteristics. 
  The Il-102 ground attack aircraft was manufactured according 
to a normal aerodynamic design with a low swept wing. The Il-40 
aircraft's specific configuration features were preserved: the 
crew, consisting of two men, and the fuel tanks and two engines 
located in an armored box in the central section near the 
aircraft's center of mass, which permitted them to decrease the 
area of armor and improve the ground attack aircraft's 
maneuvering characteristics. 
  The aircraft's wing is swept and has a relatively thick 
section permitting six bomb compartments to be "inscribed" into 
the wing near the root section which are capable of 
accommodating munitions of up to 250 kg (the diameter of a bomb 
must not exceed 325 mm). The wing tips have been canted downward 
(a place has been provided for installing pods with IR decoys in 
their facing portion). It has simple twin-section flaps. The 
ailerons have a pointed leading edge and trim and balance tabs. 
Twin-section spoilers have been located in the wing's upper 
surface. The stabilizer is equipped with a horn-balance elevator 
tab and trim and balance tabs. The swept tail fairing with a 
developed dorsal fin has a rudder with horn balance and 
triple-section servo balance. 
  The fuselage has a characteristic "hump" in which the 
pilots' 
and gunner's cockpits, part of the avionics equipment, and the 
fuel tanks are located (large removable panels that facilitate 
access to the equipment are located between the pilots' and 
gunner's cockpits). Two speed brakes have been installed in the 
tail section along the sides of the fuselage. The forward and 
rear cockpits have flat armored glass. Cockpit equipment is 
traditional with electromechanical instruments equipped with 
circular scales. The tricycle landing gear provides the 
capability to operate the aircraft from dirt runways that are 
capable of supporting a specific pressure of 5 
kg/cm[.sup]2[/]. The rearward retracting single- wheel nose 
gear (5th model tire, 70 x 330) is set far ahead and provides 
good anti-nose-over characteristics. It has twin-wheel primary 
landing gears with model 10A tires (930 x 305) that are 
retracted into a fairing under the wing. 
  A total of 4,000 kg of fuel is located in six tanks located 
in the central portion of the fuselage and protected by armor. 
Two external fuel tanks weighing 800 kg each can be installed on 
two ventral external suspension points. The aircraft's power 
plant consists of two RD-33I turbojet bypass engines (2 x 52 kN, 
a non- afterburner variant of the RD-33 turbojet bypass engine 
with afterburner that is installed on the MiG-29 fighter 
aircraft). They propose the employment of a thrust vector 
deflection and reverse system. 
  An S-17BTs collimating gunsight has been installed in the 
pilot's cockpit and the possibility of utilizing a radar 
gunsight and optical-electronic sighting systems has been 
provided for. The gunner is equipped with a KPS-53-A weapons 
aiming system that includes a PAU-475-2M gunsight with a range 
finder and computer. K- 36L ejection seats, developed at Zvezda 
OKB under the leadership of G. Severin, have been installed in 
the aircraft. 
  Cannon weaponry consists of a twin-barrel 30 mm cannon that 
turns in the vertical plane with a combat load of 500 rounds and 
a GSh-23 rear defensive cannon on a mobile turret (23 mm, 60 
rounds) that is remotely controlled by the gunner. Missile-bomb 
weaponry with a total weight of 7,200 kg is located on 16 
suspension points (including on six internal wing suspension 
points) and includes R- 60M and R-72 air-to-air guided missiles 
with IR guidance, 100-500 kg aircraft bombs, pods with various 
types of unguided rockets, canisters for small cargoes, and 
other weaponry. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Il-102 Aircraft                                        | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing area, m[.sup]2[/]              |63.5                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Normal take-off weight, kg            |18,000                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum take-off weight, kg           |22,000                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of fuel in internal tanks, kg  |4,000                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of combat payload, kg          |7,200                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed, kph                    |950                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Minimum control speed, kph            |250                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Landing speed, kph                    |180                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Lift-off speed, kph                   |150                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Combat radius, km                     |400-500                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Ferry range, km                       |3,000                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off run, m                       |250-300                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Landing run, m                        |400-450                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Landing run with turbojet bypass engi-|300-350                               | 
|ne reverse thrust, m                  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


<H5>  Aircraft of the OKB imeni A.I. Mikoyan </H5>
<H5>  Variants of the MiG-29 Fighter Aircraft </H5>
  Besides the well-known modification of the MiG-29 frontal 
aviation fighter based upon previous demonstrations, two new 
variants were displayed for the first time at "Mosaeroshow-92": 
The MiG-29KVP and the MiG-29K. 
  The TTT [tactical-technical specifications] for the MiG-29 
aircraft were published in 1972, the technical design began in 
1974, and the first of 11 prototype aircraft built completed its 
first flight on 6 October 1977. Series production began in 1982 
and was carried out at plants in Moscow (MAPO) and Nizhniy 
Novgorod. The MiG-29 began to enter the inventory in 1983. Over 
500 aircraft were in the inventory of the countries of the 
former USSR by the beginning of 1992. Furthermore, the MiG-29 
has been supplied to Cuba, Czechoslovakia, the GDR, India, Iran, 
Iraq, North Korea, Poland, Romania, Syria, and Yugoslavia. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the MiG-29                                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing span, m                          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|MiG-29                                |11.36                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|MiG-29K (folded/deployed)             |7.8/12.0                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft length, m                    |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|MiG-29                                |17.32                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|MiG-29K                               |17.27                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft height, m                    |4.73                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing area, m[.sup]2[/]              |38                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Crew                                  |1 man                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Engines:                              |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number and type                       |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|MiG-29                                |2 SPNPP [St. Petersburg Scientific an-| 
|                                      |d Production Enterprise] imeni V.Ya.  | 
|                                      |Klimov RD-33 turbojet bypass engines  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|MiG-29K                               |2 SPNPP imeni V.Ya. Klimov RD-33K tur-| 
|                                      |bojet bypass engines                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum afterburner thrust, kg        |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|MiG-29                                |2 x 8,300                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|MiG-29K                               |2 x 9,400                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight and payloads:                  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off weight                       |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum, kg                           |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|MiG-29                                |18,480                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|MiG-29K                               |17,700                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Normal, kg                            |15,240                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Combat payload, kg                    |3,000                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight data:                          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum flight speed                  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At high altitude, kph                 |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|MiG-29                                |2,450 (Mach 2.3)                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|MiG-29K                               |2,300 (Mach 2.2)                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At sea level, kph                     |1,300                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Service ceiling, m                    |18,000                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Rate of climb at sea level, meters pe-|                                      | 
|r second                              |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|MiG-29                                |330                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|MiG-29K                               |260                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum flight range, km              |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|MiG-29 with one external fuel tank    |2,100                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|MiG-29K with external fuel tanks      |2,600                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off run, m                       |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Without afterburner                   |600-700                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|With afterburner                      |260                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Length of runway for the MiG-29K at n-|120-200                               | 
|ormal and maximum take-off weight, m  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Landing run, m                        |600                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum operational G-load            |9                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|MiG-29K angle of departure from a ski |15                                    | 
|jump during take-off, degrees         |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum permissible braking load      |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|MiG-29K from the arresting gear       |-4.5                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|MiG-29K landing speed, kph            |230                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|MiG-29K nominal direct landing glide  |- 4.0                                 | 
|path angle, degrees                   |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The MiG-29KVP is an intermediate variant built to work out 
take-off from a ski jump and landing on an arresting gear. It 
can be utilized both as a combat aircraft or as a training 
aircraft for carrier aviation pilots at ground-based airfields. 
The only difference from a normal ground-based aircraft is the 
arresting hook and the reinforced design. 
  The MiG-29K is a carrier-based fighter-bomber. Its testing 
began during operations from the deck of the Admiral of the 
Fleet of the Soviet Union Kuznetsov heavy aircraft-carrying 
cruiser in November 1990. It has a folding wing, arresting hook, 
and structurally reinforced landing gear and fuselage tail 
section. The doors of the air intake foreign object protection 
system that were used on previous variants of the aircraft have 
been replaced with lighter retractable grates and the auxiliary 
upper air intakes have been removed and additional fuel tanks 
have been installed instead of them; still, the walls of the air 
intakes in the landing gear well area have been perforated to 
improve foreign object protection of the air intakes. The wing 
has eight load-bearing suspension points. The new Zhuk radar is 
located in the nose fairing with a new, single curvature 
profile. There are no overwing dorsal fins in which packages of 
chaff and IR flares were previously located. The aircraft that 
was displayed had Kh-31 antiradiation missiles on internal 
pylons and R-73 air-to-air missiles on internal pylons [as 
published]. 
  The overall architecture of the weapons control system is 
just like on the initial ground-based MiG-29. There are no 
similar weapons control systems abroad, and there is no similar 
optical radar equipment which operates autonomously and along 
with other onboard systems. The MiG-29K has a new 
optical-electronic radar, improved sensor cooling, and increased 
target detection range. It has an aerial refueling system, the 
intake probe of which is located on the port side ahead of the 
cockpit. 
  The Zhuk multifunction onboard radar was developed by the 
Fazotron Concern. It has high effectiveness and reliability with 
comparatively low weight and can operation in the "air-to-air" 
and "air-to-surface" modes. The Zhuk radar mock-up was shown for 
the first time at the 1989 Paris Air Show. By the summer of 
1992, 10 prototype radars had been built and flight tests are 
nearing completion. In the words of Fazotron Deputy Chief 
Designer V. Antonov, the Zhuk radar is lighter than the radar 
installed on the MiG-29 at the present time, is linked with 
additional weaponry, has a track-while-scan mode, and is capable 
of supporting simultaneous firing against up to four targets 
using missiles with active guidance (the existing MiG-29 
aircraft radar permits attacking only one target at a time). 
  In June 1991, an operational and technical assessment of the 
MiG-29 aircraft was completed in Germany and the German Ministry 
of Defense announced its intention to retain in the inventory 
the 20 MiG-29 single-seat air superiority fighters and four 
MiG-29UB two-seat trainer aircraft that had been previously 
delivered to the GDR. It is assumed that they will be operated 
until approximately 2002, each of which will have 2,500 flying 
hours by that time. In addition to the initial role of ensuring 
the air defense of the eastern sector of Germany from Preschen 
Airfield near the border with Poland, the MiG-29 aircraft of JG9 
Squadron will be utilized as simulated enemy aircraft during 
Luftwaffe and other NATO forces exercises. MiG-29 and F-15 and 
F-16 air combat training has been conducted, including in the 
autumn of 1990 within the framework of preparing for the war 
with Iraq. 
  In the opinion of Lieutenant General H.-J. Kubart, German 
Air 
Force commander in chief, the MiG's can operate normally until 
2002-2003, although he also expressed his concern about 
supplying the German MiG-29 squadron with spare parts. The low 
service life of the early model RD-33 engines that were 
installed on them (the mean time between repair equals only 350 
hours, but total service life can total 600 hours) is cited 
among the shortcomings of the German MiG- 29's. As a result, a 
low MiG-29 readiness coefficient was noted in the first stage of 
mastering the aircraft in the FRG: only six of 24 aircraft were 
combat ready in December 1991. In January 1992, the level of 
combat readiness was doubled but was still inadequately high. 
Representatives of the Russian plant who service the engines and 
guarantee an increase of service life by 50-100 hours were sent 
to the FRG. 
  The Finnish Air Force organized a competition for a new 
fighter aircraft in 1991-1992. The Mirage 2000-5, the JAS-39, 
the F-16, and the F/A-18 aircraft participated in it and the 
MiG-29 fighter aircraft was viewed as a fifth "shadow" 
candidate. In the words of Major General H. Nikunen, Finnish Air 
Force commander in chief, the MiG-29 has good flight 
specifications but inadequately high efficiency and operating 
technology. Furthermore, the general expressed doubts in 
Russia's capability to provide the aircraft with spare parts and 
offer the required barter compensations (the Finnish side will 
pay for the entire shipment of aircraft with counter deliveries 
of their own goods). 
  Since 1991, further deliveries of MiG-29's to the Soviet Air 
Force have been terminated in order "to prevent many types of 
aircraft with an identical mission." But production for export 
is possible. Export sales attempts through intermediaries are 
well known. The lack of sophistication of domestic sales 
structures is one of the causes of the poor aircraft sales (in 
the words of General Designer R.A. Belyakov, not a single 
aircraft was sold abroad in 1991, although there are more than 
50 undelivered MiG-29's at MAPO worth approximately $1 billion). 
To improve the situation, the KB [design bureau] has organized 
the firm MIGservis, uniting the KB with the Znamya truda 
manufacturing plant and cooperating with only one foreign trade 
organization which must issue the license for aircraft sales. It 
is assumed that the developer will have definite proceeds from 
the sale of the aircraft. On 4 June 1992, the Russian Supreme 
Soviet adopted a draft edict authorizing MAPO to independently 
carry out marketing of MiG-29 aircraft. Furthermore, during the 
exhibition an agreement was signed on the creation of a joint 
venture with a German firm to render assistance in the operation 
of the MiG-29's that are in the German inventory. 
  Sale of the MiG-29, like other military equipment, is being 
restricted for political reasons. Taiwan's deputy minister of 
foreign affairs, studying the possibility of purchasing 90 
MiG-29 aircraft for Taiwan's Air Force, recently visited Russia 
but received a refusal from Russia along with several Western 
countries to which Taiwan had turned with a similar request for 
the sale of modern aircraft. 
  Demonstration of the aircraft at various air shows by the 
"Swift" aerobatics team, recently formed at Kubinka Airfield and 
flying MiG- 29 aircraft, is helping to market it. Many foreign 
pilots and experts, to whom the opportunity was presented to 
complete familiarization flights in the aircraft, have noted the 
aircraft's high specifications. 
<H5>  The MiG-25 Aircraft </H5>
  The MiG-25RB reconnaissance-bomber aircraft, displayed on 
the 
ramp and in the air, is designed to conduct imaging and radar 
reconnaissance from high altitudes and conduct bombing strikes 
against fixed targets. 
  Work on the development of this aircraft began in 1958 when 
the OKB imeni A.I. Mikoyan began to study a high-altitude 
reconnaissance aircraft that was capable of executing missions 
with which the Lockheed U-2 and Martin/General Dynamics RB-57F 
aircraft were tasked in the United States. During the course of 
the work, a multimission aircraft was developed that was capable 
of carrying out various combat missions. 
  MiG-25 strike reconnaissance aircraft were employed in 
combat 
operations in the Middle East in 1982 and in the Iran-Iraq 
conflict, practically without combat losses (several aircraft 
were lost as a result of accidents or unskilled tactical 
utilization when missions that were not characteristic to the 
aircraft were assigned to them). Iraqi MiG-25 aircraft were 
successfully employed to destroy Iranian oil terminals 
(relatively small targets), conducting bombing using INS from 
high altitudes at supersonic speed. During the Persian Gulf War, 
the Iraqi side practically did not utilize MiG-25 
reconnaissance-strike aircraft. 
  The following modifications of the reconnaissance and 
reconnaissance-strike aircraft were developed: The MiG-25R 
(1966)-- high-altitude, high-speed, reconnaissance aircraft; the 
MiG-25RBK (1972-1980), the MiG-25RBS (1972-1977), the MiG-25RBV 
(1978), the MiG-25RBT (1978), the MiG-25RBF (a reconfigured 
MiG-25RBK, 1981), the MiG-25RBSh (a reconfigured MiG-25RBS, 
1981)--strike reconnaissance aircraft; the MiG-25BM 
(1982-1985)--a strike-defense suppression aircraft; and the 
MiG-25RU (1972)--a trainer aircraft. 
  High temperatures caused by kinetic heating of the structure 
required the involvement of many enterprises during the 
development of the aircraft, ensuring the development of special 
steels, heat- resistant glass, seals, rubbers, sealants, glues, 
and other promising design materials. Approximately 80% 
of the 
aircraft structure was made from steel, 8% from titanium 
alloys, 11% from aluminum alloys and, 1% from 
other materials. 
  Aircraft equipment is linked into a single system and 
includes an INS (the first in series-production tactical strike 
aircraft), an onboard digital computer, a Doppler slip and drift 
sensor (DISS), a Peleng bombing system that conducts the 
automatic release of bombs at assigned coordinates, an ASU-155 
automated command and control system, and an SPS-141 electronic 
warfare system (MiG-25RBT). Reconnaissance equipment consists of 
an A-72 and A-10-10 aerial cameras (on the MiG-25R and 
MiG-25RB), and a Virazh SRS-4A and SRS- 4B (MiG-25R and 
MiG-25RB), the SRS-9 (MiG-25RB), and the Kub MiG- 25RBK) and 
Sablya (MiG-25RBS) side-looking radar systems (RLSBO). 
  MiG-25 reconnaissance-bomber aircraft weaponry consists of 
up 
to 4,000 kg of 500 kg bombs on four underwing external 
suspension points that can be employed at high supersonic 
speeds. The MiG-25BM defense suppression aircraft is equipped 
with four Kh-58 guided missiles (launch range of more than 40 
km). 
  The reconnaissance-bomber aircraft was series produced in 
1969-1984 at the aircraft plant at Nizhniy Novgorod (Gorkiy). 
Series production of the aircraft was terminated in 1984 and 
reconfiguration of previously built aircraft into the MiG-25BM 
variant continued until 1985. 
  At the present time, the OKB has developed variants for the 
modernization of the MiG-25 aircraft that ensure the increase of 
its combat effectiveness due to the introduction of aerial 
refueling, new guided weaponry, avionics, and electronic warfare 
systems. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the MiG-25RB Aircraft                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing span, m                          |13.42                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft length, m                    |21.55                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing area, m[.sup]2[/]              |62.40                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Engines                               |R-15B-300 TRDF [turbojet engine with  | 
|                                      |afterburner] (2 x 112.5 kN)           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum take-off weight, kg           |41,200                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Normal take-off weight, kg            |37,000                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of fuel in internal tanks, kg  |15,245                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed, kph                    |3,000 (Mach 2.83)                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Service ceiling, m                    |23,000                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight range at supersonic speed with-|1,635                                 | 
|out external fuel tanks, km           |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight range at subsonic speed withou-|1,865                                 | 
|t external fuel tanks, km             |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight range at supersonic speed with |2,130                                 | 
|external fuel tanks (1 x 5 300 l), km |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight range at subsonic speed with e-|2,400                                 | 
|xternal fuel tanks (1 x 5 300 l), km  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Time to climb to an altitude of 19,000|6.6                                   | 
| m, minutes                           |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Time to climb to an altitude of 19,000|8.2                                   | 
| m with 2,000 kg of bombs, minutes    |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum operational G-load            |3.8                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


<H5>  The MiG-31 Interceptor Aircraft </H5>
  The MiG-31 aircraft, developed based upon the MiG-25P 
fighter- interceptor aircraft, is designed for use in the PVO 
system and is capable of carrying out prolonged patrols and 
conducting combat with all classes of aerodynamic targets 
(including small cruise missiles, helicopters, and Lockheed 
SR-71 class high-altitude, high-speed aircraft) at any time of 
day, in complex weather conditions, and under intense conduct of 
electronic warfare. 
  In 1972 the OKB began work on an improved variant of the 
MiG-25 fighter aircraft that received the designation Ye-155MP 
(Item 83, MiG-25MP) and was designed to combat both 
high-altitude and also low-flying targets with a reduced RCS. 
The first flight of this aircraft took place on 16 September 
1975 (test pilot A. Fedotov). In contrast to the initial 
aircraft, the crew of the new fighter- interceptor consisted of 
two men and the Zaslon radar gunsight was included as part of 
the avionics. Zaslon had been developed since the beginning of 
the 1960's for the Tu-148 long-range variable geometry wing 
interceptor which had been proposed to replace the Tu- 128 
aircraft. 
  Series production of the MiG-31 fighter aircraft began in 
1979 at an aircraft plant in Nizhniy Novgorod (Gorkiy), the 
first aviation unit based at Pravdinsk was equipped with the new 
fighter aircraft in 1980, and the MiG-31 completed state testing 
in December 1981. In June 1991 the aircraft was demonstrated for 
the first time at the Paris Air Show and was exhibited at the 
International Air Show in Dubai in the autumn of 1991. 
  Structurally, the MiG-31 fighter aircraft is close to the 
MiG-25. Its airframe is 50% manufactured from stainless 
steel, 
16% from titanium, 33% from aluminum alloys, and 
1% from 
other construction materials. There are small extensions in the 
root section of the wing. Onboard equipment permits the 
utilization of the MiG-31 fighter-interceptor aircraft 
autonomously, as part of a group of identical aircraft or as an 
aircraft-leader for command and control of fighter operations 
that have less improved avionics (the MiG-23, MiG-25, MiG-29, 
Su-27, or Su-15). 
  The aircraft is equipped with the Zaslon SBI-16 
pulse-Doppler 
radar with a high-power phased-array antenna (the diameter of 
the antenna, installed fixed, is 1.1 meters). The MiG-31 is the 
first (and, so far, the only) series production fighter aircraft 
in the world with a phased-array antenna that has only 
electronic scanning (an antenna of this type has been developed 
for the fifth generation F-22 aircraft and the Rafale C). 
  Maximum detection range of a target with an RCS of 16 
m[.sup]2[/] is 200 km, tracking range of an AWACS aircraft 
class target--120 km, fighter class target--90 km in the forward 
hemisphere and 120 and 70 km, respectively, in the rear 
hemisphere. The radar's horizontal search sector is 140 (in 
certain modes--240, that is, it provides surveillance both 
in the forward and in the rear hemispheres), and the vertical 
search sector is +70/-60. 
  The radar permits detection and destruction of aircraft 
(including low-observables), helicopters, and cruise missiles in 
the upper hemisphere and in the background of the surface, 
carries out simultaneous tracking of up to 10 targets, and 
simultaneous guidance of guided missiles to four targets. In 
contrast to the American Grumman F-14 Tomcat fighter aircraft 
which is capable of track- while-scan and simultaneously guiding 
AIM-54 Phoenix guided missiles to various targets in a 
relatively narrow sector (+/-20), the MiG-31 aircraft radar 
can operate in these modes practically in the entire search 
sector. 
  The MiG-31 fighter is equipped with infrared radar on an 
extendible base permitting it to carry out a search and employ 
weapons without revealing its location, and also to operate 
under conditions of intensive electronic jamming. 
  A group of four MiG-31 aircraft is capable of controlling 
airspace 800-900 km along the front. An APD-518 digital 
encrypted communications system supports the exchange of radar 
information in a group of four MiG-31 aircraft at a distance of 
up to 200 km from each other and guidance to a target of a group 
of fighters that have less sophisticated avionics. An RK-RLDN 
digital encrypted data exchange link supports coordination with 
ground-based command posts. Utilization of the APD-518 system 
ensures stealthy attack of a target by a MiG-31 aircraft while 
the target is being tracked by another fighter aircraft located 
a safe distance from enemy aircraft and relaying radar 
information to the attacking aircraft. 
  A large-format tactical situation display has been installed 
in the operator's cockpit and the pilot's cockpit is equipped 
with a PPI- 70V color head-up display developed by Voskhod MPKB, 
which has no series-produced foreign equals at the present time. 
Navigational equipment includes a Tropik radar-navigation system 
(Loran, accuracy of the determination of coordinates is 0.13-1.3 
km at a distance of 2,000 km) and a Marshrut (Omega, accuracy of 
the determination of coordinates is 1.8-3.6 km at a distance of 
2,000-10,000 km). It provides the capability to employ the 
aircraft in the Arctic TVD [theater of military operations]. 
  It has an aerial refueling system with a retractable probe. 
The aircraft is equipped with a bogie undercarriage that permits 
operation from dirt runways (which is especially important 
during operation of the aircraft in unconquered areas of Siberia 
where there is no developed runway network). The fighter is 
equipped with D-30F6 turbojet bypass engines with afterburner (2 
x 9 270/155 kN, dry weight 2,420 kg), development of which began 
in 1972. 
  The MiG-31 aircraft's weaponry includes R-33 long-range 
guided missiles (launch range--120 km) located on four external 
semirecessed suspension points under the fuselage, R-40T medium- 
range guided missiles with an IR homing system, and the R-60, 
R-60M, or R-73 close-range guided missiles on four underwing 
suspension points. A six-barrel GSh-23-6 cannon (23 mm, 260 
rounds, rate of fire 8,000 rounds per minute, weight of round 
200 grams, muzzle velocity 700 meters per second) has been 
installed under the fuselage, the firing port of which is 
covered by a special hatch in the nonoperating position which 
improves aerodynamics and reduces the aircraft's RCS. 
  The MiG-31M fighter-interceptor was demonstrated at the 
aircraft demonstration for the CIS countries leaders at 
Machulishchi (Belarus) in the winter of 1992. In contrast to the 
initial variant, a more powerful radar has been installed on the 
modernized fighter, weaponry has been increased and consists of 
six long-range guided missiles located on semirecessed 
suspension points under the fuselage and the highly maneuverable 
RVV-AE medium-range guided missiles on underwing suspension 
points. The aircraft wing has increased area extensions, the 
dimensions of the fuselage fairing have been increased, and the 
pilot cockpit's forward windshield has been manufactured in one 
piece. 
  The U.S. Navy's F-14 Tomcat carrier-based interceptor, 
designed to provide air defense for aircraft carriers, is the 
closest fighter to the MiG-31 by mission. The MiG-31 aircraft 
significantly exceeds the American aircraft in maximum speed and 
ceiling, and has approximately identical ferry range with it and 
comparable onboard radar capabilities. Until 1990 the Harris 
AN/ASW-27B communications system was utilized on the F-14A 
fighter aircraft, providing an automated exchange of information 
only between fighter aircraft and shipborne command posts or 
E-2C Hawkeye AWACS aircraft which performed the role of relays 
and could transmit information, received by the F-14 fighter's 
onboard radar, to other fighters that were part of the group. 
The AN/ASW-27C digital communications system which provides 
exchange of information in the automatic mode between four 
aircraft began to be installed on F-14 aircraft only at the end 
of 1991. 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the MiG-31, F-14A, and F-14D Fighter Aircraft            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Type of Aircraft  |MiG-31            |F-14A             |F-14D             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Year of First Fli-|1975              |1970              |1987              | 
|ght               |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing span, m      |13.46             |11.65/19.54       |11.65/19.54       | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft length, m|22.69             |19.10             |19.10             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft height, m|5.15              |4.88              |4.88              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing area, m[.sup]2|61.60             |52.49             |52.49             | 
|[/]            |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Normal take-off w-|41,000            |31,660            |32,100            | 
|eight, kg         |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum take-off  |46,200            |30,700[.sup]*[/]|33,720[.sup]**     | 
|weight, kg        |                  |                  |[/]            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of fuel in |16,350            |7,350             |7,350             | 
|internal tanks, kg|                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of fuel in |4,000             |1,720             |1,720             | 
|external fuel tan-|                  |                  |                  | 
|ks, kg            |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Type of engines   |D-30F6            |TF30-414          |F110-400          | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum thrust, kN|2 x 155           |2 x 95            |2 x 123           | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Thrust-to-weight  |0.76              |0.62              |0.73              | 
|ratio at normal t-|                  |                  |                  | 
|ake-off weight, k-|                  |                  |                  | 
|gs/kg             |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Unit wing loading |666               |603               |642               | 
|at normal take-of-|                  |                  |                  | 
|f weight, kg/m    |                  |                  |                  | 
|[.sup]2[/]      |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed, kph|3,000             |2,120             |2,450             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed at  |1,500             |1,400             |1,400             | 
|sea level, kph    |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum cruising  |2,400             |1,020             |1,020             | 
|speed, kph        |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Service ceiling, m|20,600            |15,200            |15,200            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Service flight ra-|2,500             |                  |                  | 
|nge without exter-|                  |                  |                  | 
|nal fuel tanks, km|                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Ferry range with  |3,300             |3,220             |3,220             | 
|external fuel tan-|                  |                  |                  | 
|ks                |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Line of intercept-|                  |                  |                  | 
|ion, km:          |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At supersonic spe-|720               |500               |600               | 
|ed                |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At subsonic speed |1,200             |                  |                  | 
|without external  |                  |                  |                  | 
|fuel tanks        |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At subsonic speed |1,400             |1,400             |1,500             | 
|with external fue-|                  |                  |                  | 
|l tanks           |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At subsonic speed |2,000             |                  |                  | 
|with one aerial r-|                  |                  |                  | 
|efueling          |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Time to climb to 1|7.9               |                  |                  | 
|0,000 m, minutes  |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight duration,  |                  |                  |                  | 
|hours:            |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Without aerial re-|3.6               |                  |                  | 
|fueling           |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|With one aerial r-|6-7               |                  |                  | 
|efueling          |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Landing speed, kph|280               |248               |248               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off run, m   |1,200             |430               |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Landing run, m    |800               |890               |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum operation-|5.0               |6.5               |7.5               | 
|al G-load         |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum onboard r-|                  |200/16            |210/5             | 
|adar target detec-|                  |                  |                  | 
|tion range, km/ta-|                  |                  |                  | 
|rget RCS, m[.sup]2 |                  |                  |                  | 
|[/]            |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|[.sup]*[/]With four Phoenix guided missiles                              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|[.sup]**[/]With six Phoenix guided missiles                              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|[.sup]***[/]In the entire range of the radar's search angles             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|[.sup]****[/]In a sector of +20                                     | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  According to foreign data, there were more than 200 MiG-31 
fighter- interceptors in the inventory of the CIS countries' PVO 
troops at the beginning of 1992 and another 24 aircraft of this 
type were delivered to China. 
<H5>  The MiG-23 Aircraft </H5>
  Demonstrated at the exhibition, the MiG-23MLD aircraft is 
the 
latest modification of the MiG-23 fighter aircraft family and 
that was one of the Soviet Air Force's primary frontal aviation 
fighter aircraft for a long time. Work on the development of the 
new generation aircraft to replace the MiG-21 frontal aviation 
fighter aircraft began at the OKB imeni A.I. Mikoyan in 1961. 
The MiG-23 was developed as a comparatively cheap aircraft 
capable of being effectively employed in local conflicts, for 
air defense of individual major targets, and also supplied for 
export. 
  A great deal of work, conducted by the OKB in cooperation 
with TsAGI, preceded the development of the MiG-23MLD. The 
assigned task was to substantially improve the aircraft's 
maneuverability and handling at high angles of attack since 
success in a dogfight depends to a significant degree on mastery 
of those regimes. Several configurations of the new aircraft 
were studied, differentiated by the dimensions and shape of the 
wing glove leading-edge assembly and the shape of the vertical 
tail. The selected configuration provided a substantial 
improvement of maneuverability with minimal modification of the 
airframe. 
  A second "tooth" extension was made on the MiG-23MLD 
aircraft's wing root, a vortex generator shaped like a small 
(365 mm long) plate with sharp edges was installed on the PVD 
[pitot tube], and it became possible to set the 
computer-controlled deflecting wing leading edge slats to the 
optimal position depending on the flight regime. 
  The fighter is equipped with an improved radar that is 
capable of simultaneously detecting and tracking several 
airborne targets and an improved automated command and control 
system from the ground in which a jam-proof data transmission 
link is utilized. An automated system prevents engine stall 
during missile launch and firing from the cannon. A close-range 
mode has been introduced in the radar and the pilot is equipped 
with a helmet-mounted target designation system. 
  Besides the development of ground-based aircraft, work was 
conducted on the MiG-23A carrier-based modification designed for 
deployment on a nuclear aircraft-carrying ship with catapult 
take-off, developed under the codename Orel since the beginning 
of the 1970's. However, cessation of work on Project Orel in 
1977 resulted in the termination of work on the MiG-23A fighter 
aircraft. Later, one of the MiG-23M series aircraft was 
reconfigured into a flying laboratory and used at the LII imeni 
Gromov to develop landing techniques on ship decks and also to 
develop the fundamental elements of a ship aircraft technical 
system (ATSK) including an optical landing system, various 
radiotechnical systems, etc. The aircraft was equipped with an 
arresting hook, which entailed changing the shape and increasing 
the area of the ventral fin. A movie camera that recorded the 
pilot's face during take-off and landing with high G-loads was 
installed in the cockpit instead of a collimating gunsight. In 
1980 a scientific-research complex with a ski jump, arresting 
gear, and a prototype catapult, where flight tests of the MiG-23 
flying laboratory were also conducted, was put into operation in 
the area of Saki (the Crimea). Materials obtained during tests 
were utilized in the work on the MiG-29K and Su-27K aircraft 
designed for the Admiral Kuznetsov and Varyag heavy 
aircraft-carrying ships with ski jump take-off. 
  Developed in 1973, the export variant of the MiG-23MS 
fighter 
with simplified avionics (specifically, the Sapfir-21 radar) 
gained wide sales because it had high LTKh [flight technical 
specifications] with a relatively low cost. So, in 1980 prices, 
one MiG-23MS sold for $3.6-6.6 million at a time when IAI's 
[Israeli Aircraft Industries] Kfir C.2 aircraft, which lagged 
behind the MiG-23's combat capabilities, cost $4.5 million in 
1978 prices, the Mirage III--$6.5-7.5 million (1983 prices), the 
F-16A--$14 million (1980 prices), and they proposed selling the 
Northrop F-20, which was considered to be a cheap fighter, to 
foreign purchasers for $15 million (1985 prices). 
  By 1992, the MiG-23 was in the inventory of the air forces 
of 
Algeria (66 MiG-23MS, BN, and UB), Angola (80 MiG-23MF, BN, and 
UB), Bulgaria (48 MiG-23MF, BN, and UB), Cuba (40 MiG-23MS and 
BN), Czechoslovakia (80 MiG-23ML, BN, and UB), Egypt (16 
MiG-23MS and BN obtained in 1974 and partially transferred to 
the United States and China), Ethiopia (45 MiG-23BN), Hungary 
(25 MiG-23MF and UB), India (125 MiG-23MF, delivered in 1982 to 
counteract F-16 deliveries to Pakistan, MiG-23BN and MiG-23UB 
and, furthermore, the MiG-27L Bahadur aircraft are being series 
produced in India), Iraq (MiG- 23MS, MF, BN, and UB, the precise 
number after the termination of the war is not known), Libya 
(200 MiG-23MS, BN, and UB), the DPRK (60 MiG-23ML and UB), 
Poland (100 MiG-23MF and UB), South Yemen (25), Syria (175 
MiG-23MS, MF, MLD, and UB), and Vietnam (30). Furthermore, 110 
MiG-23MF, ML, BN, and UB aircraft passed into the possession of 
the FRG after the unification of the two Germanys. The PRC has 
two to three MiG-23's that were obtained from Egypt (the MiG 
aircraft were painstakingly studied by Chinese experts and many 
of their design solutions were utilized during the development 
of the J-8-II aircraft). Several MiG-23MS and MiG-23BN aircraft 
were transferred to the United States by the Egyptian Government 
at the end of the 1970's. The famous American General Robert S. 
Bond died in one of these aircraft (the flight was conducted 
within the framework of the Stealth Program: The U.S. Air Force 
was interested in how low-observable aircraft would be detected 
by Soviet fighter aircraft radars). In 1991 the Americans 
obtained several MiG-23ML aircraft from the FRG. 
  The first major combat clash with the participation of 
MiG-23's occurred on 19 September 1979 when Syrian MiG-23MS's 
attacked an Israeli RF-4 Phantom II over Lebanon; however, they 
did not achieve success. The Israeli invasion into Lebanon began 
in June 1982. On 10 June, 350 aircraft from both sides 
participated in a dogfight over the Bekaa River Valley. The 
Syrians lost 22 fighters (four MiG-23MF, eight MiG-23MS, and 10 
MiG-21BIS). Israeli aircraft losses totaled 10 aircraft. On the 
whole, from 6 through 11 June, when a cease-fire agreement was 
concluded, the Syrian Air Force shot down 23 aircraft and lost 
47 aircraft in dogfights. 
  At the end of 1982 a shipment of 50 MiG-23MLD's arrived in 
Syria which promoted a change of the qualitative correlation of 
forces in the air in favor of the Syrians. In December 1982, air 
engagements between Syrian and Israeli aircraft resumed, but 
this time success was with the Syrians: Their MiG-23MLD's shot 
down three Israeli F- 15 Eagle and one F-4 Phantom II fighter 
aircraft. 
  Angola was another theater of military operations in which 
the MiG- 23 was widely employed. In 1985, 50 MiG-23MF aircraft 
piloted by Cuban pilots were sent to that country. The aircraft 
were immediately rushed to the south of the country where they 
became involved in combat operations. The first MiG-23 aircraft 
was shot down by antiaircraft fire at the end of 1985 (according 
to other information, Republic of South Africa [RSA] Air Force 
aircraft shot it down). The Dassault-Breguet Mirage F1C and 
Mirage III fighter aircraft in the RSA Air Force inventory were 
the primary enemy in the air. According to a Western press 
report, several aircraft of these types were destroyed by 
Angolan and Cuban MiG-23 fighters armed with R-60 guided 
missiles. On the whole, the Angolan-Cuban Air Forces won and 
maintained supremacy in the air over the southern areas of the 
country. 
  MiG-23's of various modifications were widely utilized by 
Iraq in the war with Iran. The Iraqi Air Force had MiG-23MF and 
MiG-23MS fighters and MiG-23BN fighter-bombers at its disposal. 
Having aircraft of both Soviet and also Western manufacture 
(specifically, Mirage F-1EQ fighters), Iraq widely practiced the 
modernization of its aircraft fleet permitting the aircraft to 
utilize "alien" weaponry. So, the Mirage F-1EQ fighters were 
armed with Soviet Kh- 29L air-to-surface missiles with a laser 
guidance system and MiG- 23MF's were equipped with Magic R.550 
close-range air-to-air guided missiles. MiG-23MF's were utilized 
for air superiority and for interception of Iranian F-14A Tomcat 
aircraft (Iran utilized these fighter-interceptors, which have a 
long flight range, primarily as bombers and reconnaissance 
aircraft). 
  The 1991 Persian Gulf War was the last war in which MiG-23's 
participated. By the beginning of combat operations, Iraq had 90 
MiG-23MF and MiG-23BN aircraft, however Iraqi aircraft were 
utilized extremely passively and air engagements were solitary 
in nature. Altogether during the course of the war, U.S. 
fighters (according to Western data) shot down six MiG-23 
aircraft (all by F-15 fighters). There were no published reports 
in the Western press of American aircraft losses in engagements 
with MiG-23's, however, according to certain sources, MiG-23MF's 
shot down at least one F-16 utilizing R- 23 guided missiles. 
  MiG-23 aircraft can be modernized by equipping them with 
more 
modern weapons systems and avionics, which will permit them to 
maintain the combat capabilities of this fighter aircraft close 
to the level of foreign fourth generation fighter aircraft for a 
prolonged period of time. 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Comparative Specifications of Aircraft                                     | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Type of Aircraft  |MiG-23MLD         |F-16C             |Mirage 2000C      | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing span, m      |7.8/14.0          |9.5               |9.1               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft length, m|16.7              |14.5              |14.4              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing area, m[.sup]2|34.2/35.5/37.7    |27.9              |41.0              | 
|[/]            |[.sup]*[/]      |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Normal take-off w-|14,800            |12,800            |11,600            | 
|eight, kg         |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum take-off  |17,800            |17,000            |17,000            | 
|weight, kg        |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Type of engine    |-25F-300          |F100-200          |M53-P2            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum afterburn-|1 x 130           |1 x 108           |1 x 97            | 
|er thrust, kN     |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Thrust-to-weight  |0.88              |0.84              |0.84              | 
|ratio             |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Unit wing loading |417[.sup]**[/]  |459               |283               | 
|(at normal take-o-|                  |                  |                  | 
|ff weight), kg/m  |                  |                  |                  | 
|[.sup]2[/]      |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed, kph|2,500             |2,170             |2,340             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed at  |1,400             |1,470             |1,480             | 
|sea level, kph    |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Service ceiling, m|18,300            |15,200            |18,000            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum rate of c-|240               |250               |250               | 
|limb, meters per  |                  |                  |                  | 
|second            |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Operational range |1,900             |1,900             |1,480             | 
|(without external |                  |                  |                  | 
|fuel tanks), km   |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Ferry range, km   |2,820             |3,890             |3,340             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Total amount of f-|2,400             |4,060             |4,700             | 
|uel in external f-|                  |                  |                  | 
|uel tanks, liters |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weaponry:         |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Cannon (number of |2 x 23            |6 x 20            |2 x 30            | 
|barrels x caliber,|                  |                  |                  | 
| mm)              |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Medium-range guid-|2 x R-23          |None[.sup]***[/]|2 x S.530         | 
|ed missiles (numb-|                  |                  |                  | 
|er X type)        |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Short-range guide-|4 x R-60          |4 x AIM-9         |2 x R.550         | 
|d missiles        |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Bomb payload, kg  |2,000             |5,400             |6,300             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|[.sup]*[/]Area with sweep angle of 16, 45, and 72.                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|[.sup]**[/]With a combat sweep angle of 45.                         | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|[.sup]***[/]They propose additional arming with AIM-120 ASRAAM guided mi-| 
|ssiles.                                                                    | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


<H5>  The MiG-27K Fighter-Bomber </H5>
  Demonstrated on the ramp, the MiG-27K fighter-bomber is a 
development of the MiG-23 frontal aviation fighter aircraft. In 
1969 the OKB imeni A.I. Mikoyan prepared a design of a light 
strike aircraft based upon the MiG-23S fighter aircraft. The new 
aircraft completed its first flight on 20 August 1970 (test 
pilot P.M. Ostapenko). In contrast to the MiG-23S fighter 
aircraft, the fighter-bomber, which received the designation 
MiG-23B, had a modernized fuselage nose section that provides an 
improved field of view in the ahead-below direction and was 
designed to conduct strikes against fixed ground-based targets 
in the enemy rear area and also ground attack operations using 
cannon and unguided rockets during the day. 
  The MiG-23B was equipped with a Fon laser rangefinder, a 
Sokol-23S gunsight system optimized for operations against 
ground-based targets from low altitudes that provides a dual 
standard error of 2.8% of range, and a KN-23 navigation 
system 
with an analog computer capable of "remembering" the coordinates 
of three route turning points (PPM) and four airfields at which 
the aircraft could complete a landing after a combat mission. 
The MiG-23B was equipped with a 23B automated command and 
control system (SAU) and a RV-5R radio altimeter. 
  The AL-21F-300 turbojet engine with afterburner (1 x 
8,000/112 kN) was employed on the fighter-bomber. The increase 
of the maximum take-off weight in contrast to the MiG-23S and 
the need to operate the troop direct support aircraft from 
ground airstrips resulted in the increase of the size of the 
wheels and the employment of reduced-pressure tires. 
  Bomb weaponry included up to 18 50-100 kg bombs or eight 500 
kg bombs on underwing and ventral hard points. Another weaponry 
variation includes four UB-32A unguided rocket pods with 32 S-5 
57 mm rockets or four more modern B-8M pods with 20 S-8 80 mm 
unguided rockets. Furthermore, Kh-23 guided missiles can be hung 
under the wing that are guided by a beam using Delta guidance 
equipment mounted on the left wing pylon. R-2S close-range 
guided missiles with an IR homing system are employed for 
self-defense. Cannon weaponry, like on the MiG-23S, consisted of 
a GSh-23L twin-barreled cannon with a firing rate of 
approximately 3,000 rounds per minute. 
  Series production of the aircraft was begun in 1971, 
however, 
after the manufacture of a small series at the Znamya truda MMZ 
[manufacturing plant], the production of a new modification 
fighter- bomber--the MiG-23BN ("32-23") was begun in which a 
wing similar to the MiG-23M fighter wing, the R-29B-300 engine 
(1 x 8,000/115 kN), and also the improved Sokol-23N 
navigation-bomb system were utilized. It had two additional 
external hard points in the tail section of the fuselage and 
reinforced armor of the sides of the cockpit. The MiG-23BN was 
built in a large series for deliveries for export (certain 
aircraft were reconfigured from MiG-23M fighters directly at Air 
Force repair facilities). The commonality of the design of the 
MiG-23M and the MiG-23BN totaled 80%. 
  Later, the MiG-23BM ("32-25", 1973) and the MiG-23BK 
("32-26", 1974) fighter bombers were developed, which are 
distinguished by their avionics (specifically, the PrNK-23 that 
was installed on the MiG- 23BM had a digital computer instead of 
the analog computer that was installed on earlier modifications 
of the aircraft). 
  Reduction of the requirement for the speed characteristic of 
the fighter-bomber that is designed primarily for operations at 
low altitudes with transonic speed permitted them to reject the 
use of a variable air intake on the next modification of the 
strike aircraft, which was given the designation MiG-27, which 
simplified and facilitated the design of the airframe. 
  The MiG-27 aircraft, built in 1973, was designed for 
operations against fixed and mobile ground-based targets. 
Bombing was ensured even when the target was not visible, 
including in difficult regimes, when weapons of two different 
types are used during a single run. The capability for a repeat 
automatic run over the target was provided for. 
  Besides installing armored plates along the sides of the 
cockpit, the MiG-27 aircraft's combat survivability was ensured 
by pressurizing the fuel tanks with a neutral gas. 
  V.Ye. Menitskiy completed the first flight in the new 
aircraft and A.V. Fedotov, B.A. Orlov, A.G. Fastovets, T.O. 
Aubakirov, V.V. Ryndin, and other OKB and LII test pilots 
participated in the flight tests. Series production of the 
MiG-27 began at Irkutsk Aircraft Plant in 1973 and continued 
until 1977, a total of 560 aircraft of this type were produced. 
  The MiG-27 fighter-bomber's weaponry was supplemented with 
the Kh- 25MR guided missile with a radio command guidance 
system. Cannon weaponry was substantially increased and included 
the six-barrel GSh-30-6 30 mm cannon. The aircraft was equipped 
with an R-29F-300 turbojet engine with afterburner (8,000/115 
kN). 
  The avionics included a PrNK-23 with a digital processor 
(the 
system is capable of calculating the aircraft trajectory, 
artillery rounds fired from the onboard cannon, missiles, and 
bombs), a Fon laser rangefinder, a KN-23 navigation computer 
(capable of "keeping in memory" six route turning points and 
four airfields and providing a dual standard error under 
autonomous navigation of 1.0%), 6S RSBN [radio navigation 
system], an NI-50BM Doppler navigation radar, an SAU23B1, an 
RI-65 speech accident warning system that issues 16 different 
information reports and commands to the pilot in emergency 
situations that are recorded on a magnetic tape using a female 
voice (it has been established that a pleasant female voice 
reaches a pilot's consciousness more rapidly than male speech in 
a critical situation). 
  The MiG-27K modification that was developed in 1975 was a 
further development of the MiG-27 (it is this modification that 
was demonstrated at "Mosaeroshow-92"). 
  The aircraft is equipped with significantly improved 
avionics, specifically, the Kayra PrNK-23K. The optical head of 
the laser gunsight-rangefinder can be rotated in a limited 
sector (+/- 40 in azimuth, 130 in elevation), ensuring 
target tracking during aircraft maneuvers. While tracking an 
unseen target, the coordinates of which have been entered into 
the onboard computer, illumination was carried out in a 
programmed mode when the laser beam, which is constantly holding 
on the target, automatically adjusts to a certain angle 
depending on the speed of the aircraft's movement. A television 
camera was utilized to track the target and a monochrome 
television monitor was installed in the cockpit. The aircraft 
was equipped with an automated defensive system which included 
IR flare dispensers and chaff. 
  The MiG-27K's automated weapons control system provides 
automatic release of bombs, both individually and also in a 
series, and indication of the release of munitions and their 
presence onboard the aircraft. The MiG-27K became one of the 
first aircraft armed with improved precision-guided missiles 
with television and laser guidance systems, and also with guided 
bombs. The employment of missiles with laser guidance system in 
the programmed adjustable tracking mode (PKS) has been provided 
for. The MiG-27K is equipped with Kh-25MP missiles to combat 
enemy radars. 
  Other weaponry that is located on the aircraft's external 
hard points includes R-60 close-range missiles, S-24 and S-24B 
(240 mm) unguided rockets, UB-32A or UB-16 57 mm rocket pods, 
B-8M1 S-8 80 mm rocket pods, up to 22 50 kg or 100 kg bombs, up 
to nine 250 kg bombs, or up to eight 500 kg bombs. RBK-250 
disposable bomb canisters, BetAB-250 and BetAB-500 
concrete-piercing munitions with a jet booster, BRAB-200DS, 
BRAB-220, BRAB-500, and BRAB-1000 armor- piercing bombs, and 
napalm tanks can be hung under the aircraft. Small caliber bombs 
are placed on MBD3-U6-68 multifixture storage racks. 
  The MiG-27K aircraft that was demonstrated at the exhibition 
was equipped with a Kh-31 antiradiation guided missile. 
  The MiG-27K fighter-bomber was equipped with a head-up 
display (HUD), the SAU 23BI, a Korall-N close navigation radio 
system, an AO-31 radio altimeter, and on board electronic 
warfare systems. The navigation system ensures a dual standard 
error of less than 1.0%. 
  The aircraft was in series production from 1977-1982 at 
Irkutsk Aircraft Plant (200 aircraft were produced). 
  A Klen laser rangefinder-target designator was installed in 
the nose section in a simpler modification of the MiG-27M 
("32-29") aircraft that was produced in 1978-1983 at Irkutsk 
Aircraft Plant (150 aircraft were manufactured). The aircraft 
were equipped with a KN- 23S navigation system, a Klistron 
system, an improved AO-31 radio altimeter, a television display 
in the cockpit which, however, can operate only from a 
television guidance system of a guided missile or bomb because 
there is no onboard television camera on the aircraft. There is 
also no HUD. In contrast to MiG-27's of previous modifications, 
the aerodynamics of the ventral cannon mount have been improved 
(the fairing of the breech portion of the gun has been increased 
and powder gas deflector plates have been installed). 
  The aspiration to approximate the combat capabilities of 
previously built MiG-27's to the characteristics of the MiG-27M 
resulted in the development of the MiG-27D aircraft ("32-27")--a 
previously produced MiG-27 that has been reequipped with the 
MiG-27M aircraft's avionics. Reequipping the fighter-bombers 
began in 1982 at the aircraft plant at Ulan-Ude and was 
completed in 1985. A total of approximately 500 MiG-27's were 
modernized. 
  The MiG-27D could be equipped with a canister with an aerial 
camera and utilized as a frontal aviation reconnaissance 
aircraft. 
  The MiG-27ML ("32-29L") that was manufactured in 1982 and 
has 
simplified avionics is the export variant of the MiG-27M 
aircraft. The aircraft was developed based on India's order and 
is being produced by the NAL firm at the aircraft plant at Nasik 
under the designation "Bahadur" ("Valiant"). A small series of 
MiG-27ML's and parts kits for the first shipment of aircraft 
assembled in India was manufactured at the plant in Irkutsk. 
Assembly of the first Indian MiG-27 manufactured from parts 
supplied by the USSR was completed on 11 January 1986 and 
manufacture of Indian "Bahadur" fighter-bombers began in 1988. 
They propose manufacturing a total of 165 aircraft of this type 
in India, which should compose the foundation of Indian Air 
Force strike aviation in the 1990's. They propose reequipping 
the "Bahadur" aircraft with Western avionics developed for the 
Indian variant of the Jaguar aircraft that includes the Smith 
Industries Darim navigation/attack system and also the Thomson 
Agave radar. 
  The Syrian Air Force utilized MiG-23BN fighter-bombers to 
inflict massive strikes against targets in the depth of the 
Israeli combat formations (several aircraft were lost from enemy 
ZSU [self- propelled antiaircraft artillery mounts] fire as a 
result of not totally successful planning and organization of 
air operations) during the course of combat operations between 
Israel and Syria in the Bekaa River Valley during the summer of 
1982. 
  MiG-23BN's, piloted by Cuban pilots, were successfully 
employed in Angola for strikes against ground-based targets, 
specifically, combat positions and lines of communication of RSA 
and UNITA [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola] 
troops, however, two aircraft of this type were destroyed by 
enemy air defense ground-based weapons fire (specifically, by 
Chinese NI-5A PZRK [portable antiaircraft missile 
system]--copies of the Soviet Strela-2 portable antiaircraft 
missile system) in 1987. 
  During the course of the Iran-Iraq War, Iraqi MiG-27BN's 
were 
used to conduct strikes against oil terminals and naval surface 
targets in the Persian Gulf and also against ground-based 
targets in the theater of military operations. The aircraft's 
combat capabilities were increased even more after equipping it 
with a nonretractable aerial refueling probe similar to the one 
utilized on the Mirage F- 1EQ and also with a pod with the 
French-made ATLIS optical- electronic tracking and target 
designation system which permitted an increase in the launch 
range of the Kh-29L guided missile from 8-10 km (with a 
Soviet-made laser illumination system) to 14 km. 
  In contrast to the MiG-23BN, the MiG-27 has hardly been 
utilized in combat operations, with the exception of Afghanistan 
(based on the experience of this war, many MiG-27's and MiG-23's 
were equipped with additional IR flare pods that are located on 
the fuselage and, based upon their shape, resemble stall fences). 


Relative Specifications of the Combat Effectiveness of the MiG- 23BN and 
MiG-27 Aircraft 

Type of     MiG-23BN    MiG-27    MiG-27K    MiG-27M    MiG-27ML    MiG-27D 
aircraft 

Relative    1.00        0.50      0.36       0.36       0.40        0.36 
losses 
during 
one 
combat 
sortie 

Required    1.00        0.70      0.40       0.50       0.50        0.50 
detail to 
carry out 
a typical 
combat 
mission 


<H5>  The MiG-21 Fighter Aircraft </H5>
  At the present time, the MiG-21 aircraft is the most 
widespread fighter aircraft in the world. It was series produced 
for approximately 28 years (from 1959 through 1986) at the 
Znamya truda MMZ, Gorkiy Aircraft Plant and also at the aircraft 
plant at Tbilisi. MiG-21 aircraft of various modifications were 
supplied to the air forces of the USSR, Algeria, Angola, 
Bangladesh, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, 
Germany, Egypt, Ethiopia, Finland, Guinea, Hungary, India, Iraq, 
Yugoslavia, Laos, Libya, Madagascar, Mongolia, Nigeria, the 
DPRK, Vietnam, Poland, Romania, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Uganda, 
and Zambia. The MiG-21 was built in India and China based on a 
Soviet license (the Chinese variant of the MiG-21F-13 aircraft, 
the J-7, is in series production up to the present time). 
  The following primary modifications of the MiG-21 fighter 
aircraft have been developed: the MiG-21F (first flight--1958) 
and the MiG- 21F-13 (1959)--frontal aviation fighters designed 
for use during the day; the MiG-21PF (1962), the MiG-21FL 
(1964), the MiG-21PFM (1964), the MiG-21PFS (1964), the MiG-21S 
(1965), the MiG-21SM (1968), the MiG-21M (1968), the MiG-21MF 
(1970), the MiG-21MT (1971), the MiG- 21SMT (1971), and the 
MiG-21bis (1972)--frontal aviation all-weather fighters equipped 
with a radar gunsight; the MiG-21R (1965)--a frontal aviation 
reconnaissance aircraft; the MiG-21U (1960), the MiG-21US 
(1966), and the MiG-21UM (1971)--a trainer fighter aircraft; the 
MiG-21PD ("23-31", 1966)--an experimental aircraft with a 
combined power plant (an R-11F2-300 sustainer turbojet engine 
with afterburner and two RD-36-35 lift turbojet engines; and, 
the MiG-21I Analog (1968)--an experimental aircraft developed 
within the framework of the Tu-144 SPS program. A total of more 
than 20 modifications of the MiG-21 aircraft were developed. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Type of aircraft         |MiG-21SM                 |MiG-21bis                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing span, meters        |7.15                     |7.15                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft length (with th-|15.75                    |15.75                    | 
|e pitot tube probe), m   |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Fuselage length (without |12.29                    |12.29                    | 
|the pitot tube probe), m |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft height, m       |4.00                     |4.00                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing area, m[.sup]2[/] |22.95                    |22.95                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Type of engine           |R-13-300                 |R-25-300                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum thrust, kgs      |1 x 6,490                |1 x 7,100[.sup]*[/]    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off weight, kg      |8,300                    |8,725[.sup]**[/]       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of fuel in intern-|2,200                    |2,390                    | 
|al tanks, kg             |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum flight speed, kph|2,230                    |2,175                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed at sea lev-|1,300                    |1,300                    | 
|el, kph                  |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Operational range withou-|1,050                    |1,120[.sup]**[/]       | 
|t external fuel tanks, km|                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Ferry range with an exte-|1,420                    |1,470[.sup]**[/]       | 
|rnal fuel tank (1 x 800  |                         |                         | 
|liters), km              |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Service ceiling, m       |17,500                   |17,500                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum rate of climb    |204                      |225                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off run, m          |800                      |830                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Landing run with a braki-|550                      |550                      | 
|ng parachute, m          |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum operational G-lo-|8.5                      |8.5                      | 
|ad                       |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Unit wing loading        |360                      |380                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Thrust-to-weight ratio   |0.78                     |0.81                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|[.sup]*[/]It has an ex-|                         |                         | 
|traordinary operating re-|                         |                         | 
|gime under which at alti-|                         |                         | 
|tudes of 0-4,000 m at a  |                         |                         | 
|speed that corresponds t-|                         |                         | 
|o Mach 1, the turbojet e-|                         |                         | 
|ngine with afterburner c-|                         |                         | 
|an develop thrust of up  |                         |                         | 
|to 9,900 kgs for three m-|                         |                         | 
|inutes.                  |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|[.sup]**[/]With two R-3|                         |                         | 
|S guided missiles.       |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  MiG-21 aircraft of various modifications have participated 
in 
combat operations in Vietnam, where they demonstrated greater 
effectiveness as an air superiority fighter than the American 
McDonnell-Douglas F- 4 Phantom II aircraft. MiG-21 fighter 
aircraft were utilized in the Arab-Israeli wars in 1967, 1973 
and 1982, in the 1971 Indo-Pakistani conflict, in the Iran-Iraq 
War, and also in combat operations in Angola and Afghanistan. 
  The MiG-21SM aircraft displayed at the exhibition is being 
used as a flying test stand within the MiG-21 aircraft avionics 
and weaponry modernization program. Two R-27 medium-range 
missiles, the employment of which from the MiG-21 fighter is 
possible after reequipping the aircraft with the Kopye small 
multifunction onboard radar specially developed for modernizing 
an aircraft of this type, were installed on the external hard 
points of the demonstrated fighter. 
  The radar is capable of: 
  --detecting and tracking airborne targets in the automatic 
mode, including targets flying at low altitude over land or 
water, without revealing the fighter's location; 
  --supporting an attack based upon target designation and 
destruction of targets with missiles with antiradiation or IR 
seeker heads and also using a cannon; 
  --carrying out a high-speed vertical search and automatic 
lock-on of visually observed targets at close range using 
improved guided missiles that have heightened maneuvering 
characteristics; and, 
  --forming a scale map with high resolution, enlargement of 
scale, and "freezing" the image. 
  The possibility to connect to analog and digital equipment 
onboard the aircraft and also ease of control of operation has 
been provided for. 
  Kopye radar equipment includes an antenna, a transmitter, an 
analog processor, a power source, a signal processor, a pulse 
generator, a synchronizer, an onboard digital computer, a unit 
to link to the computer, an information transformation unit, a 
CRT display installed in the cockpit, a built-in monitoring 
panel, a control panel, a HUD to which radar information is also 
sent, and a liquid cooling system. 
  The radar has seven primary operating modes: 
  --detection and automatic tracking of airborne targets in 
free space and in the background of the earth (sea) with the 
transmission of target designation to missiles with TGS 
[television seekers] or RGS [radar seekers], and also aiming 
using unguided weapons (the cannon, unguided rockets, or bombs); 
  --tracking of several targets and attacking them using 
missiles in the surveillance mode; 
  --the rapid search--close-range mode; 
  --cartography of the earth's surface using an active beam 
(low resolution); 
  --cartography of the earth's surface using synthetic 
aperture 
(high resolution); 
  --enlargement of scale of the selected sector of the map; 
and, 
  --measurement of the coordinates of the target selected on 
the ground (sea). 
  Based upon its primary specifications, the Kopye radar 
corresponds to or somewhat outstrips the American Westinghouse 
AN/APG-68 radar that has been installed on the General Dynamics 
F-16C aircraft. 
  A new automated command and control system, an RD-33 
turbojet 
bypass engine with afterburner that is used on the MiG-29 
aircraft, and also a Kh-35 antiship guided missile that can be 
hung on the ventral pylon are other improvements that can be 
employed on the modernized MiG-21 aircraft. 
  Based on the assessments of OKB representatives, the 
modernized variant of the MiG-21 fighter, based upon its combat 
capabilities, approximates fourth generation fighters with 
significantly lower cost. 
  At the end of 1991 it was reported that the Government of 
India had decided to conduct large-scale work on modernization 
of MiG-21 aircraft--the primary fighters of the Indian Air Force 
(production of the MiG-21bis aircraft based upon a Soviet 
license was completed in India in 1988, approximately 200 
aircraft were built)--as a result of delay in the work to 
develop the LCA [Light Combat Aircraft] multimission fighter 
being developed by India jointly with Dassault-Breguet. 
  It is proposed to install new avionics and a new engine and 
change the shape of the wing to provide the best maneuvering 
characteristics on the modernized Indian MiG-21 aircraft. The 
RD-33 turbojet bypass engine with afterburner (8,300 kgs) or the 
RB-199 Turbo-Union (7,680 kgs) is regarded as a new engine. 
  Furthermore, the Government of India plans to provide 
modernized MiG-21 fighters for export. Based on Indian demands, 
an improved variant of the MiG-21 fighter has been developed at 
the OKB imeni A.I. Mikoyan. In September 1991 the technical 
documentation for the new variant of the aircraft was submitted 
to the Indian side for review. In accordance with the draft, 
changes were made to the fighter's avionics and weapons system, 
as a result of which the aircraft's combat potential increased 
by a factor of 2.5 to three. The cost of modernization of the 
MiG-21 aircraft should total approximately 30% of the 
cost of 
the fighter. It is proposed to perform work on the program at 
Indian and Russian enterprises. In the words of OKB imeni A.I. 
Mikoyan General Designer R.O. Belyakov, they intend to resolve 
the problem of spare parts for Indian Air Force MiG-21 fighters 
by supplying India with parts of aircraft of this type that have 
been removed from the Russian Air Force inventory. 
  Work on a similar program in Pakistan, India's primary 
potential enemy, where it is planned, jointly with the PRC, to 
reequip J-7P fighters (the Chinese variant of the MiG-21F-13 
aircraft that was supplied to Pakistan) with an RD-33 or RB-199 
turbojet bypass engine with afterburner is one of the reasons 
that prompted the Indian side to decide to modernize the MiG-21 
fighters. 
  Preliminary negotiations were reported on the joint 
development of a wide range of avionics for modernization of 
variants of MiG-21 aircraft (specifically, the development of 
new cockpit equipment and a weapons control system were 
proposed) between the OKB imeni A.I. Mikoyan and the British 
firm GEC Avionics during the course of the exhibition's work. 
  GEC Avionics is already cooperating with China in the sphere 
of developing improved avionics for the MiG-21 (J-7) fighter. 
  Continuation of the "MOSAEROSHOW-92" RUSSIAN AEROSPACE 
EXHIBITION survey will be in No 41. 
<H5>  [No 41, 13 October 1992, pp 1-64] </H5>
  [Text] 
<H5>  ANTK imeni O.K. Antonov Aircraft </H5>
  The participation of the ANTK [Aircraft Scientific Technical 
Combine] imeni O.K. Antonov in "Mosaeroshow-92" was sufficiently 
modest. The An-124 Ruslan and the An-225 Mriya "heavyweights" 
were absent and, of the light transport aircraft, only the 
An-72P patrol aircraft, the An-26P forest fire fighting 
aircraft, and also the An-32 and An-32B were displayed on the 
ramp and in different locations. 
  The An-72P patrol service aircraft is distinguished from the 
primary variant by the installation of weaponry and a 
surveillance system. Weaponry includes two unguided rocket pods 
on underwing pylons and a GSh-24 twin-barrel gun located in the 
right fairing in front of the main landing gear. Four bombs, 
which can be dropped in flight when the ramp is retracted under 
the fuselage, are suspended in the cargo compartment over the 
cargo ramp. The OTV day surveillance television system, which 
provides a resolution of 10 meters at a distance of 3,000 
meters, is located in a fairing in front of the left main 
landing gear and is covered by a hood in the nonoperating state. 
The aircraft demonstrated at "Mosaeroshow-92" had speckled 
camouflage paint. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the An-72P                                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Crew                                  |5 men                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Engines:                              |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number and type                       |Two Progress ZMKB [Zaporozhye Machine-| 
|                                      |Building Design Bureau] Series 1A D-36| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Bench thrust                          |2 x 6,500 kgs                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weights and payloads:                 |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum take-off weight               |32,000 kg                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum cargo capacity while accompli-|5,000 kg                              | 
|shing transport missions              |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Combat payload                        |650 kg                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight data:                          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum flight cruising speed         |720 kilometers per hour [kph]         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Patrolling speed                      |300-350 kph                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Service ceiling                       |10,100 m                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Patrolling altitude                   |500-1,000 m                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Required runway length (concrete, dir-|1,400 m                               | 
|t with a firmness of 0.8 MPa, 8 kgs/c-|                                      | 
|m[.sup]2[/]                         |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Patrol duration with an emergency fue-|5.0-5.3 hours                         | 
|l reserve for one hour of flight      |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The An-26P forest fire-fighting aircraft was developed based 
on the series-produced An-26 transport aircraft through the 
installation of two external discharge devices (tanks) with a 
control system. The minor design differences of the An-26P and 
the An-26 permit the fire-fighting An-26P to be rapidly 
reconfigured into the initial transport variant. The An-26P's 
flight and ground operations are completely identical with the 
transport aircraft and ensure the utilization of a wide network 
of dirt airfields. The An-26P aircraft can be utilized to 
accomplish the following missions: 
  --visual air surveillance of the fire condition of large 
tracts of forest; 
  --visual assessment of fire-stricken area in order to 
develop 
fire-fighting strategy; 
  --on-target drop-zone deliveries of firemen and equipment 
into fire localization zones; 
  --extinguishing fire using fire-extinguishing liquid carried 
in the external tanks; and, 
  --extinguishing fire using the artificial initiation of 
precipitation method from clouds located in the fire area by 
firing silver iodide charges at the clouds. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the An-26P                                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of airmobile firemen           |30 men                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weights and payloads:                 |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off weight                       |23,800 kg                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Commercial payload (fire-extinguishin-|4,000-4,400 kg                        | 
|g liquid or airmobile firemen with eq-|                                      | 
|uipment)                              |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of packages of fire equipment (|10                                    | 
|weight of one package is 100 kg)      |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Fuel reserve (taking into account a 58|2,760 kg                              | 
|0 kg emergency fuel reserve for 45 mi-|                                      | 
|nutes of flight)                      |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Operating capacity of the two dischar-|4,000 liters                          | 
|ge devices                            |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of meteorological pyrotechnics |384                                   | 
|fired                                 |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight data:                          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range of flight operating altitudes (-|1,200-1,500 m                         | 
|with brief descent into the fire zone)|                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Operating radius                      |430 km                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Operating flight speed                |400 kph                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight speed at the moment the fire-e-|230-240 kph                           | 
|xtinguishing liquid is discharged     |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Fire-extinguishing liquid discharge t-|2 seconds                             | 
|ime                                   |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The An-32 was demonstrated at the exhibition in the ordinary 
transport configuration. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the An-32                                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Cargo compartment dimensions:         |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Length                                |12.48 meters                          | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum width                         |2.78 m                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum height                        |1.84 m                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of seats in the compartment:   |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|To transport passengers               |50                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|To transport patients on stretchers   |24                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of transported pallets         |4                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Engines:                              |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number and type                       |Two Progress ZMKB Series 5 AI-20D     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Output                                |2 x 3,810 kVt                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weights and payloads:                 |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum take-off weight               |27,000 kg                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum commercial payload            |6,700 kg                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight data:                          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight cruising speed at the most adv-|470-530 kph                           | 
|antageous altitude of 8,000 m         |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Service ceiling                       |9,400 m                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off run                          |760 m                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Landing run                           |470 m                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  A model of the An-70T future transport aircraft designed to 
replace the An-12 aircraft in the CIS countries' air forces and 
civil aviation was demonstrated on the ramp of the ANTK 
[Aircraft Scientific Technical Combine] imeni O.K. Antonov. 
  The An-70T is manufactured based on a normal aerodynamic 
design with a high wing. Composite materials were widely used in 
the design of the airframe. The power plant consists of four 
D-27 turbofan engines (4 x 13,880 horsepower) developed at the 
Progress NPO [Scientific Production Association] (Zaporozhye, 
Ukraine), which have coaxial propellers (engine flight tests 
were conducted in 1992 at the LII [Flying-Research Institute] 
imeni M.M. Gromov on an Il-76 flying laboratory aircraft; 
furthermore, more than 1,000 hours of test stand testing have 
been conducted). A digital fly-by-wire system [FBW] and cockpit 
multifunction color screen displays have been utilized in the 
An-70T aircraft. 
  A payload with a maximum weight of up to 30,000 kg can be 
accommodated in the larger diameter fuselage equipped with an 
aft ramp (up to 5,000 kg of cargo can be transported on the 
ramp). The cargo compartment is pressurized and 
loading-unloading operations have been mechanized to the maximum 
extent possible. The landing gear and powerful high-lift devices 
provide the capability to operate the aircraft from both 
concrete and dirt runways. Landing gear clearance can be 
adjusted, which ensures that the height of the truck bed and the 
height of the cargo hatch floor conform while conducting 
loading-unloading operations. 
  The An-70T aircraft's first flight is planned for the 
beginning of 1993. The aircraft is designed for 45,000 flying 
hours (20,000 sorties during a 25-year period) and six to seven 
man-hours of ground maintenance should be expended per hour of 
flying time. 
  It is planned to carry out series production of the aircraft 
at aircraft plants at Tashkent and Samara. The An-70T aircraft 
development program is being financed by the Russian and 
Ukrainian Governments. 
  The An-70T aircraft surpasses the An-12 aircraft by a factor 
of 1.5 in payload and by a factor of 1.4 in cruising speed; 
based on its specifications it most closely corresponds to the 
Euroflag FLA [Future Large Aircraft] European Consortium 
military transport aircraft being developed jointly by Belgium, 
Great Britain, Germany, Italy, Spain, Portugal, and Turkey. Like 
the Ukrainian aircraft, the FLA can be equipped with turbofan 
engines (although other power plant variants are also being 
examined), however, it has a somewhat lower take-off weight and 
payload weight. Furthermore, the rate of development of the 
European aircraft significantly lags behind the rate of 
development of the An-70T aircraft, which opens favorable 
prospects for sale of the An-70T aircraft on the international 
market to replace the obsolete An-8, An-12, Lockheed's C-130 
Hercules, and Transall's C-160 transport aircraft. 



  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the An-70T, An-12, and Euroflag FLA                      | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                  |Type of Aircraft                                        | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                  |An-70T            |An-12             |FLA               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Year of first fli-|1993              |1956              |2000              | 
|ght               |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum take-off  |123               |61                |115               | 
|weight, tonnes    |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Payload weight, t-|30                |20                |25                | 
|onnes             |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Type of engines   |D-27              |AI-20M            |Type has not been | 
|                  |                  |                  |determined        | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum output, h-|4 x 138,800       |4 x 4,250         |                  | 
|orsepower         |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight range with |5,530             |3,600             |5,000             | 
|maximum payload   |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Cruising speed, k-|750               |550               |750               | 
|ph                |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Service ceiling   |9,600             |10,200            |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Required runway l-|1,800-1,900       |2,200             |                  | 
|ength, m          |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The ANTK imeni O.K. Antonov developed the design of the 
An-170 transport aircraft--a variant of the An-70 with a 
lengthened fuselage and increased wingspan that is designed to 
replace the Il-76 aircraft. However, preference was assigned to 
the Il-106 aircraft in a design competition. 
<H5>  OKB imeni S.V. Ilyushin Aircraft </H5>
<H5>  The Il-106 Transport Aircraft </H5>
  A model of the new Il-106 transport aircraft was 
demonstrated 
at "Mosaeroshow-92." The aircraft, a normal design with four 
TRDD [turbojet bypass engines] with a super-high-bypass ratio 
and vertical tail surfaces, belongs to the same class of 
aircraft as the American C-17 military transport aircraft and is 
obviously designed to accomplish the same missions. 



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Il-106                                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Engines:                              |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number and type                       |Four NK-92                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Bench thrust                          |4 x 180 kN [kilonewtons]              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weights and payloads:                 |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum take-off weight               |258 tonnes                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Transported payload                   |80 tonnes                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight data:                          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Cruising speed                        |820-850 kilometers per hour [kph]     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight range                          |5,000 km                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off run                          |1,400 m                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


<H5>  2. Helicopters </H5>
<H5>  The Mi-24 Army Combat Transport Helicopter </H5>
  Demonstrated at "Mosaeroshow-92," the OKB imeni M.L. Mil 
Mi-24 helicopter is well known throughout the world as the 
former USSR's first fire support helicopter. Its development 
began in 1967 in parallel with preparation for series 
production, which saved quite a lot of time. A prototype model 
of the new helicopter took off for the first time in 1969 and 
series-production helicopters began to arrive at units in 1971. 
Later it was supplied to customers from 22 countries. By 1992, 
series production of the Mi-24 had ceased. The Mi-24 was 
produced in the following variants: 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Mi-24                                 |Initial variant with TV2-117 engines  | 
|                                      |and the pilot's and gunner's seats po-| 
|                                      |sitioned side-by-side                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Mi-24D                                |First variant with TV3-117 engines an-| 
|                                      |d tandem placement of the pilot and g-| 
|                                      |unner                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Mi-24V                                |Variant with Shturm-V and R-60 guided | 
|                                      |missiles                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Mi-24P                                |Variant with a gun                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Mi-24R                                |Reconnaissance helicopter with wing t-| 
|                                      |ip pylons for placement of radiation/-| 
|                                      |chemical/bacteriological reconnaissan-| 
|                                      |ce systems and with removable optical-| 
|                                      |gunsight and radio command systems in | 
|                                      |the nose fairings                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Mi-24K                                |Reconnaissance helicopter with artill-| 
|                                      |ery fire observer                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Mi-25                                 |Export variant of the Mi-24D          | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Mi-35                                 |Export variant of the Mi-24V          | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Mi-35P                                |Export variant of the Mi-24P          | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The Mi-24 is capable of destroying enemy tanks, storming 
enemy fire positions and defensive positions, escorting 
transport-assault helicopters and conducting aerial combat, 
adjusting artillery fire, dropping small assault subunits and 
reconnaissance teams into the enemy rear area, conducting 
radiation and chemical reconnaissance, and evacuating wounded 
personnel from the battlefield. This was one of the world's most 
effective helicopters until the end of the 1970's. In 1975 and 
1978, seven world records, including the absolute speed 
record--367 kph in 1978, which was held for approximately 10 
years--were established in the variant of the Mi-24 that 
received the designation A-10. The helicopter was tested under 
fire in many wars and military conflicts (Afghanistan, Iran, 
Iraq, Angola, Mozambique, Syria, Libya, Yemen, and Ethiopia), 
where it proved itself to be a reliable ground troops fire 
support system. It was also utilized for operations against 
airborne targets: The Iran-Iraq War episode when an F-4 Phantom 
fighter aircraft was shot down by gun fire from an Mi-24 serves 
as the most graphic example. 
  The fundamental difference between the Mi-24 and Western 
helicopters is the compartment for a squad of assault troops 
(eight men). Initially, the crew of the Mi-24 included two men: 
the pilot and the weapons operator. Then the flight engineer was 
introduced into the crew, whose work location is located in the 
assault compartment. Up to now, the Mi-24's engines, developed 
at the OKB imeni V.Ya. Klimov under the leadership of General 
Designer S.P. Izotov, are at the level of the world's best 
models based on specific and weight specifications. The Mi-24's 
special equipment includes an optical-electronic (infrared and 
television for low levels of illumination) surveillance-gunsight 
system in the right nose ventral fairing and a radio command 
missile guidance system in the left nose ventral fairing, a PKB 
gunsight (on the Mi-24V), a HUD [head-up display], a radar 
illumination warning receiver, an IR jamming system, an 
identification friend-or-foe system [IFF], a gun camera, ASO-2 
pods with 132 decoys, and a UHF communications system. The 
flight-navigation system includes an autopilot, a radio 
altimeter, an instrument flying system, a DISS [Doppler slip and 
drift sensor], an ARK [aircraft radio compass], and mechanical 
indicators with a moving terrain map. 
  At first, the Mi-24 was armed with four Falanga subsonic 
PTUR's [antitank guided missiles] with manual control (later 
with a semiautomatic control system): two antitank guided 
missiles, each located on the wing tip pylon launch rails. 
Beginning with the Mi-24V they were replaced with Shturm-V 
9K113/9M114 supersonic antitank missiles, the number of which on 
the wing tip and underwing pylons reaches 12. R-60 close-range 
guided missiles, UB-32-57 or UB-20-57 unguided rocket pods with 
S-5 (32 x 57 mm or 20 x 57 mm), S-8 (80 mm) or 240 mm unguided 
rockets, a UPK-23-250 standard gun pod with a GSh-23L gun 
(23-mm, a basic load of 250 rounds, dimensions 340 x 450 x 3,000 
mm), pods with machine guns or grenade launchers, up to 1,500 kg 
of chemical or conventional bombs, canisters with mines, etc., 
can be installed on the four underwing pylons instead of 
antitank guided missiles. The helicopter can land and reload its 
weapons with ammunition located in the compartment. 
  The gun has also undergone changes. The first Mi-24's had a 
single-barrel machine gun, then a four-barrel 12.7 mm machine 
gun with a rotating barrel unit was installed in a USPU-24 
ventral, standard machine gun mount with electronic remote 
control. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the USPU-24 [Standard Machine Gun Mount]                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Dimensions:                           |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Diameter of the base                  |630 mm                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Height                                |580 mm                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Type of machine gun                   |9A-624 four-barrel                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Caliber                               |12.7 mm                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Rate of fire                          |4,800 rounds per minute               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Basic load                            |1,400 rounds                          | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Deflection angles:                    |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Elevation                             |from +20 to -60                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Azimuth                               |from +60 to -60                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of the mount                   |80 kg                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  Since 1980, initially the Mi-24P gun variant was armed with 
a 
GSh-30-2 30 mm twin-barrel gun with a basic load of 250 rounds 
in the right fuselage fairing and then with a 23 mm gun on a 
mobile mount. 
<H5>  The Ka-50 Fire Support Helicopter </H5>
  The OKB imeni N.I. Kamov Ka-50 new generation army combat 
helicopter, whose primary missions on the battlefield are troop 
fire support, covering armored vehicle combat operations, and 
opposing enemy army aviation, was demonstrated in flight for the 
first time at "Mosaeroshow-92." This is the first employment in 
world practice of a single-seat helicopter to accomplish this 
type of mission. The helicopter's first flight occurred on 17 
June 1982 (test pilot Nikolay Bezdetnov). A large amount of 
modeling was conducted in the process of its development, 
hundreds of flights were made in a flying laboratory, 
experimental and prototype models of the Ka-50 accumulated 
several thousand flying hours, firings were conducted from the 
gun, and unguided rockets and antitank missiles were launched. 
The conclusion of the customer's test pilots--the helicopter is 
accessible for line unit pilots with medium skills. 
  Development was conducted on a nontraditional competitive 
basis for Russian helicopter manufacturing and, in the process, 
the task was assigned to develop a domestically produced 
helicopter that did not lag behind the specifications of the 
American AH-64 army combat helicopter. 
  Four possible designs were examined during the validation of 
the Ka-50's appearance: single-rotor with a tail rotor, 
longitudinal, dihedral, or coaxial, and the latter was chosen 
which, besides higher combat survivability, ensures the 
helicopter's heightened efficiency in a hover and at low flight 
speeds and while gaining altitude and an increased static 
ceiling with equal engine output, simplified flying (due to the 
lack of cross links in the control channels as a result of the 
helicopter's aerodynamic symmetry, and improved maneuverability 
(for example, a flat turn capability)). Furthermore, a coaxial 
design helicopter has a reduced visual and radar cross section 
due to its smaller geometric dimensions. 
  The decision to assign one crew member to accomplish combat 
missions also determined the Ka-50's appearance. That decision 
was made taking into consideration the experience of the combat 
employment of the Mi-24 helicopter, the operation of which, in 
the opinion of General Designer S.V. Mikheyev, demonstrated that 
the pilot's tasks (piloting and navigating the helicopter with 
the goal of undetected access to the target search and attack 
area at extremely low altitudes) largely do not intersect with 
the operator's tasks (target search and attack using antitank 
missiles). Honored Combat Pilot of the USSR, Hero of the Soviet 
Union, Russian Ground Forces Army Aviation Commander in Chief 
Lieutenant General V. Pavlov thinks that an independent safe 
search for targets by a combat helicopter in conditions of 
strong PVO [air defense] or a search for targets that are using 
modern camouflage systems is a very difficult task. Therefore, 
in any case, this requires the transmission of a preliminary 
target designation to the attacking helicopter which is 
necessary not only to ensure that it is not detected but also to 
organize helicopter group operations. The latter circumstance 
(operations by a well-organized group) is an important element 
for the success of an attack. Everything listed, especially high 
maneuverability, the need for which was confirmed in 
Afghanistan, and the simplicity of piloting a coaxial design 
helicopter, played a decisive role in the development of 
precisely a single-seat combat helicopter. 
  The Ka-50 helicopter was designed taking into consideration 
the improvement of serviceability. It has built-in equipment 
operability monitoring systems, and has been provided with 
convenient access to equipment without utilizing ladders. 
Servicing the weapons systems, electronic systems, refueling, 
and loading are carried out from the ground. Power plant 
servicing from the cowlings-ladders and servicing of the main 
rotors is carried out from the upper surface of the fuselage. 
System design provides for combat utilization of the Ka-50 with 
prolonged separation (more than two weeks) from main bases. 
  A distinguishing feature of the Ka-50 is the completely 
armored cockpit that protects the pilot from up to 20-mm rifle 
and cannon weapons. The cockpit is equipped with a K-37 seat 
that was designed for it. The K-37 ensures the rescue of the 
pilot during ejection at any altitude. The rotor blades are 
jettisoned before ejection. This is the first employment in the 
world of an ejection system in a helicopter that has been 
proposed for series production. 
  It has a tricycle landing gear with the nose gear retracted 
in flight which permits reduction of the helicopter's 
aerodynamic resistance and its radar cross section. Flight with 
the landing gear extended is authorized in the entire range of 
speeds while flying at extremely low altitudes in the event an 
emergency landing has to be carried out. 
  Modified engines have been installed on the Ka-50, which 
have 
proven themselves in operation on the Mi-24 and are equipped 
with dust-protection and exhaust screen devices. 
  A single gunsight-flying-navigation system which permits one 
crew member to both fly and conduct fire from all types of 
weapons has been developed for the Ka-50 for the first time in 
the practice of domestic helicopter manufacturing. The optical 
gunsight system (OPS) installed on the helicopter ensures target 
search and automatic guidance of antitank missiles to the 
target. A helmet-mounted target designation system has been 
employed that relieves the pilot of the task of controlling the 
optical gunsight system. The pilot is freed from the need to 
maintain a certain trajectory of movement and the helicopter can 
complete altitude and course changes and change flight speed 
after launch in the process of guiding the antitank missile. It 
has a HUD on which flight and also gunsight information for 
employment of the gun and unguided rockets is depicted. 
Information on the status of onboard systems is transmitted to 
the pilot and information is also utilized that is received via 
radio channels from reconnaissance helicopters. The helicopter 
REP [electronic countermeasures] system shows no lag behind the 
Apache helicopter's similar system in its functional indicators. 
  The Ka-50 has four weapons hard points under its wing on 
which up to 16 supersonic antitank guided missiles or up to 80 
80-mm unguided rockets (in four 20-tube pods) can be suspended. 
Employment of other types of removable weapons is also possible. 
Antitank guided missiles support the attack of targets outside 
the zones of destruction of enemy antiaircraft missile systems 
and a high probability of hitting small targets in the entire 
spectrum of missile launch ranges. The antitank missile's launch 
range is 8-10 km, it has the capability of piercing 900 mm of 
armor with dynamic protection, and it has a laser guidance 
system. 
  An important feature of the Ka-50 is the employment of the 
2A42 tank gun (it is also utilized on the BMP-2) with a high 
armor-piercing capability and the capability for recoilless 
operation in dust, sand, and dirt. The 30-mm gun has selective 
feed and a variable rate of fire and the basic load of up to 500 
rounds is located in two ammo boxes in the central section of 
the helicopter. The unusual solution was realized thanks to the 
compromise that was found--rigid attachment of the gun's 
rotating gun mount to the starboard side of the fuselage in such 
a way that a turn of the gun in the vertical plane is carried 
out by a servo in approximately the same range of angles as the 
AH-64 helicopter, and in the horizontal plane--by turning the 
entire helicopter (a flat turn). The tracking servo holds the 
gun on the target. Installation of the gun turret near the 
center of gravity ensures very high accuracy of fire. At low 
altitudes, the pilot uses the manual operating mode, at great 
distances--the precise automatic firing mode, the aiming of 
which is no different than aiming to launch an antitank guided 
missile. 
  The Ka-50 helicopter program has a high priority in the 
plans 
of the Russian Armed Forces and, therefore, work on the 
organization of Ka-50 series production continues despite a 
significant reduction in defense expenditures. The helicopter's 
entry into Russia's army aviation units is anticipated by the 
end of the year. The VNTK [Helicopter Scientific Technical 
Combine] imeni N.I. Kamov is seeking paths into the foreign 
market: in S. Mikheyev's words, they propose participating in 
the competition for a new combat helicopter that the British 
Army plans to announce by the end of 1992. The winning firm will 
obtain an order for the manufacture of 130 helicopters whose 
primary mission will be to combat tanks. A variant of the 
helicopter with Western equipment will be offered to Great 
Britain. In spring 1992 the OKB concluded an agreement with the 
American company Group Vector that envisions equipping the Ka-50 
helicopter with Western systems and weaponry, which will make 
the Ka-50 more competitive in the foreign aircraft market, and 
organizing marketing of the helicopter. 
<H5>  The Mi-28 Fire Support Helicopter </H5>
  The Mi-28 combat helicopter was demonstrated for the first 
time at the 1989 Paris Air Show. Design of the Mi-28 began in 
1980 and the first prototype helicopter left the ground on 10 
November 1982. The helicopter was built based upon the single 
rotor design traditional for the OKB, selection of which was 
based on the results of the analysis of a large number of 
designs of the aircraft, including twin-rotor designs. In 
contrast to the Ka-50, this is a two-seat aircraft. OKB imeni 
M.L. Mil experts say that the mission of flying at extremely low 
altitudes (5-15 meters) over the earth's surface with complex 
relief and the simultaneous search for remote targets cannot be 
effectively accomplished by one man even if he is assisted by 
totally modern optics and electronics based upon current 
concepts. All the more so in that flying and destroying targets 
does not exhaust the crew's tasks--it also needs to avoid coming 
under fire from enemy air defense systems. Other helicopter 
manufacturing firms also assign a preference to the advantages 
of a two-man crew: all the world's helicopters in combat ranks 
are two-seaters. 
  The number of mechanical hinged joints, lubrication points, 
and joints with nuts requiring calibrated tightening were 
drastically reduced on the Mi-28 to increase serviceability. 
Attached ladders are not required when servicing the helicopter 
in the overwhelming majority of cases and ease of access to 
assemblies has been achieved through rapid and total exposure of 
power plant cowlings and equipment compartment hatches. The 
Mi-28 has built-in monitoring systems. The average total 
labor-intensiveness of maintenance has been reduced by a factor 
of three in contrast to the Mi-24 helicopter and by a factor of 
three to nine on individual assemblies and systems. The Mi-28 
can be transported in the cargo compartments of the An-22 and 
Il-76 aircraft with the main rotor blades and wings removed. 
  The Mi-28 helicopter was manufactured based on a 
single-rotor 
design with a tail rotor located on the right in flight (in 
contrast to the Mi-24 on which the tail rotor has been installed 
on the left in flight). Special attention was devoted to 
increasing the helicopter's combat survivability. During the 
selection of its configuration, the task was assigned to ensure 
mutual screening of assemblies and protection of more critical 
members by less critical members (for example, the engines have 
been separated by a distance that is adequate for placement of 
the main gearbox). The selected materials and dimensions of the 
members ensure the absence of catastrophic failures when damaged 
for a time that is adequate to carry out the mission with a 
return to base. For example, the fiberglass from which the main 
rotor and tail rotor blades are manufactured has high residual 
strength when damaged. The dimensions and spar sections were 
selected with the calculation that weapons of the most probable 
caliber will not cause an unacceptable loss of their durability 
when hit. The crew cockpit is protected with titanium armor with 
external ceramic plates and has armored glass with flat 
low-reflective panels. 
  The Mi-28 has a five-bladed main rotor and a titanium hub 
with elastomeric bearings. The blades have fiberglass D-shaped 
spars that are manufactured using the spiral fiber winding 
method, have Kevlar plastic sections with a Nomex-type filler, 
and anti-abrasive titanium pads have been installed on the 
leading edges of the blades. The blades have high load-bearing 
profiles and streamlined tips. The diameter of the main rotor 
was selected approximately the same as the Mi-24's so that the 
improved Mi-28 helicopter blade could subsequently be 
transferred to the Mi-24. The main rotor shaft is inclined ahead 
by 5 and the rotation of the main rotor is 242 rpm. 
  The crew is located in cockpits arranged in step fashion: 
the 
navigator-operator's work station is located in the forward 
cockpit and the pilot is located in the raised rear cockpit. The 
pilot's mission is to fly the helicopter and employ the unguided 
weapons and the navigator-operator's mission is search, 
detection, identification, and destruction of small targets at 
maximum range using precision-guided weapons and the gun and 
also helicopter navigation. 
  The X-shaped tail rotor consists of two two-bladed rotors 
with fiberglass blades. The rotors are installed at angles of 
35/145 on one shaft on an elastomeric bearing (one 
three-bladed tail rotor was initially used on the first two 
prototype helicopters). The tricycle landing gear with tail 
support is nonretractable. It has single-wheel landing gears, 
the sizes of the main tires are 720 x 320 mm, the operating 
pressure is 0.54 MPa, and the dimensions of the self-orientating 
tail wheel is 480 x 200. 
  The power plant consists of two TVZ-117 GTD [gas turbine 
engines] that have been installed in nacelles along the sides of 
the upper section of the fuselage over the engines, and the 
engine nozzles are canted downward. The engines have a 
modernized electronic adjustment system. The air intakes have 
dust protection devices and an anti-icing system with bleed air 
from the engines. The transmission can operate without lubricant 
for 20-30 minutes. 
  The AI-9V VSU [auxiliary power system] is utilized to start 
the engines and drive the electrical supply system and the 
hydraulic and pneumatic systems on the ground, which permits 
these systems to be maintained in operable condition for the 
required time without starting the main engines. The capacity of 
the internal fuel tanks is approximately 1,900 liters. Four 
external tanks can be suspended on the underwing pylons. 
  The helicopter has a hydromechanical control system. Control 
of the stabilizer is linked with control of the main rotor 
collector pitch. Only the pilot has flight control elements. 
Systems control has been integrated to the maximum extent 
possible. The control elements that are used in flight--the 
"pitch-gas" lever and the control stick--are located on the left 
control panel and the control elements that are required only 
for preparation for flight are located on the right control 
panels. Depiction of secondary information on systems operation 
to the crew has been practically excluded. The pilot's cockpit 
has a HUD and a CRT [cathode ray tube] display in the center of 
the instrument panel to depict optical-electronic system data. 
  OKB experts think that crew ejection from a helicopter in 
emergency situations has too many shortcomings and preferred a 
crew rescue system without leaving the helicopter. 
Energy-absorbing seats with a gravitation system to create the 
required preparatory position and an undercarriage with an 
increased shock-absorber stroke ensure survival for the crew 
during emergency landings when the helicopter hits the ground at 
high (up to 12 meters per second) vertical speeds and at high 
speeds when the ground is hit sidelong or head-on. Design steps 
have been taken that prevent members of the crew from colliding 
with control elements and interior elements and also prevent 
systems and assemblies that are outside the cockpit from ending 
up inside the cockpit. Sensors and mechanisms automatically turn 
on the rescue system if the crew does not manage to turn it on 
in the manual mode for some reason. The probability of a 
post-accident explosion or fire has been reduced. Parachutes 
have been provided for a possible departure from the aircraft 
from high altitude and emergency jettisoning of the cockpit 
doors and inflation of pneumatic cells located under the 
threshold of the doors (to exclude a collision with the 
undercarriage) occur prior to a jump. 
  There are two hydraulic systems with an operating pressure 
of 
15.2 MPa and a 200 volt alternating current electrical supply 
system with two generators. 
  The surveillance-gunsight system--the navigator-operator's 
primary system to guide antitank missiles and fire from the 
gun--has been installed on a gyrostabilized platform and has a 
great deal of mobility (+/-110 along the azimuth). In the 
day variant, the system has two optical channels with wide and 
narrow fields of view and an optical-television channel with a 
narrow field of view. A laser rangefinder-target designator has 
also been provided that is used to determine its current range 
to the target, to calculate adjustments in the automatic mode 
while firing from the gun and while launching unguided rockets, 
and also for selection of the optimal trajectory for an antitank 
missile at the moment of launch. These systems are also utilized 
to control a missile while it is being guided to the target. An 
IR system and a TV system for low levels of illumination can be 
installed for operations at night. It is also possible for the 
crew to use night vision glasses. 
  Firing is conducted using a HUD or a helmet-mounted gunsight 
that controls the mobile gun within visual range without using 
magnifying optics. The Vitebsk helicopter electronic 
countermeasures system (analogous to the Apache helicopter's 
AN/ALQ-136) has been installed. It has IR radiation suppression 
devices and automated decoy dispensers. 
  The weaponry of the prototype helicopters includes a turret 
mount with a 2A42 modified tank gun (30-mm; 900 round per minute 
rate of fire against airborne targets and 300 rounds per minute 
against groundbased targets; basic load 300 rounds), which has 
the same mobility as the gunsight (+/110 along the azimuth 
and +13 -40 in elevation) and synchronously follows it. 
  Moscow's Dzerzhinets Assembly Plant is developing a fixed 
mobile (the previous range of mobility has been maintained) gun 
specially for the Mi-28. A single-barrel 30-mm gun with 
selective feed is being utilized. The rate of fire is 300 and 
600 rounds per minute and the basic load is 250 rounds. The 
weight of the NPPU [fixed mobile gun mount] with a basic load 
and the gun is 620 kg, the weight of the control apparatus is 45 
kg, and the dimensions of the NPPU are 1,730 x 1,100 x 750 mm. 
  There are two hard points under the outer wing panel, each 
of 
which is designed for a load of up to 480 kg. Up to 16 Shturm 
antitank guided missiles with a radio command guidance system 
and two pods with 20 57-mm or 80-mm unguided rockets are 
suspended under the wing. Firing from the gun and launching 
antitank missiles are carried out only by the operator from the 
forward cockpit and unguided rockets can be launched from both 
cockpits. 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Comparative Specifications of Contemporary and Future Combat Helicopters   | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                  |Type of helicopter                                      | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                  |Ka-50             |Mi-24P            |Mi-28             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Year of first fli-|1982              |1969              |1982              | 
|ght               |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Year production i-|                  |1971              |                  | 
|nitiated          |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Production volume |                  |2,310             |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Dimensions:       |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Diameter of main  |14.5              |17.1              |17.2              | 
|rotor, m          |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Length with rotat-|16                |18.8              |                  | 
|ing rotors, m     |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Height, m         |                  |4.2               |4.8               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Crew, men         |1                 |3                 |2                 | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Engines:          |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number and brand  |2 TVZ-117         |2 TVZ-117         |2 TVZ-117         | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Output, kVt       |2 x 1,618         |2 x 1,618         |2 x 1,618         | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight and payloa-|                  |                  |                  | 
|ds, kg:           |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off          |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum           |                  |11,500            |11,200            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Normal            |                  |11,200            |10,400            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of empty h-|                  |8,200             |7,000             | 
|elicopter         |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Combat payload    |                  |2,500             |3,640[.sup]**[/]| 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight data:      |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed, kph|350[.sup]*[/]   |330               |300               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Hovering ceiling, |4,000             |1,500             |3,600             | 
|m                 |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Time-to-climb, mp-|10:2,500          |12.5:0 [as publis-|                  | 
|s:m               |                  |hed]              |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range with intern-|                  |500               |475               | 
|al fuel reserve,  |                  |                  |                  | 
|km                |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum flight du-|                  |4                 |2                 | 
|ration, hours     |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum operation-|3                 |1.75              |3.0/--0.5         | 
|al G-load         |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|[.sup]*[/]With a gunsight system                                         | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|[.sup]**[/]In a flat dive                                                | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


<H5>  OKB imeni M.L. Mil Future Aircraft </H5>
  Information on future military or dual-purpose helicopters 
that have been developed at this collective was presented at the 
MMZ [Moscow Machine Building Plant] imeni M.L. Mil Pavilion. 
  A drawing of a future helicopter--the Mi-40 infantry 
fighting 
aircraft developed based on the Mi-28 helicopter's main rotor 
design and power plant--was displayed. The Mi-40 helicopter is 
designed to equip airmobile rapid deployment forces units and is 
equipped with a built-in twin-barrel 23-mm gun which is mounted 
in a new type of remotely controlled nose turret with an 
increased field of fire. Furthermore, it is proposed arming the 
helicopter with future antitank missiles and unguided rockets. 
  The helicopter's avionics ensure its effective combat 
employment in complex weather conditions and at night. An 
assault team of eight-10 men is located in the fuselage and can 
conduct fire against groundbased targets using organic weapons. 


---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of MMZ imeni M.L. Mil Future Helicopters                   | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|              |Type of helicopter                                         | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|              |Mi-30         |Mi-40         |Mi-46T        |Mi-54         | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Normal take-o-|3,250         |10,400        |              |              | 
|ff weight, kg |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum take--|3,750         |11,500        |30,000        |4,000         | 
|off weight, kg|              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum paylo-|(5)           |(8-10)        |10,000        |1,300         | 
|ad, kg (capac-|              |              |              |              | 
|ity, men)     |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number and ou-|2 x 650       |              |              |2 x 550       | 
|tput of engin-|              |              |              |              | 
|es, horsepower|              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed,|530           |295           |270           |260           | 
| kph          |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Static ceilin-|2,700         |3,600         |2,300         |2,000         | 
|g, m          |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Operating ran-|              |              |460           |400[.sup]*     | 
|ge, km        |              |              |              |[/]        | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weaponry      |              |1 x 23-mm gun,|              |              | 
|              |              | antitank mis-|              |              | 
|              |              |siles, unguid-|              |              | 
|              |              |ed rockets    |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|[.sup]*[/]With a 10,000 kg payload                                      | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  A convertible aircraft with a tilting wing, on which two 
large diameter propellers have been installed (design similar to 
the design of the American V-22 Osprey aircraft) and which 
accommodates five people, is designed to carry out a wide circle 
of military and civilian missions (transport, patrol, rescue 
operations, reconnaissance, etc.). 
  The Mi-54 helicopter is designed to replace the Mi-2 and 
Mi-4 
multimission helicopters which are widely operated in our 
country and abroad. 
  The Mi-46T heavy helicopter is called upon to replace the 
Mi-6 transport helicopter and the Mi-10K helicopter-crane. 
<H5>  3. Trainer Aircraft </H5>
  A model of the Yak-UTS trainer aircraft was displayed at the 
OKB imeni A.S. Yakovlev Pavilion. Besides the aircraft, the 
training system includes simulators and automated training 
systems using personal computers. The Yak-UTS is designed to 
replace the Czech-made L-39 Albatros trainer aircraft of the CIS 
countries' air forces and was selected based upon a competition 
in which, besides the OKB imeni A.S. Yakovlev, the OKB's imeni 
A.I. Mikoyan, P.O. Sukhoy, and V.M. Myasishchev participated. 
The new aircraft's first flight could occur in 1994-1995 and the 
beginning of series production in 1995-2000. 
  The aircraft is manufactured according to a normal 
aerodynamic design with a wing that has developed wing 
extensions and winglets. The aerodynamics and high 
thrust-to-weight ratio (0.6-0.7) provide the capability to fly 
in modes close to those of fourth generation fighters 
(specifically, flight is possible with an attack angle of up to 
32). 
  The twin-seat cockpit with a single canopy provides a good 
field of view for both the pilot and the instructor. Two 
multifunction CRT displays with screen sizes of 130 x 130 mm 
will be installed on the instrument panels, and it also has a 
HUD. 
  It is proposed equipping the aircraft with two AI-25TLM 
turbojet bypass engines (Progress NPO [Scientific Production 
Association), Zaporozhye) that have a service life of 1,000 
hours. In the future it is proposed employing better engines 
developed at the OKB imeni V.Ya. Klimov (in contrast to the 
AI-25TLM turbojet bypass engines with afterburner, they propose 
increasing the thrust by 15%, economy by 4%, 
service life must 
total 4,000 hours and must increase to 6,000 hours in the 
future). A 700-liter capacity conformal external fuel tank can 
be installed under the fuselage. 
  The aircraft's control system is hydromechanical and they 
envision reconfiguring it to imitate flight in various types of 
aircraft. 
  The UTS is equipped with an inertial navigation system, a 
radio navigation system, a radio altimeter, a video recorder, 
and K-36 ejection seats. A laser gun-simulator and also laser 
radiation receivers (smoke generators that imitate destruction 
in aerial combat should be switched on automatically when the 
"enemy" aircraft's laser beam hits them) will be installed in 
the aircraft to train in conducting aerial combat. 
  Airframe service life should total 10,000 hours and could 
increase to 15,000 hours in the future, which corresponds to UTS 
operation for 30 years. 
  Besides the basic trainer variant, a carrier-based UTS is 
being developed that is equipped with a folding wing, reinforced 
landing gear, and arresting hook. 
  It is proposed developing a four-seat UTS with two two-seat 
cockpits to train bomber aviation pilots. It is proposed 
utilizing the carrier-based variant of the four-seater aircraft 
as a transport-passenger aircraft for rapid delivery of people 
and light cargo to aircraft-carrying ships (maximum cruising 
speed--650 kph, operating range--2,000 km). 
  A single-seat strike variant of the aircraft with augmented 
weaponry and onboard radar is being developed for export 
deliveries. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Yak-UTS Trainer Aircraft                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wingspan                              |11.25 m                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft length                       |12.40 m                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft height                       |4.60 m                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Sweep angle of wing along the forward |31                               | 
|edge                                  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum take-off weight               |5,500 kg                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of fuel in internal tanks      |1,800 kg                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of fuel in the conformal tank  |700 kg                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Type of engine                        |AI-25TLM turbojet bypass engine with  | 
|                                      |afterburner                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum thrust                        |2 x 17 kN                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed                         |850 kph                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Ferry range with conformal external f-|2,500 km                              | 
|uel tank                              |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off speed                        |180 kph                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Landing speed                         |170 kph                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off run (concrete/dirt runway)   |250/330 m                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Landing run (concrete/dirt runway)    |450/520 m                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum operational G-load            |+8/-3                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The T-501 UTS that was displayed at the exhibition is a 
future trainer aircraft developed by the OKB imeni A.I. Mikoyan. 
Construction of the first prototype T-501 UTS equipped with a 
TVD [turbojet engine] began in April 1992. Work is being 
financed by the firm RosAeroProgress (RAP), which concluded a 
contract worth R38 million with the OKB imeni A.I. Mikoyan at 
the beginning of 1992. Requirements for the UTS were coordinated 
with the CIS Air Force. It is proposed building two prototype 
aircraft for flight tests and also one aircraft for static 
tests. The first flight of the new UTS is planned for March 
1993, and the flight of the second prototype aircraft is planned 
for June 1993. Aircraft model wind tunnel tests were 
accomplished at the ADT [wind tunnel] at TsAGI [Central 
Aero-Hydrodynamics Institute]. 
  It is proposed equipping the T-501 aircraft with the TVD-10V 
engine (1 x 1,025 horsepower), the UTS's wingspan should total 
11 m, length --9.66 m, wing area--16.5 m[.sup]2[/], normal 
take-off weight--2,670 kg, maximum speed--560 kph, maximum rate 
of climb--21 mps, ferry range--1,800 km and, flight range at low 
altitude--1,000 km. 
  It is possible that an order will be received to build 
approximately 800 UTS's of this type. 
  The Czech L-59 Aero UBS that was demonstrated on the ramp 
and 
in flight was the only foreign combat aircraft presented at 
"Mosaeroshow-92." The aircraft is the further development of the 
L-39 Albatros UBS widely used in the air forces of the CIS 
countries (more than 1,600 aircraft were delivered) and 14 other 
states. 
  The aircraft is equipped with a ZVL/Lotarev DV-2 turbojet 
bypass engine with afterburner and a Sapfir APU [automatic 
safety device]. Avionics include an RSBN [radio navigation 
system], an SRO-2M identification friend or foe system, an RV-5 
radio altimeter, a HUD, and cockpit screen displays on CRT's. 
The two-man crew is located in VS-2 ejection seats in a cockpit 
under a single canopy that folds back and supports leaving the 
aircraft on the ramp. Aircraft weaponry with a total weight of 
1,053 kg is located on five external hard points and can include 
a gun, two air-to-air guided missiles, bombs, and unguided 
rockets. Work is being conducted on a single-seat strike variant 
of the L-59 aircraft. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the L-59 Aircraft                                          | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wingspan                              |9.54 m                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft length                       |12.20 m                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft height                       |4.77 m                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing area                             |18.80 m                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of empty aircraft              |4,360 kg                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Normal take-off weight:               |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|In the trainer variant                |5,510 kg                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|In the strike variant                 |5,700 kg                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum take-off weight               |6,613 kg                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of fuel in internal tanks (inc-|1,200 kg                              | 
|luding wing tanks)                    |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of fuel in external tanks (2 x |544 kg                                | 
|350 l)                                |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum landing weight                |6,000 kg                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed (N = 5,000 m)           |875 kph                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum Mach number                   |0.82                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum rate-of-climb                 |25 mps                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Service ceiling                       |11,730 m                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Ferry range with external fuel tanks  |1,500 km                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Combat radius without external fuel t-|1,210 km                              | 
|anks                                  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off run                          |640 m                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Landing run                           |720 m                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The new OKB imeni P.O. Sukhoy-designed Su-29T aircraft 
displayed at the exhibition is a two-seat variant of the 
well-known Su-26MKh sports-acrobatics aircraft that was also 
displayed. The Su-29 is designed for flight training, mastering 
the art of aerobatics by military and civilian pilots and air 
school cadets, for trainers and performances at aircraft sport 
competitions. The aircraft has high speed run and rate-of-climb 
specifications, good handling combined with low G-loads on the 
control elements and a 360 field of view from the cockpit. 
The high durability of the design (authorized G-load is 23) 
combined with a high seat angle of incline (35) permits the 
pilot to repeatedly utilize a G-load of +12/-10 while 
flying, which gives the aircraft an advantage during flight in a 
restricted flying zone. 
  The aircraft is manufactured with wide employment of 
composite materials (more than 70% of aircraft design 
weight). 
The aircraft wing (twin-spar, one-piece) is totally manufactured 
from composite materials based upon carbon plastics and 
plexiglass and the wing skin panels have a honeycomb filler. The 
central portion of the fuselage has a truss tubular welded frame 
made of high-tensile strength stainless steel and removable skin 
panels made from composite materials. The tail fairing and tail 
section of the fuselage are a semi-monocoque design made from 
composite materials. It has a tricycle landing gear with tail 
bumper. The primary wheels are installed on springs made from a 
titanium alloy and are equipped with differential disc brakes 
with a hydraulic drive. 
  The Su-29 is equipped with an M-14P air-cooled nine-cylinder 
radial piston engine with an output of 360 horsepower. It has a 
pneumatic engine ignition system. The capacity of the main fuel 
tank is 70 liters. It has two tanks built into the wing with a 
total capacity of 220 liters to ferry the aircraft. 
  The Su-29T single-seat variant is designed to train 
pilot-sportsmen and for their participation in acrobatic 
competitions and is distinguished from the two-seat variant by 
its reduced length and weight, boosted engine and, as a result, 
improved speed and maneuvering properties. There is a 140 liter 
external tank to ferry the aircraft, but two tanks built into 
the wing with a total capacity of 220 liters can be used instead. 
  It is proposed delivering 24 Su-29 two-seat aircraft abroad 
in 1992. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Su-29[.sup]*[/]                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Dimensions:                           |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wingspan                              |8.20 m                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft length                       |7.29 (6.83) m                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft height                       |2.74 m                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Engines:                              |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number and type                       |1 M-14P PD [piston engine] (M-14PF)   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Output                                |360 (400) horsepower                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weights and payloads:                 |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum take-off weight               |1,100 (780) kg                        | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of empty aircraft              |670 kg                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight data:                          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum permissible speed (not to exc-|450 kph                               | 
|eed)                                  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum horizontal flight speed       |330 (340) kph                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off speed                        |120 (110) kph                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Landing speed                         |115 (105) kph                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Rate-of-climb at sea level            |18 (19) mps                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Service ceiling                       |4,000 m                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off run (Su-29T)                 |140 m                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Landing run (Su-29T)                  |250 m                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum roll rate                     |6 (7) radians per second              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum operational G-load            |+12/-10                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|[.sup]*[/]The differentiating data of the Su-29T variant is cited in paren-| 
|theses                                                                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


<H5>  4. Aircraft of Special Designs </H5>
  The work of R.L. Bartina and R.Ye. Alekseyev that laid the 
foundations of wing-in-ground effect vehicles in the USSR 
created a solid foundation for the further development of 
aircraft using the screen effect which, according to some 
assessments, could become the primary type of long-range 
transport in the next century. 
  Nizhniy Novgorod's Central KB [Design Bureau] for Ships and 
Hovercraft NPO is undertaking efforts to expand the sphere of 
application of the Orlenok wing-in-ground effect vehicle, which 
was developed in the 1970's, as a transport vehicle for the 
Navy. Five vehicles have been built thus far and three of them 
are in operation. In 1992 the use of the Orlenok in the 
Mriya-Orlenok aviation-maritime search and rescue system was 
proposed. 
  The An-225 Mriya was developed in 1985-1988 and its first 
sortie occurred on 21 December 1988. By the beginning of 1992 it 
had completed approximately 400 flights with a total duration of 
approximately 600 hours, including 36 flights with the Buran 
reusable spacecraft. The proposed system consists of an 
aircraft-platform based upon the Mriya and a rescue 
wing-in-ground effect vehicle based upon the Orlenok. They 
assume that the Mriya-Orlenok system will be based at civilian 
or military coastal airfields. When a distress signal is 
received, the aircraft-platform will fly to the accident area 
and conduct a search if necessary. As soon as the object of the 
search has been found, the wing-in-ground effect vehicle will 
start engines and separate from the aircraft-platform. The 
wing-in-ground effect vehicle's developed wing permits it to 
carry out a gliding descent and a landing on water. In the event 
that the accident object is located outside the range of the 
aircraft-platform, the wing-in-ground effect vehicle is 
separated at the maximum possible distance from the basing 
airfield (at the "drop point") and carries out the remaining 
portion of the trip independently. 
  The system platform will be somewhat different from the 
basic 
Mriya aircraft. It requires installation of special 
communications, search and onboard auxiliary equipment, and also 
development of strong hard points and an attachment and 
separation system for the Orlenok wing-in-ground effect vehicle. 
  Five Mriya-Orlenok systems, dispersed along the water area 
of 
the World Ocean and united in a single international rescue 
system, cover practically all zones of heavy navigation, 
fishing, and the maritime petroleum industry. The development 
and introduction into operation of this system will take four to 
five years and will be cheaper than designing another new 
aviation-maritime rescue system because the prototypes of both 
components of this system are already flying. With an operating 
period of 20 years, the system will already pay for itself in 
three years and will begin to yield a profit. Organization of an 
international rescue service is required to implement this 
program for rescuing people at sea. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Mriya-Orlenok System                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft-Platform                                                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wingspan                              |88.4 m                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Length                                |84.0 m                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing area                             |905.0 m[.sup]2[/]                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight speed                          |700-750 kph                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing-in-Ground Effect Vehicle                                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Dimensions:                           |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wingspan                              |30.6 m                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Length of the wing-in-ground effect v-|58.1 m                                | 
|ehicle                                |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing area                             |304.6 m[.sup]2[/]                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weights and payloads:                 |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off weight (as part of the Mriya-|140 tonnes                            | 
|Orlenok system)                       |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Passenger capacity                    |70 people                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight data:                          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight range (altitude 2 meters)      |2,400 km                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight speed                          |400 kph                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|The An-225-Orlenok System                                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off weight                       |610.0 tonnes                          | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Drop point (emergency fuel reserve fo-|2,400 km                              | 
|r one hour of flight)                 |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight speed                          |650-700 kph                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  Negotiations between the Nizhniy Novgorod TsKB [Central 
Design Bureau] and the firm Aerocon (United States) on the issue 
of joint development of the new wing-in-ground effect vehicle 
occurred in January-March 1992. In 1989 Aerocon obtained a 
$546,000 contract from the U.S. Department of Defense Advanced 
Research Programs Agency (DARPA) to study the wing-in-ground 
effect vehicle concept. The firm anticipates that another $1 
million will be allocated to continue the research. Although 
DARPA has reported that it does not plan to expand this program 
(transferring it to the stage of development and production), it 
is known that it enjoys the support of the U.S. Central Command 
staff, which has compiled official TTT [tactical-technical 
specifications] for a vehicle of this type, and the support of 
the U.S. Transportation Command staff. The advantages of 
wing-in-ground effect vehicles were demonstrated during the 
assessment of possible scenarios of potential wars. For example, 
two wing-in-ground effect vehicles can transport an American 
infantry brigade, equipped with guided weapons which can 
neutralize three to five enemy armored divisions, to a crisis 
zone in one trip. 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Comparative Cost of Trip From New York to France                           | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Method of transpo-|Time              |Cost, U.S. dollars|Number of seats   | 
|rtation           |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Ocean liner (New  |5 days            |1,795             |1,860             | 
|York-Cherbourg)   |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Boeing-747 airlin-|7 hours           |1,944             |400               | 
|er (New York-Pari-|                  |                  |                  | 
|s)                |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Concord airliner (|3 hours, 45 minut-|6,388             |100               | 
|New York-Paris)   |es                |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing-in-ground ef-|6 hours           |200               |3,000             | 
|fect vehicle (New |                  |                  |                  | 
|York-Cherbourg)   |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  According to Aerocon spokesmen, approximately $15 billion 
would be required for a demonstration program that envisions the 
construction of 12 wing-in-ground effect vehicles over a 15-year 
period. In the event resources are allocated, the first 
wing-in-ground effect vehicle flight could occur in five years. 
The cost of one wing-in-ground effect vehicle is $500-700 
million. 
  Efficiency and the low cost of a ticket will be the primary 
feature of the civilian variant. A wing-in-ground effect vehicle 
can be employed for military purposes to transport either 32 
helicopters, 20 tanks, four hydrofoils, or 2,000 servicemen and 
1,350 tonnes of cargo. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Wing-in-Ground Effect Vehicle based on the TsKB Design | 
|for SPK [Joint Production Combine]/Aerocon                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Size:                                 |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wingspan                              |100 m                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Length                                |170 m                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Height                                |35 m                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of seats:                      |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Passengers                            |3,000 people                          | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Soldiers with military equipment and  |2,000 men                             | 
|gear                                  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Engines:                              |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number and type                       |20 jet engines                        | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Stand thrust                          |20 x 395 kN                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weights and payloads:                 |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off weight                       |5,000 tonnes                          | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Cargo capacity                        |1,500 tonnes                          | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight data:                          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Cruising speed                        |800 kph                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight range                          |16,000 km                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight altitude                       |2-10 m                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  Irkutsk State University (IGU) laboratory complex exhibits 
that were presented at "Mosaeroshow-92" aroused interest. IGU 
demonstrated a model of a wing-in-ground effect vehicle-flying 
wing with a hydrofoil undercarriage (ShVP) that is being studied 
under the "Skat" program. The combination of a wing-in-ground 
effect vehicle with a hydrofoil undercarriage permits us to 
support basing without airfields with a corresponding increase 
of the effectiveness of transport operations when existing 
wing-in-ground effect vehicles are adapted for take-off and 
landing from a single type of take-off and landing surface--from 
the water or from an airfield with a hard covering. 
  It is proposed using the aircraft that was demonstrated as 
the primary system to carry out transport missions in the areas 
of Siberia and the North. The economic effect of its 
introduction is potentially very great because this transport 
does not require the creation of a network of causeways or 
prepared airfields and can be operated around the clock on any 
ground. The hydrofoil undercarriage permits it to move 
practically at any speed, beginning from the hover mode with 
zero forward speed to a transition speed to wing-in-ground 
effect flight with a high aerodynamic quality at speeds of 
700-900 kph. Low pressure on the ground in a static hydrofoil 
(0.06-0.07 atm [atmospheres]) does not have a substantial impact 
on the ground which, in combination with the employment of 
hydrogen engines as a power plant, makes this type of transport 
ecologically clean and harmless. 
  The undercarriage has a cupola design with a stiff, 
sectioned, spring-loaded enclosure: there are stiff flaps on the 
lower surface of the flying wing that tilt with the creation of 
a multichamber cupola under the wing in which a static air 
pillow is created by bleeding air from the gas turbine engines. 
The static air pillow is required for take-off and landing. The 
flaps are retracted into the wing contours in cruising flight 
and are included in the design-power plant design to increase 
the load ratio for a commercial payload. 
  The wing-in-ground effect vehicle-flying wing's high 
aerodynamic quality ensures its high transport effectiveness, a 
commercial payload may reach 50% of take-off weight and 
the 
cost of one tonne-kilometer will be 1.5-2 times lower than for 
transport aircraft of the beginning of the 1990's. The 
wing-in-ground effect vehicle is being studied in two main 
variants: 
  --for medium and long-range (2,000-20,000 km) cargo 
transport 
movements with high transport effectiveness in the form of a 
delta wing with a thick S-shaped profile that provides an 
aerodynamic quality of from 25 to 35 (in various 
configurations); and, 
  --for short-range (1,500-2,000 km) cargo transport movements 
with moderate transport effectiveness in the form of a flying 
wing-flat platform. 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off weight,  |Carried cargo, to-|Maximum cruising  |Range, thousands  | 
|tonnes            |nnes              |speed, kph        |of kilometers     | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1                 |0.3               |290               |1,440             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|8                 |2.8               |440               |2,870             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|27                |10.8              |495               |4,680             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|64                |28.8              |565               |4,950             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|125               |59                |630               |5,530             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|216               |108               |695               |6,050             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|343               |172               |755               |6,500             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|512               |256               |810               |7,130             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|729               |365               |855               |7,570             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1,000             |500               |900               |7,880             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  It is assumed that wing-in-ground effect vehicles with a 
broad spectrum of take-off weights (on succeeding scales) can be 
developed. 
  The latest vehicle in this series (with a take-off weight of 
1,000 tonnes) must have a wing area of 1,800 m[.sup]2[/], a 
cruising speed of 720-900 kph, a maximum practical range with a 
full payload of 7,000 km, with a carried payload of 250 
tonnes--10,000 km, and an aerodynamic quality of 30 with a 
relative altitude over the screen of 0.1 and aerodynamic quality 
of 25 with a relative altitude of 0.2. 
  So far, the IGU laboratory complexes jointly with Irkutsk 
Aviation Production Association have created a manned stand. By 
the end of 1992 they planned to build the first experimental 
manned model of a wing-in-ground effect vehicle-flying wing and 
designs of possible series-produced vehicles are being 
developed. With adequate amounts of financing, research of 
experimental manned models and construction of prototype models 
will be completed by 1996 with subsequent test operation of 
prototype vehicles in 1996-2000. The results of the laboratory's 
work were demonstrated at international exhibitions in the 
United States (Seattle) and Germany (Hanover) and also at VDNKh 
[Exhibition of the National Achievements of the Economy] at the 
"Ecologically Clean Transport" Exhibition. In May 1993, Irkutsk 
University proposes to organize the First International 
Conference on Wing-in-Ground Effect Vehicles under the 
chairmanship of M.P. Simonov. 
  At "Mosaeroshow-92," Moscow's EKIP production firm displayed 
information on a family of wide-fuselage highly economical 
aircraft that do not require airfields, with a cargo capacity 
from two to 200 tonnes, capable of carrying out both free as 
well as wing-in-ground effect flight and have low fuel 
consumption (from 10 to 14 grams per passenger-kilometer). The 
aircraft will be able to take off from any category of airfield, 
including water surfaces. The vehicles have a design that is 
close to the "flying wing" design with a load-bearing fuselage 
in the shape of a thick, low-aspect-ratio wing and small 
winglets. According to calculations, the vehicle's patented 
shape permits reduction of the weight of the design by reducing 
the level of the aerodynamic loads and their equal distribution 
along the surface of the vehicle, reduction of inductive 
resistance and an increase of the aerodynamic quality (up to 
17-25 in free flight and 22-30 during flight near the ground) 
due to a reduction of the required lift coefficient (as a result 
of the increase of the aerodynamically lifting area), and an 
increase of the volumes of cargo-passenger compartments by eight 
to 10 times, in contrast to passenger transport aircraft 
comparable in cargo capacity. A patented device for controlling 
boundary currents that provides attached flow and a hydrofoil 
undercarriage have also been employed on EKIP's vehicle. 


Specifications of the EKIP Family of Aircraft 

                   L2-3       L3-1      L3-2      L4-1         L4-2 

Dimensions: 

Wingspan, m        14.4       31.3      55.5      91.6         128 

Aircraft length,   11         20        35.6      59           82 
m 

Aircraft height,   3.1        6.7       11.8      19.6         27.5 
m 

Area in the        88         400       1,250     3,430        6,860 
plane, 
m[.sup]2[/] 

Area of the        23.8       75        235       640          1,280 
hydrofoil, 
m[.sup]2[/] 

Engines: 

Number and type    4 AL-34    2 D-436   2 NK-92   6 NK-92      10 NK-92 


Thrust, ts         4 x 0.85   2 x 7.0   2 x 18    6 x 18       10 x 18 
[tonne-force] 

Fuel               14         11        10-11     10-11        10-11 
consumption, 
grams per 
passenger 
kilometer 

Power-to-weight    0.38       0.4       0.33      0.36         0.3 
ratio 

Weights and 
payloads: 

Total weight,      9          35        110       300          600 
tonnes 

Payload/number     2.5/24     10/80     35/300    100/1,000    200/2,000 
of passengers, 
tonnes/people 

Structural mass,   5.0        15        40        100          200 
tonnes 

Fuel, tonnes       1.5        10        40        100          200 

Average wing       102        88        88        88           88 
load, 
kg/m[.sup]2[/] 

Average            380        470       470       470          470 
flotation 
pressure, 
kg/m[.sup]2[/] 

Flight data: 

Flight speed,      470-650 (identical for all) 
kph 

Flight altitude,   5.5-6.0    8.5-10    8.5-10    8.5-10       8.5-10 
m 

Flight range, km   2,000      4,500     8,600     8,600        8,600 


Take-off run, m    400        450       500       500          500 

Runway type        dirt/water (identical for all) 


  At the exhibition, the OKB imeni P.O. Sukhoy disseminated 
information on the development of the S-90-200 highly 
comfortable passenger amphibious wing-in-ground effect vehicle 
which has been ongoing for several years now. Development is 
based on a preliminary agreement with the Singapore firm Aero 
Marine. This twindeck liner is designed to transport passengers 
and cargo on medium and long routes that run primarily over a 
water surface with poorly equipped stopping points. The 
configuration of the upper deck envisions two salons: first 
class for 39 passengers and tourist class for 54 passengers. 
Eight cabins are located on the lower deck. The capability to 
embark and disembark passengers on shore in locations that are 
not equipped with piers is the outstanding feature of this 
vehicle. The wing-in-ground effect vehicle must ensure flight 
safety over the sea in areas with a large number of islands and 
intense navigation. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the S-90-200                                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wingspan                              |61 m                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Vehicle length                        |40 m                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Vehicle height                        |11.5 m                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum take-off weight               |132 tonnes                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum payload weight                |25 tonnes                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Crew                                  |14 people                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of passengers                  |210 people                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Power plant:                          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number and type of engines            |2 NK-92                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Output                                |2 x 8,832 kVt                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum cruising speed                |470 kph                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight range with maximum fuel reserve|8,000 km                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight altitude over the ground       |3 m                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum flight altitude               |5,000 m                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The OKB imeni G.M. Beriyev A-40 multimission amphibious 
aircraft demonstrated at "Mosaeroshow-92" in flight and on the 
ramp was developed for long-range antisubmarine warfare 
operations, with the capability to develop various civilian 
modifications for broad employment in island and coastal areas 
that do not have an adequate number of airfields and also on 
water areas of the world ocean. The A-40 is being offered in 
passenger, cargo-passenger, search and rescue (the Be-42), and 
other variants. It can carry out the replacement of crews of 
surface ships and conduct patrol operations in a 200-mile 
economic zone. The Be-200 shortened variant is being developed 
based on it. 
  The A-40 aircraft was demonstrated publicly for the first 
time outside the USSR at the Paris Air Show in July 1991. By 
that time the aircraft had established 14 world records, 
including raising a 10-tonne cargo payload to an altitude of 
13,281 m and cargoes of 1, 2, and 5 tonnes to an altitude of 
13,367 m. The A-40 aircraft's maximum flight weight reached 
69,300 kg while establishing the records. 
  The A-40 is a cantilever monoplane with a high sweptwing and 
T-shaped tail fairing. More than 60 developments were 
acknowledged by inventors during the development of the 
Albatros. The high aspect ratio wing has a sweep of 
approximately 27 along the leading edge. Mechanization of 
the wing trailing edge consists of two mobile double-slotted 
flaps that occupy a large portion of the span and leading edge 
slats are located along the entire sweep of the leading edge. 
Nonretractable floats that serve to increase the aircraft's 
stability on the water have been installed on short pylons on 
the wing tips. There is an aft water rudder. It has a 
single-step hull with a high aspect ratio. 
  A variable-rise bottom has been developed for the first time 
in world practice, which permitted significant improvement of 
the aircraft's stability and controllability while moving 
through the water and also a reduction of G-loads during 
take-off and landing. Honeycomb bonded structures and 
nonmetallic materials have been widely employed in the aircraft 
airframe. A 6.10 meter-long weapons compartment has been located 
in the aft section of the hull. It has a tricycle landing gear 
with a nose gear and the main gears retract into large fairings 
located behind the wing. The base of the undercarriage is 14.835 
m (between the centers of the wheels), and the track is 4.980 m 
(along the central points of the twinned wheels). 
  The aircraft is equipped with two Perm Aviadvigatel 
[Aircraft 
Engine] NPO [Scientific Production Association] D-30 KVP 
turbojet bypass engines, which are installed over the landing 
gear fairings behind the wing, preventing water from getting 
into the air intakes during take-off and landing. Additional 
protection from water is provided through the installation of 
strakes along the sides of the hull in the nose section and in 
front of the planing step. Two booster engines, located under 
the main turbojet bypass engines in the main gear fairings, 
serve to improve take-off characteristics from a water surface. 
The aircraft has an aerial refueling system with a fuel 
reception probe located above the nose section of the hull. 
  There must be a radar with antenna in the nose fairing on 
the 
initial ASW [antisubmarine warfare] variant. Equipment to render 
antihypothermia, surgical, antishock, and other types of medical 
assistance are envisioned on the Be-42 search and rescue 
variant. Onboard systems to lift rescued people out of the water 
include two LPS-6 six-seat semirigid motor boats, mechanized 
ladders, and special equipment. The maritime rescue craft is 
equipped with radar and navigation equipment permitting it to 
conduct rescue work in conditions of limited visibility, even in 
fog, and also at night. When extinguishing fires, the Albatros 
is capable of collecting water onboard while gliding, which 
permits it to increase the frequency of sorties to the site of a 
fire. 
  The maximum combat payload of 6,500 kg includes up to three 
Orlan antiship torpedoes or up to four to six Korshun, Yastreb, 
or Orel antiship guided missiles (all in the bomb bay). 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the A-40                                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Dimensions:                           |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wingspan                              |42.00 m                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft length without the pitot tube|42.00 m                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft height (on a dry ramp)       |11.00 m                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Span of the stabilizer                |11.87 m                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of passengers                  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|In the passenger variant              |105 people                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|In cargo-passenger variant I          |37 people                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|In cargo-passenger variant II         |70 people                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of rescued people in the Be-42 |54 people                             | 
|search and rescue variant             |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Crew:                                 |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight                                |5 people                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Rescue team in the Be-42 search and r-|4-6 people                            | 
|escue variant                         |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Engines:                              |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number and type                       |2 Perm MKB [Machine-Building Design B-| 
|                                      |ureau] D-30KPV turbojet bypass engines| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Static thrust                         |2 x 147.1 kN (2 x 15,000 kgs)         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weights and payloads:                 |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum take-off weight in the civili-|86,000 kg                             | 
|an variant                            |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum take-off weight in the ASW va-|90,000 kg                             | 
|riant                                 |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum commercial payload            |10,000 kg                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum combat payload                |6,500 kg                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum payload in the firefighting v-|30 tonnes                             | 
|ariant (fire extinguishing mixture)   |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight data:                          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum cruising speed                |800 kph                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Patrolling speed                      |320-400 kph                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum flight range                  |5,500 km                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight range with receipt of 15 victi-|5,000 km                              | 
|ms (Be-42)                            |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight range with a 6.5 tonne payload |4,700 km                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight range with maximum commercial  |10 tonnes [as published]              | 
|payload                               |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight range in the passenger variant |4,000 km                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight range in the cargo-passenger v-|4,200 km                              | 
|ariant                                |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Required airfield runway length       |1,800 m                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Required length of water area         |3,200 m                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Required take-off run from an airfield|1,000-1,200 m                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Required landing run at an airfield   |700-900 m                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Seaworthiness (height of wave)        |up to 2.2 m                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  A full-size mockup of the Yamal light amphibious aircraft 
developed by the Aviaspetstrans Consortium jointly with EMZ 
imeni V.M Myasishchev was demonstrated at "Mosaeroshow-92." The 
amphibious aircraft is designed for operation in Russia's 
northern areas, Siberia, and the Far East. The preliminary 
design has been completed and production of a prototype aircraft 
has begun. The first flying model of the Yamal should take off 
at the end of 1994. It is planned to produce 20 aircraft by 
1995. The assumption is that hundreds of these aircraft will be 
required. 
  More than 1 million pieces of various equipment are 
concentrated in the areas of the Russian North, but only 
2-3% 
of the fleet has been adapted for operation under extreme 
conditions. In contrast to the summer period, the productivity 
of machinery and mechanisms is reduced by several times during 
the winter period under conditions of low temperatures. The 
design of the airframe, placement of the engines and propellers, 
and configuration of the equipment have been subordinated to the 
main goal--servicing the aircraft "from within" the fuselage, 
which is extremely important in the North. 
  Aviaspetstrans Consortium was formed around the Yamal 
project 
in 1990 to renew and develop the air service infrastructure on 
local routes in areas of the North, Siberia, and the Far East. 
Aviaspetstrans' task includes supplying economic organizations 
and the native population with modern aviation services with the 
maximum possible level of ecological cleanliness. The consortium 
consists of EMZ imeni V.M. Myasishchev, several NII's 
[scientific research institutes], Moscow Regional Commercial 
Bank, and several state organizations. 
  Yamal is differentiated by its original twin-engine 
turboshaft power plant, consisting of two TVD-1500's and located 
behind the wing with a drive to the six-bladed pusher propeller 
installed on the T-shaped tail fairing. That location of the air 
propeller and also the air intakes located on top of the 
fuselage will protect the engines and air propeller from jets of 
water coming out of the amphibious aircraft's "chines" and 
underwing floats and from pieces of ice breaking off. 
Negotiations are occurring with Canadair on possible 
cooperation: They propose series production in Russia of the 
Canadair CL-415 twin-engine amphibious aircraft and joint work 
on Yamal. Pratt &amp; Whitney Canada has offered four PT6 engines 
free of charge for installation on prototype Yamal aircraft. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Yamal Amphibious Aircraft                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Dimensions:                           |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wingspan                              |20.0 m                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft length                       |15.3 m                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft height                       |5.5 m                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wing area                             |41.0 m[.sup]2[/]                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Size of the passenger salon           |23.4 m[.sup]3[/]                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Crew                                  |2 people                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Engines:                              |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number and type                       |2 turbojet engines                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Output                                |2 x 1,300 horsepower                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weights and payloads:                 |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum take-off weight               |7,200 kg                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum commercial payload with a 500 |2,000 kg or 18 passengers             | 
|km flight range                       |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|With a 3,000 km flight range          |500 kg                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight data:                          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum cruising speed                |450 kph                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Minimum operating flight altitude (fo-|100 m                                 | 
|r ice reconnaissance, etc.)           |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum operating flight altitude     |6,000 m                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off distance from the water      |230 m                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off distance from the ground     |225 m                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  Nizhniy Novgorod's AeroRIK Scientific Production Enterprise 
reported on the Dingo multimission amphibious aircraft with a 
hydrofoil undercarriage that is being developed. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Dingo Amphibious Aircraft                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wingspan                              |14.5 m                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft length                       |12.5 m                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft height                       |3.5 m                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Power plant:                          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Sustainer engine                      |Turbojet engine                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Output                                |850 horsepower                        | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Lift engine to create the air cushion |TVA-200 gas-turbine engine            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Output                                |250 horsepower                        | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off weight                       |3,600 kg                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Full payload                          |850 kg                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed                         |350 kph                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Cruising speed                        |250 kph                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight range:                         |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum                               |1,300 km                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|With an 850 kg payload                |850 km                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


<H5>  5. Remotely Piloted Vehicles </H5>
  The development of remotely piloted vehicles [RPV] capable 
of 
accomplishing a wide circle of missions on behalf of the various 
branches of the armed forces and the national economy is one of 
the most promising directions of development of military and 
civilian aircraft. 
  The Kulon NII and the Russian Air Force demonstrated the 
Malakhit terrain aerial surveillance system designed for 
surveillance in the optical and IR range at any time of day 
using the Shmel-1 RPV. 
  Typical missions for the system are: ecological monitoring 
of 
the environment; patrolling terrain; monitoring the radiation 
situation around AES's [nuclear power plants]; surveillance of 
the state of oil and gas pipelines, heat and energy lines; 
assessment of the state of ice on rivers, and the consequences 
of natural disasters (earthquakes, fires, floods, etc.); 
monitoring the accomplishment of agricultural work; assessment 
of the moisture content of the soil, the temperature of fields, 
weed levels, and the state and quality of sowing; and 
surveillance of herds and the migration of animals. 
  The system consists of an integrated launch and control unit 
located on a BMD-1 combat assault vehicle tracked chassis, the 
RPV, and a mobile maintenance facility. 
  The launch and control unit carries out automatic prelaunch 
monitoring, launch, and command and control of the RPV, and 
reception and depiction of terrain images on a television screen 
in real time. A picture of the terrain that is being observed 
from onboard the RPV and also the track of the aircraft and its 
current coordinates are depicted on a video control device 
installed on the control and launch unit. 
  A high degree of automation of the processes of monitoring 
ground and onboard devices and also flight control and the 
availability of built-in simulator systems permit reduction of 
the requirements for operator qualification and reduce operator 
training time. 
  The system ensures command and control and reception of 
information from the RPV when located at a distance of 60 km 
from the launch and control unit. Simultaneous command and 
control of two RPV's is permitted. A television camera installed 
on the RPV has an adjustable remotely controlled angle 
(3-30), the IR sensor field of view totals 3.4 of the 
flight altitude, and the resolution of the IR sensor is 3 mrads. 
  The Shmel-1 RPV is a reusable aircraft manufactured 
according 
to a normal aerodynamic design with a pusher propeller in a ring 
shroud. An autopilot ensures stability of flight, which consists 
of a computer, compass, vertical gyroscope, angular velocity 
sensors and electric drives to control the ailerons and 
elevators and also the throttle butterfly of the sustainer 
engine. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Shmel-1 RPV                                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off weight                       |130 kg                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Engine type                           |piston                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Engine output                         |23.9 kVt                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range of flight operating altitudes   |100-3,000 m                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight speed                          |140 kph                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight duration                       |2 hours                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Landing system                        |parachute                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  A model of the future Kolibri RPV developed at the OKB imeni 
A.S. Yakovlev was demonstrated in the spring of 1992 at the 
African Air Show in Johannesburg (Republic of South Africa). The 
aircraft, manufactured based on a normal aerodynamic design, has 
a wing that smoothly joins the fuselage, which promotes 
reduction of the radar signature, and a T-shaped tail to which a 
pusher propeller has been attached. 
  The RPV is equipped with a 75 horsepower piston engine, can 
carry a payload that consists of various sensors with a total 
weight of 70 kg, and is capable of operating at a distance of up 
to 180 km from the launch and control unit. The combat radius 
can be increased to 700 km when a second relay RPV is used. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Kolibri RPV                                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wingspan                              |5.90 m                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|RPV length                            |4.25 m                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Span of the horizontal tail           |1.70 m                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Take-off weight                       |280 kg                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Fuel weight                           |72 kg                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Payload weight                        |70 kg                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Engine type                           |piston                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Engine output                         |75 horsepower                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range of flight operating altitudes   |50-3,500 m                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum operating radius:             |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Without using a relay RPV             |180 km                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Using a relay RPV                     |700 km                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight duration                       |8 hours                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight speed                          |250 kph                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  Raduga MKB offered information on a series of small 
agricultural and military RPV's. In particular, an autogyro was 
demonstrated that utilized the Shmel RPV fuselage in its design. 
Another small aircraft-type flying apparatus that is designed 
for use in agriculture is launched and controlled from a small 
launch and control unit that is mounted on a GAZ-66 motor 
vehicle chassis. 
  Eniks NITs demonstrated the Ye85 aerial target, designed to 
imitate cruise missile and glide bomb type targets, at 
"Mosaeroshow-92". The target has been manufactured according to 
a normal aerodynamic design with a straight wing, has light 
plastic construction, is launched from a helicopter's external 
hard point and carries out a landing on a parachute. Programmed 
or radio-command target control is used. Employment of a light 
original design pulsing VRD [jet engine] that is protected by a 
copyright is a distinguishing feature and the thrust of the 
PuVRD is approximately 40 kg. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Ye85 Target                                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Launch weight                         |120 kg                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight speed                          |250-600 kph                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flight altitudes                      |200-3,000 m                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range                                 |70 km                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Radar cross signature                 |0.1-10 m[.sup]2[/]                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The conclusion of the RUSSIAN "MOSAEROSHOW-92" AEROSPACE 
EXHIBITION survey is in No. 42. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42460 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma007___94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Bulletins of Foreign S&amp;T Information </ABS>
<DATE1>   16 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<F P=101>   PHYSICS </F>
<H3> <TI>   New Theory Explains Anomalous Properties of Water </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  11111111 </F>
<F P=103> 11111111 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:CSO 

  [Text] Having studied the properties of water, S. Benson 
and E. 
Siebert (University of Southern California at Los Angeles) have 
arrived at the conclusion that the molecules of this liquid do 
not jostle randomly, but form short-lived networks in the shape 
of cubes of eight molecules and rings of four molecules. The 
cubes and rings are then formed into chains and networks. 
  Experimental data obtained for the hard and gas phases were 
used to construct a theoretical model of water in the liquid 
phase. The chemists claim that the microstructures they 
discovered help explain some of the unusual properties of water, 
such as its ability to absorb large amounts of heat and its 
ability to expand on freezing. 
  Most liquids fall into one of two categories: they are 
either 
regular or structured. The molecules in regular liquids form 
relatively weak bonds in pairs under the impact of van der Waals 
forces. Because these forces do not have a particular direction, 
the molecules are free to adopt any orientation relative to one 
another to fill free space. The organic solvent 
tetrachloromethane is an example of such a liquid. Such liquids, 
the molecules of which are held together by stronger, oriented 
forces, are among the regular liquids. Usually, these are 
hydrogen bonds, which form between a slightly positive hydrogen 
atom in one molecule and an oxygen atom with a weak negative 
charge in a neighboring molecule. 
  Structured liquids cannot be described by the simple 
empirical formulas that are used to describe the physical 
properties of regular liquids. For example, each molecule in a 
regular liquid with closely packed molecules can be surrounded 
by 10-11 others. In a structured liquid, there can be as few as 
4-5 of these molecules and therefore sufficient free space 
remains between molecules. 
  The American scientists think that water is possibly the 
most 
extreme representative of a structured liquid. It has maximum 
density at a temperature of 4C and an unexpectedly high 
heat capacity. After many years of debates, scientists arrived 
at the conclusion that hydrogen bonds are the cause of the 
anomalous properties of water, however, there is still no 
adequate theory that precisely predicts water's heat capacity 
and fluidity or explains such a property of water as its low 
density in solid state. 
  Benson and Siebert claim that with their new 
octamer-tetramer 
model of intermolecular hydrogen bonds permits them to predict 
the physical characteristics of water in the entire range of 
temperatures of the existence of the liquid phase (from 0 to 
100C) with an accuracy of up to 2% with regard to 
experimental data. 
  The scientists do not claim that water consists exclusively 
of cubic and ring bonds of molecules, but they think that these 
are the simplest and most widespread types of bonds. Instruments 
do not yet exist that permit us to record such formations 
because the hydrogen bonds between water molecules form and 
break with a frequency of 500 Ghz. 
  Benson and Siebert say that water might also contain other 
structures--such as cyclic pentamers (five molecules in a ring) 
or decameric sandwich dimers. But they also admit that there is 
no evidence of the existence of these microstructures, except 
for calculations of thermal and volumetric properties which 
match experimental data. 
  The proposed microstructural theory also explains water's 
anomalous behavior when other substances are added. Although the 
presence of simple hydrogen bonds predicts that a polar 
substance such as ammonia gives off heat when it dissolves in 
water, it cannot explain why this occurs even when nonpolar 
tetrachloromethane dissolves. 
  NEW SCIENTIST, 25 July 1992, Vol. 135, No. 1831, p. 
14. 
<H5>  Berlin Builds a Second Synchrotron </H5>
  The Federal Ministry of Research and Technology (Germany) 
has 
announced the construction of a second synchrotron, BESSY-II, in 
Berlin-Allershof in addition to BESSY-I located in West Berlin. 
  BESSY-II is primarily designed for basic research and will 
have a ring with a diameter three times as large as BESSY-I's, 
which will permit the production of a magnetic field with 
approximately 1,000-10,000 times greater voltage. 
  Construction of the new synchrotron will cost 190 million 
Deutsche marks (&pound;68.5 million). The money will be allocated 
by the German Federal Government and the Berlin authorities. 
  NEW SCIENTIST, 1 August 1992, Vol. 135, No. 1832, p. 
10. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42461 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma007___94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Bulletins of Foreign S&amp;T Information </ABS>
<DATE1>   16 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<F P=101>   CHEMISTRY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Boron Molecules that Look Like Fullerenes </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  11111111 </F>
<F P=103> 11111111 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:CSO 

  [Text] In 1976 Harvard Chemist W.N. Lipscomb had already 
predicted 
the possibility of the similarity of the structures of a 
B[.sup]32[/]H[.sub]32[/] molecule and a multi-atom carbon 
molecule with the Formula C[.sup]60[/]. The shape of the 
20-sided B[.sup]32[/]H[.sub]32[/] molecule is similar to 
the ball-shaped C[.sup]60[/] molecule [the buckyball]. 
  Lipscomb and his colleague L. Massa (New York's Hunter 
College) conducted a systematic study of the possible 
correspondence between boron compounds and fullerenes--the new 
class of carbon molecules that include C[.sup]60[/]. 
  In the boron hydrides, the boron atoms bond to each other to 
form a particular shape and the hydrogen atoms radiate from the 
cages formed by the boron atoms. Superimposing the two 
molecules, the 60 carbon atoms on the boron hydride molecules 
match up with the hydride molecule's 60 faces, while each of the 
32 boron atoms would fall smack in the middle of the faces 
formed by the carbon atoms. 
  You can calculate the number of matches using the 
Descartes-Euler formula, which describes the fit between the two 
types of molecules by summing the number of faces and the number 
of atoms in the vertices (less two). In closed geometrical 
structures, contacts represent the connecting lines between 
vertices; in molecules--they represent the shortest distances 
between neighboring atoms. 
  Like fullerenes, hollow boron molecules should have new 
useful properties. Lipscomb and Massa suggest chemists try to 
make closed boron hydrides using laser beams to vaporize a 
calcium boron compound in the presence of hydrogen. 
  SCIENCE NEWS, 20 June 1992, Vol. 141, No. 25, p. 
406. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42462 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma007___94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Bulletins of Foreign S&amp;T Information </ABS>
<DATE1>   16 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<F P=101>   COMPUTER EQUIPMENT </F>
<H3> <TI>   IBM and Hewlett-Packard Innovations </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  11111111 </F>
<F P=103> 11111111 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:CSO 

  [Text]On 21 September IBM and Hewlett-Packard planned to 
report, 
independently of each other, on the production of new 
high-performance personal computers to increase their share of 
the sales market. 
  IBM Corporation, the largest manufacturer of computers in 
the 
world, will demonstrate a number of its PS/2 series PC's with a 
three-year service guarantee in New York which it plans to 
promote as computers for commercial users. And in the beginning 
of September, IBM reported on the production of a new cheap PS/1 
series system that is designed for use in small offices and 
under everyday conditions. 
  Five new table-top systems, three servers, three monitors, 
and four personal computers with audio and video capabilities 
are in the PS/2 series. The firm's OS/2 version 2.0 operating 
system will be loaded in all of the systems beforehand and all 
of them will be based on IBM's "microchannel" architecture. An 
IBM spokesman refused to provide any detailed description of the 
product whatsoever. Personal Computer Company, a new IBM 
subsidiary enterprise with headquarters in Somers (New York), 
will be involved in marketing the expanded PS/2 series. 
  According to information from IBM spokesmen, the firm's 
income from production of PC's totaled $7 billion in 1991, 
however, IBM's "Personal Business" Division head J. Canavino 
refused to provide a prediction for next year. 
  Hewlett-Packard plans to offer four high-class personal 
computers, manufactured based on the 80486 microprocessor, with 
a starting price of $1,149. Hewlett-Packard, whose income 
totaled $14.5 billion in 1991, is known primarily as a 
manufacturer of printers, automated work stations, and 
measurement equipment. According to expert assessments, printers 
account for 25% of the company's profits and personal 
computers 
only account for 5%. 
  In August, Hewlett-Packard reduced prices on its personal 
computers by more than 25% while attempting to remain 
competitive in the market. According to the company's official 
statement, the new series of computers, which have received the 
name Vectra 486N PC, are $400 cheaper than comparable items from 
Compaq Computer Company. 
  New York (Reuters), 3 September 1992; 24 September 
1992. 
<H5>  Cray Receives Contract from NASA </H5>
  Cray Research has received a NASA contract worth $74 million 
for the delivery of a high-speed computer, beating out such 
competitors as Japan's NEC Corp. and its American marketing 
partner Control Data Systems. 
  The computer is needed by NASA experts from Ames Scientific 
Research Center (Mountain View, California) to assist in the 
design and conduct of tests of new design aircraft and 
spacecraft. This center became the first to utilize numerical 
modeling on a computer to replace certain expensive and 
time-consuming tests of models of aircraft in a wind tunnel. 
  Hundreds of scientists from government, industrial, and 
scientific organizations utilize the computer installed at Ames 
Scientific Research Center in their work. 
  Cray received a seven year contract. The order for the 
computer that was issued by Ames Scientific Research Center 
became the first joint marketing effort between Control Data 
Systems and NEC after they signed a cooperation agreement in 
January 1992. 
  Control Data Systems (Arden Hills) became the successor of 
Control Data (currently Seridien) for conducting calculations on 
a computer. 
  NASA awarded the contract to the American firm in response 
to 
NEC's efforts to introduce high-speed computers in the American 
government market, in which Cray is the leader. Having received 
at one time a Canadian Meteorological Service contract, beating 
out Cray in the process, NEC filed suit against NASA in Federal 
Court, accusing the agency of a pro-American policy, and won the 
right to compete in the competition along with Cray. 
  According to NASA spokesmen, Cray won the contract thanks to 
the superiority of the specifications of its new C-90 computer 
and the firm's reputation as a long-standing, reliable, and 
profitable partner. The C-90 computer will replace the Cray-2 
computer, which has been utilized at the Ames Scientific 
Research Center since 1985. 
  Cray made a profit in the amount of $113 million with income 
of $862.5 million in 1991. 
  AP, 3 September 1992. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42463 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma007___94006" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Bulletins of Foreign S&amp;T Information </ABS>
<DATE1>   16 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<F P=101>   POWER ENGINEERING </F>
<H3> <TI>   Prospects for Solar Power Engineering in Japan </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  11111111 </F>
<F P=103> 11111111 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:CSO 

  [Text] Solar batteries, the energy of which is being used 
to operate 
air conditioners, have been installed in a building at Sanyo 
Electric enterprise (Island of Avadzi [transliterated], Western 
Japan). 
  Utilization of solar energy as an ecologically clean source 
is becoming increasingly attractive as a result of growing alarm 
due to the harmful aftereffects for the planet's ecology of the 
combustion of fossil fuels. The volume of world production of 
solar batteries have dramatically increased recently, although 
their share in the overall production of energy remains quite 
insignificant. The total output of solar batteries in 1991 
increased to 55 MVt (which is equivalent to the output of a 
small generator plant), in contrast to practically zero in 1977. 
  Japan's share in world production of solar batteries has 
increased in the last several years and totaled 36% in 
1991. 
The U.S.' share totals 30% and the EEC countries' share 
is 24%. 
  So far, solar batteries have been employed in a quite 
limited 
assortment of items. They are primarily used in calculators and 
watches, devices with low energy consumption, and the 
utilization of solar batteries in them was dictated by 
convenience rather than economic or ecological considerations. 
  The main problem preventing the broader introduction of 
solar 
batteries is their high cost. Although the installation of solar 
batteries permits a dramatic reduction of expenditures for 
electrical energy, the user must initially spend 1.5 million yen 
($12,000) on that system. 
  Sanyo is cooperating with Misawa Homes design home-building 
company in the construction of homes equipped with solar 
batteries. According to the calculations of Sanyo experts, 
expenditures on the installation of solar batteries in the 
amount of 6 million yen ($49,000) will be recouped in just 10 
years. They need to increase the batteries' efficiency 
(depending on the type of element) and reduce their cost in 
order to expand the sales market for these batteries. 
  Elements produced by Kiosera, the second largest 
manufacturer 
of solar batteries, based on semicrystallized silica, have the 
greatest efficiency (16%). These elements are expensive to 
produce (the energy expended in their manufacture is recovered 
in two years) and must be subjected to temperatures of 
1,500C in the manufacturing process. 
  Sanyo's elements are made from amorphous silica and are more 
efficient: A temperature of approximately 300C is required 
for their manufacture, the energy transformation coefficient is 
more than 10%, and the expended energy is recovered 
within a 
year. Sanyo stated that expenditures for the production of 
elements made from amorphous silica do not exceed $5 per kVt. 
Expenditures should significantly decrease in mass production: 
up to $1 per kVt by the year 2000, based on the firm's plans. 
  Firms that manufacture solar batteries hope to expand their 
sphere of employment--from autonomous devices like outside 
spotlights, which are recharged during the day for operation at 
night, to electromobiles with hybrid engines, to building 
electrical supplies. 
  Looking to the future, Sanyo experts have promoted Project 
GENESIS (a global energy network based on solar batteries and 
international superconductor transmission lines), in accordance 
with which deserts in various countries of the world will be 
covered by a network of solar stations, the energy of which will 
flow into populated areas through a network of superconducting 
cables. So far, implementation of this project is impossible due 
to economic considerations, however, the situation will change 
with time. 
  SUMOTO (Reuters), 14 September 1992. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42464 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma007___94007" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Bulletins of Foreign S&amp;T Information </ABS>
<DATE1>   16 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<F P=101>   NEW TECHNOLOGIES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Processing Explosives into Fertilizers </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  11111111 </F>
<F P=103> 11111111 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:CSO 

  [Text] Germany Army specialists have decided to process 
20,000 
tonnes of explosives into fertilizers. The explosives were used 
in mortar and missile rounds that were inherited from the army 
of the former GDR. 
  The explosives (nitrocellulose, nitroglycerine, and 
dinitrotoluene) will be subjected to microbiological processing 
and transformed into fertilizers. The mortar rounds are being 
dismantled at the Spreewerk Luebben plant located southeast of 
Berlin. The explosives are placed in a solution and "cooked" by 
chemical hydrolysis, a process that renders the solution 
nonexplosive and reduces the material to microbe-sized morsels. 
Dinitrotoluene is additionally "cooked" by alkali fusion at high 
temperature to break down toxic anilines that are a component of 
this explosive. 
  Later the solution, a mixture of cellulose, glycerol, and 
nitric acid, undergoes microbiological processing. A. Dahn, a 
spokesman for Berlin's BS Engineering and Contracting, which 
developed the explosives scrapping process, says the bacteria 
can be found in processed water from treatment plants. A sludge 
containing ammonium nitrate which can be dried, composted, and 
used to fertilize the soil remains as a result of the explosives 
processing process. 
  Although processing explosives is not the simplest and 
cheapest technology to produce fertilizers, it may prove to be 
the best way to dispose of explosives in Germany. Combustion of 
the explosives in furnaces is practically unacceptable because 
it would take approximately five years just to obtain the 
license for this technology. And even if the incinerator's 
technical specifications meet the standards, the cost of just 
the stack scrubbers alone would total approximately 75 million 
marks (&pound;25 million). 
  In Dahn's words, &pound;1.5 million were required to 
develop the 
explosives microbiological scrapping process, and initiating the 
experiments and construction of the explosives scrapping plant 
on an industrial scale will require another &pound;4.7 million. 
He 
estimates the plant will be able to process the entire stockpile 
of explosives in five to 10 years. 
  NEW SCIENTIST, 8 August 1992, Vol. 135, No. 1833, p. 
9. 
<H5>  Tire Scrapping Technology </H5>
  Britain's AEA Technology has developed a cheap technology to 
process old automobile tires into gas, oil, and other products. 
The technology is based on the separation of tire materials 
under the impact of high temperature. The developers say that 
this technology is cleaner and more economical than scrapping 
tires through incineration. 
  A pilot plant has been tested at an AEA Technology test site 
near London. Tires are heated up to 1,080C in a kiln and, 
in the process, two fuels, gas and oil, a substance rich in 
high-quality carbon, and steel were separated. The kiln is 
equipped with a condenser to recover oils and with a gas 
scrubber. 
  AEA Technology sold the first commercial MPD (Multi-Purpose 
Disposer) plant to an American firm that will manufacture and 
sell the plant in North America. 
  Each plant that operates based upon the new technology can 
handle 1,000 kg of tires in less than nine hours. Two hundred 
[as published] plants can be linked up to annually process 
14,000 tonnes. Each tonne of European-produced tires produces up 
to 220 kg of aromatic oils, 240 kg of gas, 420 kg of carbon, and 
160 kg of steel. 
  The carbon-containing element that is formed when the tires 
are scrapped is of sufficiently high quality and calorific value 
that it can be used either in filters or as a fuel. The oil and 
gas can be pumped straight into nearby thermal electric plants 
using pipelines. 
  Its developers state that the MPD system meets all of the 
clean air standards that have been adopted in the countries of 
Europe at the present time and could be licensed in any state of 
the United States, except California, where clean air standards 
surpass world standards at the present time. The unit requires 
relatively simple refinements to meet those standards. 
  NEW SCIENTIST, 29 August 1992, Vol. 135, No. 1836, p. 
21. 
<H5>  Electricity Extinguishes Fires </H5>
  Israeli experts from Ben-Gurion University (Beer-Sheva) have 
developed a fire extinguishing device, the principle of 
operation of which is based on the phenomenon of so-called 
electric wind that is capable of putting out any flame on a flat 
surface, for example, a rug or a pool of burning oil. The device 
has a diameter of one meter and does not have a harmful impact 
on the environment because the use of water, foam, or Halon gas 
are not required for its operation. 
  The device consists of two electrodes--a flat electrode and 
a 
sharp electrode. When voltage is applied to them, an electrical 
field is formed, which is much more dense near the sharp 
electrode. If the field is large enough, atoms near the sharp 
electrode lose electrons which are transformed into 
positively-charged ions and, propelled by the field, move away 
from the sharp electrode, in the process interacting with other, 
neutral atoms. This movement of atoms and positive ions is 
called electric wind. 
  Israeli experts searched for the optimal shape and 
orientation of the sharp electrode to use electric wind to blow 
out fires. The flat burning surface acts as the other electrode. 
A meter-long wire attached to a metal frame and connected to a 
direct current source was utilized as the first electrode. 
  A flame is blown out when the wire is moved by hand over the 
fire at a height of less than 10 cm from the surface at a rate 
of approximately one meter per second. The electric wind 
separates the flames from the burning material and rapidly cools 
the material below its ignition temperature. 
  The developers say that the fire extinguishing device should 
be very cheap because it is manufactured from simple components 
and has low energy consumption. 
  Tel-Aviv's Spectronix is developing a commercial version of 
the device. It is possible that production of the new device 
will begin in several months. 
  NEW SCIENTIST, 15 August 1992, Vol. 135, No. 1834, p. 
20. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42465 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma007___94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Bulletins of Foreign S&amp;T Information </ABS>
<DATE1>   16 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<F P=101>   INSTRUMENT BUILDING </F>
<H3> <TI>   Shortcomings of Atomic Microscope </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  11111111 </F>
<F P=103> 11111111 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:CSO 

  [Text] We obtain a depiction of the structure of the 
landscape of a 
material in an atomic microscope based on the forces of 
interaction between atoms in a microprobe and the material under 
investigation. However, Swiss scientists warn that imperfections 
in the tips can lead to spurious results. 
  In the 1 June APPLIED PHYSICS LETTERS a case of an atomic 
microscope misrepresenting the topography of a diamond film is 
described. Examinations with a scanning electron microscope and 
a scanning tunneling microscope revealed that the film surface 
consists of sharp facets and edges formed by oriented crystals. 
The atomic microscope presented this surface in the shape of 
truncated pyramids, and the microprobe's tip had that same 
squared-off shape. 
  Microprobe tips are etched in batches from silicon wafers. 
The scientists found three flawed tips in a batch of 10. Dust or 
imperfect processing technology could have been the cause of the 
flaws. Scientists see the solution to the situation in 
scientists calibrating the tips before beginning experiments. 
  SCIENCE NEWS, 13 June 1992, No. 24, p. 399. 
<H5>  VIPER Explosives Detector </H5>
  I. Cambridge (a division of Meggitt Control) is offering the 
VIPER (Vapor Intensifier for Plastic Explosive Recognition) 
portable explosives detector that permits the detection of 
particles and vapors of plastic explosives. 
  Detection of plastic explosives is a difficult task due to 
the low pressure of the vapors emitted by them. However, a trace 
of explosive is adequate for the VIPER detector and therefore it 
can be utilized to detect such explosives as hexogen, PETN, and 
semtex, and also the more broadly used trinitrotoluene and 
dynamite. The instrument is easy to use. Collection of samples 
can be done using a vacuum technique or by wiping a surface with 
a special cloth. Samples taken for the content of both vapors 
and also particles of explosives are processed identically and 
are placed in an analyzer. 
  The VIPER detector has already undergone testing at the Lima 
Peru airport, where it was used to inspect the baggage of all 
passengers of three international American airlines for three 
days. Security forces managed to completely inspect 
approximately 1,000 items for explosives content thanks to the 
detector's rapid operation (no more than three seconds) and 
operation in real time with a low probability of false alarm. 
  INTERSEC, July-August 1992, Vol. 2, No. 3, p. 103. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42466 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma007___94009" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Bulletins of Foreign S&amp;T Information </ABS>
<DATE1>   16 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<F P=101>   AUTOMOBILE MAKING </F>
<H3> <TI>   Mitsubishi's New 3000GT Automobile </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  11111111 </F>
<F P=103> 11111111 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:CSO 

  [Text] Japan's Mitsubishi has manufactured a new model of 
the 3000GT 
automobile, to which the definition of "leading technology" has 
been totally applied. This is an all-wheel drive automobile with 
a V-shaped twin-engine with a turbocharger, an antilock braking 
system, electronically controlled suspension, and an aerodynamic 
shape that can be adjusted depending on speed. Comfort, safety, 
and ease of driving is ensured thanks to the use of all of the 
systems listed above. 
  The new automobile is capable of reaching speeds of up to 
250 
kph and can accelerate from 0-100 kph in 5.9 seconds. This 
automobile demonstrated the capability to move at a speed of 56 
kph in fifth gear in anticipation of the moment when road 
conditions would permit it to reach normal speed on the heavily 
traveled roads of Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire. 
  The engine operates quietly with the drive shaft at more 
than 
1,000 rpm and a speed of 48 kph and emits a melodic hum when 
shifted into the upper gears at 6,000 rpm and higher. The 
Mitsubishi 3000GT has surprisingly low road noise for an 
automobile with 17-inch (432 mm) wheels and very low-placed 
tires (SP 8060 tires specially developed for the sports car by 
Dunlop). 
  The automobile is equipped with an air conditioner and 
driver-side air bag. The rear seats play an auxiliary role and 
do not provide adequate comfort; the rear portion of the coupe 
is designed more for storing baggage, for which the rear hatch 
can be raised. 
  The Mitsubishi 3000GT is being offered in a four-seat 
variant 
for &pound;35,500, which is &pound;20,000 cheaper than Honda's 
NS-X 
two-seat model of that same class and nearly &pound;4,000 cheaper 
than a Porsche-968. However, the Mitsubishi 3000GT is more 
expensive than Nissan's 300ZX (&pound;32,775) and the just 
produced 
Subaru SVX model (&pound;27,996). 
  One hundred 3000GT automobiles will be shipped to Great 
Britain in 1992 and orders have been received for more than half 
of the shipment. 
  The English market for sports cars and coupe models with 
high 
specifications went down from 11,100 vehicles in 1990 to 7,481 
vehicles in 1991. A total of 2,965 vehicles of that type were 
sold during the first half of 1992. Experts think that the 
overall economic decline, increased insurance payments, and also 
the stricter actions of law enforcement agencies with regard to 
individuals who exceed the speed limit is the cause of the 
decline in demand. 
  FINANCIAL TIMES, 1 August 1992, p. VIII. 
<H5>  Sale of Allison Transmission </H5>
  General Motors has decided to sell its Allison Transmission 
subsidiary, which specialized in the production of transmissions 
for heavy trucks, to the West German company ZF Friedrichshafen. 
The deal must be approved by the governments of both interested 
parties and, according to plans, will enter into force at the 
end of 1992. Details of the agreement are not being released. 
According to General Motors Vice President L. Royce, his firm 
will continue to count on deliveries from Allison Transmission. 
  The ZF Plant, with headquarters in Friedrichshafen, is 
valued 
at $4 billion and specializes in deliveries of transmissions, 
suspensions, and control devices to the world market. 
Acquisition of the Allison Transmission subsidiary will assist 
ZF to develop a long-term strategy for the production of 
world-class power plants for a wide circle of purchasers 
throughout the world. 
  An official ZF spokesman said that the German company plans 
to retain Allison's leadership and staff of workers 
(approximately 5,000 people) and will continue production of 
automatic transmissions for trucks, buses, off-road vehicles, 
and military vehicles in Indianapolis. 
  Thirty three thousand people in 49 of the world's countries 
work at ZF plants and the company made an annual income of $3.8 
billion in 1991. 
  General Motors is offering another subsidiary for sale in 
Indianapolis--Allison Gas Turbine--however, a purchaser has not 
yet been found. The activities of Allison Gas Turbine depended 
primarily on military contracts, but this subsidiary has been 
increasingly oriented toward the civilian market in the last 
several years. Allison Gas Turbine develops aircraft engines for 
new aircraft that are being operated on regional airlines and 
also for personal business aircraft, that is, it specializes in 
a sphere where obtaining profits is only possible after several 
years. 
  General Motors has already informed the personnel of Allison 
Gas Turbine about the shutdown of production. 
  AP, 5 August 1992. 
<H5>  Robot To Replace Oil in Automobile Engine </H5>
  On 16 September, the Japanese firm Idemitsu Kosan began to 
sell an innovation for automobile owners--the Oiru Robo device 
for automatic replacement of oil in an automobile engine. 
  The entire operation is carried out in three steps, and the 
participation of an individual ends at the first stage when the 
"on" button is pushed. After that, the "oil robot" pumps the old 
oil out of the vehicle and pumps in exactly the same amount of 
new oil. Replacement of 3.5 liters of oil takes five minutes. 
Utilization of the new device will permit a reduction of 
one-third in the time a client needs to stay at a gas station 
where these types of services are offered. 
  ITAR-TASS, 19 September 1992. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42467 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma007___94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Bulletins of Foreign S&amp;T Information </ABS>
<DATE1>   16 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<F P=101>   NEW MATERIALS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Solid, Lighter than Air Material </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  11111111 </F>
<F P=103> 11111111 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:CSO 

  [Text] A team of American scientists from Livermore National 
Laboratory (California) under the leadership of R. Morrison have 
invented the new porous material Seagel with such a low density 
that the scientists' say it would float away if it were not 
weighed down by the air trapped in its microscopic pores. 
  Seagel, which is biodegradable, was obtained by processing 
agar, a component of brown algae [kelp] that is widely used as a 
thickener during the preparation of food items such as ice 
cream. Its developers say that Seagel is also suitable for food 
and only carbon dioxide and water are formed during its 
combustion. 
  To obtain Seagel, agar is first dissolved in water and then 
an organic solvent and an emulsifying agent are added to the 
mixture which disperses the agar evenly throughout the liquid as 
tiny droplets. The liquid then sets into a gel and is 
freeze-dried to obtain the final product. Depending on the 
conditions of the process and the concentration of the initial 
products, you can obtain a material with different properties 
depending on the individual application: from packaging 
materials to slow-release capsules for medicines. 
  Seagel should find the greatest application with a density 
of 
40-50 mg/cm[.sup]3[/]. This compares with the 60 
mg/cm[.sup]3[/] density of balsa wood, which is widely used 
as an insulating material in supertankers and as a 
noise-absorbing material in high-speed trains. Seagel can also 
replace polyurethane and polystyrene styrofoam, however, you 
need to take into account that the material must be hermetically 
sealed because it dissolves in water at a temperature of 
approximately 50C. However, even this property can be 
useful if Seagel is used as a mold for casting because it 
permits it to be easily washed away to reveal the finished 
product. 
  NEW SCIENTIST, 15 August 1992, Vol. 135, No. 1834, p. 
19. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42468 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma007___94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Bulletins of Foreign S&amp;T Information </ABS>
<DATE1>   16 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<F P=101>   ECONOMICS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Japan Proposes Scientific Research Effectiveness Criteria </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  11111111 </F>
<F P=103> 11111111 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:CSO 

  [Text] Japan is still inadequately allocating resources for 
scientific research in contrast to other industrially developed 
countries, despite the enormous growth of appropriations in this 
sphere over the last two decades. The Ministry of Foreign Trade 
and Industry, which sets the direction of the country's economic 
development, highlighted this problem in the latest issue of a 
White Paper, suggesting the introduction of the indicator 
Technostock as a yardstick for scientific research results. 
  Technostock is the total amount spent on research and 
development taking into consideration the obsolescence factor. 
To calculate Technostock, R&amp;D expenditures are multiplied by 
the 
Technoflow factor, the amount of which is lower than one and 
depends on the time required to introduce new technology. 
Technoflow is added to Technostock for the previous year, taken 
also with the obsolescence factor, and the resulting sum is the 
Technostock for that year. 
  There are two kinds of Technostock: the first calculates 
expenditures for production and profits and the 
second--so-called intellectual property. 
  Japan has been rapidly catching up with the United States in 
production-directed Technostock. For the period 1970-1988, this 
indicator increased by 608% in Japan and by a total of 
10.8% 
in the United States, although in 1970 the United States had 31 
times as much production-directed Technostock as Japan. In 1988, 
the gap had narrowed to 4.8. Japan's intellectual property 
indicator rose 320% and that of the U.S.--50%--for 
the period 
indicated. The gap between the countries narrowed from 15:1 in 
favor of the United States in 1970 to 5:1 in 1988. In the 
process, the gap in total GNP between Japan and the United 
States has been closing even faster. In 1988, the GNP of the 
United States was only 1.7 times that of Japan. 
  Japan lags behind not only the United States but also Great 
Britain, France, and Germany in the intellectual property 
indicator and in the number of published scientific papers. Only 
R&amp;D expenditures and the number of patents applied for in 
other 
countries were growing in line with GNP. 
  The White Paper recommends strengthening basic scientific 
research while considering the results of a poll taken among 
university and public officials that suggested assigning 
priority to work in the areas of the ecology and energy-saving 
technologies. 
  NEW SCIENTIST, 29 August 1992, Vol. 135, No. 1836, p. 
8. 
<H5>  Expenditures on Space Programs </H5>
  The cost of civilian space exploration being carried out by 
approximately 25 countries and international organizations is 
assessed at $25 billion today. According to data in SPACE NEWS, 
the United States, France, Japan, and China alone are annually 
spending more than $1 billion on these needs. 
  NASA, with an annual budget of $14.7 billion which is spent 
primarily on spacecraft, surveillance satellites, and the 
development of the Freedom Space Station, remains the main space 
exploration center. NASA's main partner on the continent is 
Canada ($292 million). Brazil annually allocates $100 million 
for the launch of satellites and Argentina--$10 million for the 
launch of satellites to conduct astronomical exploration. 
  France, which spends $1.38 billion per year, leads on the 
European Continent. Italy ($973.4 million), Germany ($969 
million), and Great Britain ($206.6 million) follow. According 
to official data, Russia allocates $741 million per year on 
space programs. 
  In Asia, the space budget of two countries exceeds a billion 
dollars. They are Japan ($1.262 billion) and China ($1.2 
billion). China spends its resources primarily on launches, for 
communications satellites and for meteorological satellites. 
India, Taiwan, South Korea, and Pakistan also participate in 
this activity. 
  Australia allocates $13 million per year for space 
exploration. Only the RSA [Republic of South Africa] is 
represented in space from countries on the African Continent. 
  The European Space Agency (ESA), with a budget of $3 billion 
per year consisting of contributions from 14 European states, 
coordinates European space programs. Canada is an associate 
member of ESA, and ESA, in turn, is participating in the 
development of the Freedom Space Station with a 10% share. 
  Washington (AFP), 2 September 1992. 
<H5>  Germany Increases Amount of Financing for Scientific Research </H5>
  Germany's Ministry of Research and Technology has a 3.55 
billion budget for this year, or more than a 3.8% 
increase as 
compared to the 1991 level. A large part of the allocated 
resources is earmarked for eastern Germany. In 1993, &pound;627 
million or 18% of the science budget will be invested to 
build 
up research on the territory of the former GDR, which signifies 
an increase in appropriations of 9.8% compared to the 1992 
level. Approximately &pound;100 million from this amount is being 
designated for universities. 
  The increase in financing comes in the wake of reports by 
government and private agencies that the quality of research in 
eastern Germany still lags far behind. 
  Research into climate, ecology, and public health won the 
largest increases in funding. The Ministry of Research and 
Technology has allocated &pound;5.7 million for this purpose. 
  In its space strategy, Germany is shifting from large-scale 
manned flights toward unmanned flights and the expansion of 
sensing from space, and is conducting negotiations with the CIS 
countries about expanding cooperation in space research. 
  NEW SCIENTIST, 25 July 1992, Vol. 135, No. 1831, p. 
4 
<H5>  Siemens and Philips Joint Ventures in Germany and China </H5>
  The EEC Commission intends to conduct a study of certain 
agreements between Siemens (Germany) and the German subsidiary 
of the Dutch firm Philips Electronics in accordance with the law 
on company mergers. 
  According to the Commission's data, documentation will be 
studied on the transfer of Philips cable plants in Koln and 
Nurnberg to its German joint venture with 
Siemens--Nachrichtenkabel und Anlagen. 
  In December 1991, Philips reported negotiations on the 
transfer of its German and Dutch cable and optical fiber 
manufacturing enterprises to Siemens. 
  The EEC Commission task also includes studying Siemens' 
plans 
to repurchase from Philips half of the share in the Chinese firm 
Yangtze Optical Fiber and Cable Company. The remaining 
50% of 
the capital belongs to Chinese organizations. 
  The EEC Commission intends to investigate Siemens' plans to 
increase its share in the German firm Norddeutsch Zeekabelwerke, 
which specializes in the production of cables and measurement 
equipment. 
  The EEC Commission has four weeks to ascertain if the 
Siemens 
and Philips agreement will inflict damage on the situation in 
the European Common Market. In the event serious doubts exist in 
the advisability of the deal, a more thorough four-month study 
of the state of affairs will be conducted. The Commission has 
the right to change the terms and even block an agreement that 
lessens competition. 
  Brussels (AP), 9 September 1992. 
<H5>  South Korea Finances Leading Technology Projects </H5>
  In the middle of August, South Korea's Ministry of Science 
and Technology announced the first projects proposed within the 
framework of government efforts directed at achieving the 
technological level of Japan and the leading Western countries 
by the beginning of the 21st century. 
  The government program, assessed at $6 billion, is known as 
the G-7 project (seven is the number of countries that are at 
the level which South Korea intends to achieve. Besides Japan, 
they are the United States, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, and 
Great Britain). The South Korean Government plans to invest more 
than 2,400 billion won (790 won = $1) into the project by 2001 
matched by a similar amount from the country's industry. 
  The announced projects encompass three of the 14 scientific 
research areas (new pharmaceutical and agrochemical substances, 
new materials, and new functional biomaterials) and come under 
the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Science and Technology. 
Other projects, covering such areas as high-definition 
television, semiconductors, communications lines, and automated 
manufacturing systems, will be announced shortly by other 
ministries. 
  More than 20 government institutes, 50 universities, and 60 
private companies will participate in the already announced 
projects. The Korea Institute of Science and Technology [KIST] 
and the Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology [KRICT] 
will lead the research. The industrial firms participating 
include such conglomerates as Hyundai, Samsung, Daewoo, and also 
several pharmaceutical companies. 
  In 1992, the government and industrial firms allocated 27 
billion won ($34 million) to develop the three indicated 
research areas. Distribution of approximately half of these 
budget resources was cited in a table and more complete 
information will be published in several months (the data was 
expressed in millions of won). 
  Dozens of pharmaceutical companies and several universities 
will participate in research in the sphere of new medicines and 
vaccines, to which a large portion of budget resources has been 
allocated. Two nonprofit government-industry consortiums--the 
New Medicine Development Consortium and the Genetic Engineering 
Research Consortium--have been established. 
  Hyundai, Samsung, and Daewoo have supported research to 
develop new ceramic materials for use in the heavy industry, 
automobile, and electronic sectors. But so far there is no sign 
of cooperation proposals from other countries, as the South 
Korean Government had hoped. 
  NATURE, 20 August 1992, Vol. 358, No. 6388, p. 613. 
<H5>  R&amp;D Expenditures in OECD Countries </H5>
  The Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD), which includes 24 industrially developed countries, has 
published information on the organization's member-countries' 
expenditures for the conduct of scientific-research and 
experimental design work. The OECD has published this 
information for the first time, which provides the opportunity 
to conduct an accurate comparison of R&amp;D expenditures in the 
United States, Japan, and the European Community countries. 
  Per capita R&amp;D expenditures in the EC countries total 
$310 
per year, as compared to $510 in Japan and $600 in the United 
States. In the process, these expenditures account for 2% 
of 
Gross National Product in the EC countries, 2.9% in 
Japan, and 
2.8% in the United States. 
  However, government appropriations for R&amp;D in the EC 
countries cover 17.7% of total expenditures for this work, 
compared to 8% in Japan and 12.4% in the United 
States. 
  NEW SCIENTIST, 18 July 1992, Vol. 135, No. 1830, p. 
11. 
<H5>  Tax on Packaging </H5>
  One of the most complex issues that manufacturers, 
ecological 
experts, and government organizations of the world's various 
countries face right now is the continuously growing amount of 
packaging materials that are used. 
  Until recently, the adoption of stricter decrees that 
provide 
for the government's increased role was proposed as the solution 
to this issue. These are legislative acts that oblige 
manufacturers to collect and reuse used packaging materials in 
increasingly large quantities and also attempt to establish 
quantitative indicators of the increase of the percentage of 
wastes that are reused. Decisions were also made to ban certain 
methods of destroying used packaging materials, such as burning 
them. 
  The social and economic research center in the sphere of 
global ecology thinks that using market laws is the most 
effective method to resolve the problem. Center experts think 
that we need to create conditions so that the minimum possible 
amount of material is used during the manufacture of packaging 
and introduce economic incentives to intensify the collection 
and processing of used packaging we must do. 
  The introduction of a progressive tax on packaging 
materials, 
the amount of which would depend on the degree of danger this 
type of packaging poses for the environment, is being proposed 
as the best solution. It can be levied both directly by 
government agencies and also by the manufacturers themselves in 
the form of an additional collection. In this case, the market 
will determine the best method to package goods. 
  It is proposed introducing three indicators as a general 
established range on which the amount of the tax will depend in 
order to ensure practical implementation of the approach "let 
the polluter pay." The former takes into account the ratio of 
the weight of the packaging to its volume, the second--the 
number of times the packaging has been used, and the third--the 
cost of collecting and reprocessing used packaging. So, if the 
packaging manufacturer reduces its relative weight (the ratio of 
the weight of the packaging to the volume occupied by the 
packaged goods), the tax will be reduced correspondingly. The 
same will occur in the event of an increase of the number of 
times the packaging has been used. 
  As a result, an "additional" portion of the cost of 
packaging 
must be reduced to the amount of compensation for harming the 
environment which is a consequence of just the process of 
manufacturing and transporting packaging materials. Questions 
regarding other sources of environmental pollution, like the 
process of extracting bauxites that are needed to obtain 
material for aluminum cans, will be resolved separately by 
government organizations. Introduction of an additional 
collection to the cost of packaging to compensate for the impact 
of similar sources of pollution would result in the emergence of 
ineffective dual taxation. 
  The obvious difficulty when introducing a new tax system 
will 
consist of the fact that its amount will be different for 
various countries and various goods. So, the cost of avoiding 
the use of packaging in the United States will be much lower 
than in the Netherlands. In part this can be explained by the 
fact that there is a risk of obtaining a swimming pool during an 
attempt to dig a garbage pit. So, new taxes must be calculated 
on national and possibly even regional levels. Practical 
problems of organizing tax collection and their impact on the 
international trade process also arise. 
  Preliminary calculations of the amount of taxes for various 
types of packaging have led to interesting results. So, if we 
examine various types of containers used to package nonalcoholic 
beverages in Great Britain, the least amount of tax is for a 
cardboard container (obviously, primarily due to its low 
weight), the amount of tax will be higher for plastic bottles 
(made of polyethylene terephthalate), still higher for reusable 
(an average of 14 times) glass bottles, and also for aluminum 
cans. The tax for heavy glass disposable bottles is very high. 
  The listed calculations were conducted by independent 
researchers using specialists of the Swedish firm Tetra Pack, 
which is the largest producer of multilayer cardboard beverage 
cartons in the world. 
  FINANCIAL TIMES, 24 June 1992, p. 12. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42469 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma007___94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Bulletins of Foreign S&amp;T Information </ABS>
<DATE1>   16 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<F P=101>   VARIOUS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Wheelchair Permits Disabled Persons To Move While Standing </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  11111111 </F>
<F P=103> 11111111 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:CSO 

  [Text] Rollei AB (Skelleftea, northern Sweden) has 
developed a new 
type of wheelchair with which a disabled person can be moved not 
only in the sitting position but also while standing at full 
height. Its developers--the firm's owners, the Degermans, father 
and son--are currently involved with manufacturing a prototype 
of this chair, which has received the designation RTS (Raise To 
Standing). 
  The RTS wheelchair can be gradually adjusted for height. 
Instead of ordinary belts to secure the position of the body, a 
disabled person can use front and side supports. Electric 
drives, control of which is carried out using switches located 
on the armrests and at the chair level, are used to change 
position and other operations. A person can stand in the chair 
not only straight up but also with a slight forward incline: 
that position is recommended as promoting strengthening of the 
skeletal system. 
  The inventors say that "this is not the first wheelchair 
that 
permits a disabled person to assume a vertical position, but it 
is the first one in which a disabled person can move in the 
vertical position." To do that, wheels equipped with hand rings 
which permit a disabled person to rotate the wheels have been 
made in such a way that they are accessible from any of the 
disabled person's body positions. These wheels are comparatively 
small in diameter in order to permit the wheelchair to be 
maneuvered in a restricted space. The fact that the chair's 
armrests are retractable downward and the disabled person can 
leave the chair from one of its sides is another advantage. 
  The RTS wheelchair is specifically recommended for patients 
who are paraplegics, polio sufferers, or people suffering from 
rheumatic diseases. A user of the wheelchair obtains greater 
independence, thanks to which a person's self-confidence 
increases. From the medical point of view, breathing is eased 
and digestion and blood circulation improve when the body is in 
a vertical position. 
  After some refinements, the RTS wheelchair will be ready for 
testing at the Swedish Institute for Problems of Disabled 
Persons and then for series production. The item has been 
patented; its development was financed by the Swedish National 
Committee for Industrial and Technical Development (NUTEK). 
  Rollei AB has already previously developed and produces 
several models of special wheelchairs. One of them, "Partner," 
facilitates accomplishment of various labor operations for the 
user. It is comfortable, height-adjustable using an electric 
drive, and has small dimensions. The other chair helps a 
disabled person to perform his natural hygiene needs. 
  International Swedish Press Bureau, 29 June 1992. 
<H5>  [No 42, 20 October 1992, pp 1-55] </H5>
  [Text] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-42470 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuma007___94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UMA-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Military Affairs Bulletins of Foreign S&amp;T Information </ABS>
<DATE1>   16 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<F P=101>   "Mosaeroshow-92" Russian Aerospace Exhibition (Survey) </F>
<H3> <TI>   6. Aircraft Armament </TI></H3>
<H4>   Air-to-Air Missiles </H4>
<F P=102> 11111111 </F>
<F P=103> 11111111 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:CSO 

  [Text] The Vympel Moscow State Machine-Building Design 
Bureau 
(GosMKB), which is entering into an association with 
Spetstekhnika, demonstrated aircraft guided missiles at the 
exhibition for the first time. A comparison of the data reported 
by the KB [Design Bureau] with the specifications of foreign 
missiles indicates that domestically produced missiles, as a 
rule, have somewhat larger dimensions and launch weight but a 
greater launch range, although the numbers clearly characterize 
the maximum unaimed range in the majority of cases. The emphasis 
on the development of medium-range missiles in Russia draws 
attention: the family of R-27 missiles has a large number of 
different variants that are equipped with various homing 
systems, in contrast to similar foreign missiles. A number of 
Russian missiles, especially the latest generation of 
series-produced R-73's and the newly developed RVV-AE 
generation, have substantial design innovations (for example, 
combined aerogasdynamic guidance and latticed control surfaces) 
that permit them to provide heightened maneuvering 
characteristics to missiles in contrast to similar foreign 
missiles. A brief description of Russian missiles with an 
indication of their specific features is cited below. 
  The R-27--is a medium-range aircraft guided 
missile. It is employed from aircraft launcher (APU) and 
catapult (AKU) devices against the following targets: highly 
maneuverable aircraft, helicopters, cruise missiles, etc. 
Destruction of targets is ensured on all aspect angles, during 
the day and at night, in simple and complex weather conditions, 
in the presence of natural or man-made interference, and in the 
background of ground and water surfaces with active 
countermeasures. It has been developed in the following variants: 
  R-27AE--a variant that has inertial guidance with 
radio correction and active radar homing in the terminal phase 
of flight. Independence of operations is ensured within seeker 
lock-on range. The multifunctional monopulse Doppler active 
radar seeker, developed by Agat MNII, provides search, lock-on, 
and tracking of moving targets based on preliminary target 
designation by the radars of the airborne launch platforms or 
antiaircraft systems. The seeker has the following operating 
modes: 

  -  totally autonomous (active) based upon initial target 
designation without the radar support of other radars in 
flight; 
  -  inertial-correcting mode by a radar; 
  -  and, a programmed 
mode under which the user can enter a new program for the 
onboard computer. 



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Tactical-Technical Specifications of the Homing Head                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Launch range (with an R-27 type missi-|Up to 70 km                           | 
|le against a target with a 5 m[.sup]2  |                                      | 
|[/] RCS [radar cross section]      |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Lock-on range of a target with a 5 m  |No less than 20 km                    | 
|[.sup]2[/] RCS                      |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Operating range of the correction cha-|Up to 50 km                           | 
|nnel (with a MiG-29 aircraft weapons  |                                      | 
|control system)                       |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Preparation time after preliminary sw-|No more than 1.5 seconds              | 
|itch-on for two minutes               |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight (without fairing)              |No more than 14.5 kg                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Diameter                              |200 mm                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Length (without fairing)              |600 mm                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  R-27R--a variant that has inertial guidance with 
radio correction and semiactive radar homing in the terminal 
phase of flight. Air Force spokesmen cited a launch range 
equal to 50 km at "Kubinka-92" and the developer's promotional 
materials indicated a range of 80 km at "Mosaeroshow-92" 
(obviously, this is the maximum range of an unaimed launch). The 
9B-1101K inertial-semiactive radar seeker was also developed at 
Agat MNII. The seeker is designed to lock on to targets in 
altitude ranges from 20 to 25 km with a maximum altitude 
separation (vertical separation) of 10 km with target speeds of 
up to 3,500 kph [kilometers per hour] and a G-load of eight. The 
launch of two missiles against two targets is possible. It 
ensures the seeker's readiness for employment one second after 
receipt of the target designation from a MiG-29 type platform's 
weapons control system. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Tactical-Technical Specifications of the 9B-1101K Homing Head                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Lock-on range of targets with a 3 m   |25 km                                 | 
|[.sup]2[/] RCS                      |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Time for inertial guidance with radio |30 seconds                            | 
|correction with a maximum range from  |                                      | 
|the launch platform of 25 km          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Fuselage diameter                     |219 mm                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Length (from the tip of the fairing)  |1,173 mm                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight                                |33.5 kg                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of the equipment section       |21.5 kg                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Ambient air operating temperature ran-|-55 - +60 C                      | 
|ge                                    |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum ambient air humidity at a tem-|98%                                   | 
|perature of +35 C                |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum pressure                      |up to 14 mm of mercury                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  R-27RE--a modification of the R-27R variant with 
enhanced launch range. It is employed on MiG-29K, MiG-29M, 
MiG-29S, Su-27, Su-27K, and Yak-141 aircraft. 
  R-27T--a variant with all-aspect passive IR 
homing. It is employed based on the "fire and forget" principle. 
The Air Force cited a 45 km launch range at the "Kubinka-92" Air 
Show and the developer's advertising at "Mosaeroshow-92" 
indicated a maximum launch range in the target's forward 
hemisphere of 72 km. A launch weight of 246 kg was cited at 
"Kubinka-92" and 254 kg at "Mosaeroshow-92." 
  R-27TE--a modification of the R-27T variant with 
enhanced launch range. It is utilized on MiG-29K, MiG-29M, 
MiG-29S, Su-27, Su-27K, and Yak-141 aircraft. 
  R-27EM--a variant that has inertial guidance with 
radio correction and semiactive radar homing in the terminal 
phase of flight. It is employed from aircraft launcher and 
catapult devices against the following targets: highly 
maneuverable aircraft, helicopters, Tomahawk cruise missiles, 
and Harpoon-type antiship missiles, etc., at a minimum altitude 
of three meters over water. It ensures destruction of targets in 
all aspect angles, during the day and at night, under simple or 
complex weather conditions, in the presence of natural or 
man-made interference, in the background of ground or water 
surfaces with active maneuvering, jamming, and weapons 
countermeasures. 
  R-33E (AA-9 Amos)--is a long-range aircraft guided 
missile that has inertial guidance and semiactive radar homing 
in the terminal phase of flight. It is employed on the MiG-31 
aircraft from ventral aircraft catapult devices (four missiles 
are suspended) for interception of aircraft and cruise missiles. 
It ensures the destruction of targets that are flying at 
altitudes from 25-50 meters to 26-28 km over various surfaces at 
Mach 3.5 with an altitude separation or vertical separation of 
up to 10 km relative to the launch platform. Destruction of up 
to four targets simultaneously at various altitudes and 
intervals is possible. According to foreign data, the range is 
more than 160 km, although a total of 120 km was indicated at 
"Mosaeroshow-92." 
  R-40T (AA-6 Acrid)--a medium-range aircraft guided 
missile with a TGS [television seeker]. It also has a variant 
with a semiactive radar seeker. Range is approximately 72 km. It 
is utilized on MiG-31, MiG-25, and Su-15 aircraft. 
  R-60 (AA-8 Aphid)--close-range air-to-air missile 
with an infrared seeker. It is utilized on MiG-21, MiG-23M, 
MiG-25PD, MiG-29, MiG-29S, MiG-31, Su-24M, Su-25T, and Yak-38 
aircraft. 
  R-73 (AA-11 Archer)--close-range aircraft guided 
missile. It is utilized on the MiG-21, MiG-23ML, MiG-29, 
MiG-29M, MiG-29S, MiG-29K, Su-27, Su-27K, Su-25T, and Yak-141. 
It has an all-aspect passive IR seeker and combined 
aerogasdynamic guidance. It is employed against the following 
targets: highly maneuverable aircraft, helicopters, cruise 
missiles, etc. It ensures destruction of targets at altitudes of 
up to 5 km in all aspect angles, during the day or at night, 
under simple or complex weather conditions, in the presence of 
natural or man-made interference, and in the background of 
ground or water surfaces. It exceeds existing similar types of 
missiles based on maneuvering characteristics, does not impose 
restrictions on initial launch conditions, and is completely 
autonomous. It has target designation angles of 45 for the 
RMD1 variant and 60 for the RMD2 variant. It can serve to 
organize antimissile defense and permits realization of a 
reverse launch mode for defense of the launch platform's rear 
hemisphere. A missile length of 2,100 mm, a maximum launch range 
of 35 km, and a 7.4 kg warhead were indicated at the 
"Kubinka-92" Air Show and the developer cited these somewhat 
different figures for those missile parameters in the RMD1 
variant at "Mosaeroshow-92": 2,900 mm, 30 km, and 8 kg, 
respectively. 
  RVV-AE--A mockup of this medium-range aircraft 
guided missile with an active radar seeker system that is under 
development and which is similar to the American AIM-120 
(AMRAAM) guided missile was displayed at the exhibition. 
Development of the missile has been ongoing for 10 years and it 
should replace existing R-73 missiles. The missile has 
low-aspect-ratio aerodynamic surfaces and four latticed control 
surfaces that are located in the tail section that increase the 
effectiveness of guidance and reduce the missile's RCS. It is 
employed against the following targets: highly maneuverable 
aircraft, cruise missiles, air-to-surface and air-to-air 
missiles, strategic bombers, helicopters, including in the hover 
mode, etc. It ensures destruction of targets from any direction 
in all aspect angles, during the day and at night, under simple 
or complex weather conditions, under conditions of electronic 
countermeasures, and in the background of ground or water 
surfaces based on the "fire and forget" principle, including 
with multichannel fire. In the future, it is envisioned 
configuring the missile with an IR homing warhead with in-flight 
lock-on. They also plan to develop a variant with a motor with 
increased dimensions to increase launch range at low altitudes 
and to destroy AWACS aircraft-type targets at ranges of up to 
150 km or more. It is capable of attacking targets with a side 
angle of 90 (relative to the launch platform). 
  Tests have been successfully completed and it is proposed 
initiating series production of the missile for installation on 
the Su-27 and MiG-29 aircraft in the near future. Deliveries for 
export are proposed and organization of joint production is 
possible. 
<H5>  Air-to-Surface Guided Missiles and Antiship Missiles </H5>
  Air-to-surface missiles that have been developed at various 
design collectives were displayed in pavilions and on the 
hardstand. 
  The Vympel GOSNKB [State Scientific Design Bureau] displayed 
various variants of the Kh-29 guided missile to destroy hardened 
ground and naval surface targets (steel-reinforced concrete 
shelters, concrete runways, large rail and vehicle bridges, 
ships, and surfaced submarines). The missile is manufactured 
based on a canard design and is equipped with a solid-fuel motor. 
  The Kh-29L guided missile has a semiactive laser 
seeker (illumination of the target from aircraft equipped with 
the Kayra, Klen, or Smerch optical-electronic systems or from 
ground-based laser target designators). Combat employment 
altitude is from 200 meters (maximum launch range of nearly 8 
km) to 5,000 meters (maximum launch range of more than 10 km). 
Minimum launch range is 2-3 km. Seeker lock-on of the 
illuminated target is carried out prior to launch of the guided 
missile. It has a catapult missile launcher. Circular probable 
error when utilizing the Smerch guided missile system for 
missile guidance is 1-2 meters. The Smerch guided missile system 
is employed on the Su-25TK. The use of a helmet-mounted target 
designation system is possible. 
  The Kh-29T guided missile is equipped with a 
television seeker system and is designed to destroy surface 
ships with a displacement of up to 5,000-10,000 tonnes 
(destroyer or cruiser class), steel-reinforced concrete 
shelters, concrete runways, bridges, and industrial facilities. 
Seeker lock-on of the target is carried out prior to launch of 
the guided missile; a depiction of the acquired target is 
reproduced on a television display in the aircraft cockpit, 
after which the missile is fired from the launcher and executes 
an autonomous flight to the target. Maximum launch range 
(depending on the launch platform aircraft's altitude) is 10-12 
km, minimum launch range is 2-3 km, and the launch altitude 
range is 200-5,000 meters. 
  The Kh-29T and Kh-29L guided missiles are equipped 
with 320 kg high-explosive-penetrating warheads and are employed 
from Su-25TK ground attack aircraft, from MiG-23BN, MiG-27K, 
MiG-27M, Su-17M3, Su-17M4, Su-24M and Su-27IB fighter-bombers, 
and from Su-27M and MiG-29M fighter aircraft. 
  During the Iran-Iraq War, Kh-29L guided missiles were 
delivered to Iraq and were successfully employed from MiG-23BN 
and F1E Mirage aircraft with the French ALTIS target designation 
system that is located in a pod (in this case, maximum launch 
range increased to 15 km). 
  The Zvezda Machine-Building Plant displayed a series of 
missiles designed to destroy various land and naval surface 
targets. 
  Kh-25MP antiradiation guided missiles (known in 
the West as the AS-12 Kegler), which are manufactured according 
to a canard design and equipped with a solid fuel motor, are 
designed to destroy enemy radars at a range of up to 40-60 km. 
Hawk surface-to-air missiles and the improved variant are the 
missile's typical targets. Maximum guided missile speed is 900 
meters per second [mps]. 
  The Kh-25L missile has a semiactive laser seeker, 
launch range (depending on the flight altitude of the launch 
platform aircraft) is 10-20 km and maximum speed is 850 mps. A 
variant of the guided missile with a thermal seeker has been 
developed for use at night (maximum launch range is 10-20 km). 
  The Kh-25MR guided missile is equipped with a 
radio command guidance system, attains a maximum speed of 860 
mps, and maximum launch range reaches 10 km. 
  MiG-21, MiG-23, MiG-27, MiG-29, Su-17M, Su-24, Su-25, 
Yak-38, 
and Yak-41M aircraft and also helicopters are equipped with the 
Kh-25M family of missiles. This type of guided missile is 
similar in dimensions, weight, and primary specifications to the 
American-made Hughes AGM-65 Maverick family of guided missiles 
and somewhat exceed the latter in maximum speed. However, a 
thermal seeker that permits effective use of the missile at 
night was introduced earlier on the American guided missiles. 
  The Kh-31A antiship guided missile is equipped 
with a combined solid-fuel/ramjet engine and active radar 
seeker. The missile is manufactured based on a normal 
aerodynamic design with a low-aspect-ratio wing. Four circular 
air intakes covered by cone-shaped protective caps that are 
jettisoned in flight are located along the sides of the fuselage. 
  Based on its primary specifications and design solutions, 
the 
Kh-31A guided missile is close to the Franco-German ANS missile 
which is in the stage of development (however, the domestically 
produced missile has a somewhat greater maximum speed). The 
guided missile is capable of destroying targets when jamming is 
being used. 
  MiG-29M, MiG-29K (an aircraft with a guided missile was 
displayed on the hardstand), MiG-27K (an aircraft with a guided 
missile was displayed on the hardstand), Su-27M, SU-27IB, 
Yak-41M, and also helicopters are armed (or are proposed to be 
armed) with this missile. 
  According to the developing firm, at the present time the 
Kh-31P antiradiation guided missile is the best 
missile of its class in the world. The guided missile is capable 
of effectively destroying all existing types of air defense 
medium- and long-range surface-to-air missile radars (including 
the best American Patriot surface-to-air missile system) and 
also early warning and air traffic control radars. The firm 
states that the Kh-31P exceeds the American AGM-88 HARM guided 
missile and the French ARMAT in its combat specifications. 
MiG-21 and MiG-23BN (after completion of modernization work), 
MiG-27M, MiG-29M, MiG-29K, Su-24M, Su-27M, Su-27IB, and Yak-41M 
aircraft are platforms for this missile. Structurally, the 
Kh-31P is similar to the Kh-31A and differences consist of the 
guidance system and less powerful warhead. The maximum speed of 
the Kh-31 missile family is 1,000 mps. The developing firm 
states that the combat capabilities of aircraft should increase 
by a factor of 3-5 after they have been armed with its family of 
missiles. 
  The Kh-35 guided missile (Western 
designation--SS-N-25) is a missile with transonic speed (300 
mps) and is equipped with a turbojet bypass sustainer engine. 
Its development began in 1983 based on a Navy order which was 
interested in an antiship missile to arm light ships (craft) and 
aircraft. The entry of the aircraft variant of the missile into 
the inventory of the CIS countries' air forces and navies is 
anticipated in 1994. 
  The guided missile is manufactured based on a normal 
aerodynamic design and has a folding wing and tail assembly. A 
trapezoidal air intake is located in the lower portion of the 
fuselage. A variant of the missile that is designed for launch 
from ships, ground-based launchers, and helicopters is equipped 
with a solid fuel rocket booster engine and has a 
high-aspect-ratio folding cruciform tail assembly. It has an 
active radar guidance system on the terminal phase of the 
trajectory that is capable of operating under conditions of 
electronic countermeasures. The missile's combat effectiveness 
increases due to flight at extremely low altitudes (3-5 meters 
depending on the height of the waves) which significantly 
complicates interception of the guided missile by shipborne 
antimissile systems. The missile is equipped with a 145 kg 
high-explosive-fragmentation-incendiary warhead armed with high 
explosives. 
  After appropriate refitting, practically all types of 
tactical aircraft (including the MiG-21, which is capable of 
carrying one Kh-35 guided missile on a ventral hard point), the 
Tu-142 antisubmarine warfare aircraft (eight missiles located on 
two underwing hard points), and also the Ka-27 and Ka-28 
helicopters can be launch platforms for the aircraft variant of 
the missile (without the booster rocket). The shipborne variant 
of the guided missile, which is part of the Uran system, is 
accommodated in transport-launch canisters, grouped in packages 
of four each, on missile boats and small missile ships and also 
on ships of other classes (SKR's [escort vessels] and BPK's 
[large antisubmarine warfare ships]) during the course of their 
modernization. 
  A drawing of a coastal defense system using Kh-35 guided 
missiles was displayed at the exhibition. The self-propelled 
system, mounted on a four-axle off-road chassis, includes a 
command and control and communications vehicle equipped with a 
radar on a mobile mast, a launcher with eight transport-launch 
canisters, and also a transloader [transporter-loader] vehicle 
that carries eight transport-launch canisters and a crane. 
Launch of the coastal variant of the Kh-35 can also be 
accomplished from closed positions. 
  Based on its design solutions and tactical-technical 
specifications, the Kh-35 missile is close to the American 
AGM/RGM-84 Harpoon antiship guided missile, however, according 
to the developing firm's statement, it somewhat exceeds the 
latter in combat effectiveness (the Kh-35 has a somewhat greater 
launch range and weighs 80 kg less). 
  Information on a future antiship missile in the stage of 
development at the present time was presented at the Almaz NPO 
[Scientific Production Association] Pavilion. The all-weather 
supersonic missile is designed to destroy hardened single or 
group naval surface targets and is equipped with a solid-fuel 
rocket motor. A launch is conducted from a transport-launch 
canister at angles of 19-90 (depending on the type of 
launch platforms). Maximum launch range is 250 km. It is 
proposed using future nuclear submarines and also reequipped 
nuclear submarines of old designs as missile launch platforms 
(the capability to install a package of several missiles in SLBM 
[submarine-launched ballistic missile] launch tubes is 
envisioned). Furthermore, it is planned to arm surface 
combatants of various classes (destroyers, cruisers) and also 
ground-based self-propelled coastal defense mounts (the 
installation of three missiles launched at a slant on one 
four-axle off-road motor vehicle is envisioned) with the new 
guided missile. 
  A Moskvit supersonic heavy antiship missile designed to 
destroy major surface targets was suspended on a ventral 
hardpoint on a special pylon under a Su-27K aircraft displayed 
on the exhibition's hardstand. The missile's length is 9.7 m, 
launch weight is 4,500 kg, launch range is 150-250 km (depending 
on the flight altitude of the missile launch platform aircraft), 
and it has a 320 kg warhead. The guided missile is equipped with 
a combined solid-fuel ramjet engine, has four semicircular air 
intakes with a central cone, a folding wing, and 
low-aspect-ratio tail assembly. Utilization of both passive and 
active homing systems is possible. 
  Sovremennyy class destroyers (eight launchers), missile 
boats 
(four launchers), Sivuch class hydrofoils (eight launchers), and 
also wing-in-ground effect vehicles are equipped with the 
shipborne variant of this missile (known in the West as the 
SS-N-22). 
  Information on the state of work on the future aircraft 
guided missile was reported to journalists during the course of 
the exhibition's operation. 
  FLIGHT INTERNATIONAL magazine reported on the cessation of 
work, for financial considerations, on the program to develop an 
improved, strategic, supersonic, stealth cruise missile, which 
is known in the West as the AS-19. The development of this 
missile, which is designed to equip the Tu-160 and Tu-95MS 
bombers, was begin in the mid-1980's and its entry into the 
inventory was planned for the mid-1990's. The missile was 
designed to replace the RKV-15B cruise missile (AS-15). The 
cruise missile has a maximum launch range of approximately 4,000 
km and carries two warheads with independent guidance that are 
capable of detecting and attacking targets up to 100 km from 
each other. The conduct of the cruise missile program's flight 
tests has been impeded for political reasons (the test ranges 
where the launches are being conducted are located on the 
territory of the Republic of Kazakhstan). 
  A hypersonic aeroballistic antiship missile (a modification 
of the RKV-500B short-range nuclear aircraft missile known in 
the West as the AS-16 Kickback) has a launch weight of 1,200 kg 
and is externally similar to the American AGM-69 SRAM aircraft 
missile with which American B-52, B-1B, and B-2 bombers are 
armed. The antiship missile can be mounted on Tu-160 and Tu-22M 
bomber drum launchers. The missile is equipped with an inertial 
guidance system that is used on the cruise portion of the 
trajectory and an active radar seeker that operates in the 
millimeter band. The launch range of the antiship missile is 
60-150 km. After launch, the missile carries out a supersonic 
cruising flight using aerodynamic lift and, in the terminal 
phase, moves along a ballistic trajectory with a speed 
equivalent to Mach 5. 
  A subsonic medium-range antiship missile known in the West 
as 
the AS-18 can be accommodated both on ships and on aircraft. The 
antiship missile is 5 meters long, is manufactured based on a 
canard design with a cruciform wing and tail assembly, is 
equipped with a solid-fuel rocket engine installed in a pod 
under the fuselage, and has a 315-kg warhead and a maximum 
launch range of 200 km. The guidance system is inertial for the 
cruise phase of the trajectory with a radar seeker for the 
terminal phase. 


Specifications of Russian and Foreign Air-to-Air Missiles 

Model      Class         Guidance      Length,    Caliber,     Wingspan,    Control      Launch 
                                       mm         mm           mm           surface      weight, 
                                                                            span, mm     kg 

Short-Range Missiles 

R-60       Air-to-Air    IR Seeker     2,100      120          --           --           45 

R-73       Air-to-Air    IR Seeker     2,900      170          510          Data not     105 
RMD1                                                                        available 

R-73       Air-to-Air    IR Seeker     2,900      170          510          Data not     110 
RMD2                                                                        available 

AIM-9L     Air-to-Air    IR Seeker     2,870      127          630          Data not     86.6 
                                                                            available 

R550       Air-to-Air    IR Seeker     2,750      157          660          Data not     90 
Magic                                                                       available 

ASRAAM     Air-to-Air    IR Seeker     2,900      166          Data not     Data not     87 
                                                               available    available 

Medium-Range Missiles 

R-27AE     Air-to-Air    Inertial      4,780      260          800          970          350 
                         guidance 
                         with radio 
                         update + 
                         active 
                         radar 
                         homing 

R-27R      Air-to-Air    Inertial      4,080      230          770          970          253 
                         guidance 
                         with radio 
                         update + 
                         semiactive 
                         radar 
                         homing 

R-27RE     Air-to-Air    Inertial      4,780      260          800          970          350 
                         guidance 
                         with radio 
                         update + 
                         semiactive 
                         radar 
                         homing 

R-27T      Air-to-Air    IR Seeker     3,795      230          770          970          254 

R-27TE     Air-to-Air    IR Seeker     4,500      260          800          970          343 

R-27EM     Air-to-Air    Inertial      4,780      260          800          970          350 
                         guidance 
                         with radio 
                         update + 
                         semiactive 
                         radar 
                         homing 

RVV-AE     Air-to-Air    Semiactive    3,600      200          Data not     Data not     175 
                         radar                                 available    available 
                         homing 

AIM-7M     Air-to-Air    Semiactive    3,700      200          1,000        Data not     228 
                         radar                                              available 
                         homing 

Sky        Air-to-Air    Semiactive    3,700      203          1,020        Data not     192.3 
Flash                    radar                                              available 
                         homing 

AIM-120    Air-to-Air    Inertial      3,650      178          526          Data not     156.5 
                         guidance                                           available 
                         with active 
                         radar 
                         homing 

MICA       Air-to-Air    Inertial      3,100      Data not     Data not     Data not     110 
                         guidance +               available    available    available 
                         semiactive 
                         radar 
                         homing or 
                         Infrared 
                         homing 

Long-Range Missiles 

R-33E      Air-to-Air    Inertial      4,150      380          900          1,180        490 
                         guidance + 
                         semiactive 
                         radar 
                         homing 

AIM-54     Air-to-Air    Inertial      4,000      380          915          Data not     443 
                         guidance +                                         available 
                         semiactive 
                         radar 
                         homing 




Model      Warhead      Warhead Type      Launch Range, km        Maximum      G-Load of 
           Weight, kg                                             Altitude     Destroyed 
                                                                  of           Targets 
                                                                  Destroyed 
                                                                  Targets, 
                                                                  km 

                                          Maximum    Minimum 

Short-Range Missiles 

R-60       3.5          --                10         --           --           -- 

R-73       8            Continuous rod    30         0.3          20           12 
RMD1 

R-73       8            Continuous rod    40         0.3          20           12 
RMD2 

AIM-9L     9.5          High-explosive    18         Data not     Data not     Data not 
                        fragmentation                available    available    available 

R550       12.5         High-explosive    10         0.3          Data not     Data not 
Magic                                                             available    available 

ASRAAM     --           Data not          15         0.3          Data not     Data not 
                        available                                 available    available 

Medium-Range Missiles 

R-27AE     39           Continuous rod    130        0.5          27           8 

R-27R      39           Continuous rod    80         0.5          25           8 

R-27RE     39           Continuous rod    130        0.5          27           8 

R-27T      39           Continuous rod    72         0.5          24           8 

R-27TE     39           Continuous rod    120        0.5          30           8 

R-27EM     39           Continuous rod    170        0.5          27           8 

RVV-AE     Data not     Data not          90         Data not     Data not     12 
           available    available                    available    available 

AIM-7M     40           Continuous rod    100        0.6          Data not     Data not 
                                                                  available    available 

Sky        30           Continuous rod    50         Data not     Data not     Data not 
Flash                                                available    available    available 

AIM-120    20           Fragmentation     75         Data not     Data not     Data not 
                                                     available    available    available 

MICA       10           High-explosive    60         Data not     Data not     Data not 
                                                     available    available    available 

Long-Range Missiles 

R-33E      47           High-explosive    120        Data not     28           Data not 
                        fragmentation                available                 available 

AIM-54     60           Continuous rod    200        Data not     Data not     Data not 
                                                     available    available    available 




Specifications of Air-to-Surface Guided Missiles 

             Type of Guided Missile 

             Kh-25MR     Kh-25MP          Kh-25ML     Kh-29T        Kh-29L      Kh-31P           Kh-31A      Kh-35       Kh-58U           Shturm 

Missile      4,353       3,830            4,255       3,875         3,875       4,700            4,700       4,400       4,800            1,840 
length, mm 


Missile      275         275              275         380           380         360              360         420         380              130 
diameter, 
mm 

Wing span,   --          --               --          1.100         1.100       --               --          --          --               -- 
m 

Launch       300         320              300         680           660         600              600         600         640              32 
weight, kg 


Warhead      90          90               90          320           320         90               90          145         160              6 
weight, kg 


Maximum      8-10        40               10-20       10-12         8-10        100              50          130         50               5 
aimed 
launch 
range, km 

Minimum      --          --               --          2-3           2-3         --               --          --          --               -- 
aimed 
launch 
range, km 

Maximum      --          --               --          5,000         5,000       --               --          --          --               -- 
launch 
altitude, 
m 

Minimum      --          --               --          200           200         --               --          --          --               -- 
launch 
altitude, 
m 

Type of      Radio       Antiradiation    Laser       Television    Laser       Antiradiation    Active      Active      Antiradiation    Radio 
guidance     command     missile          guidance    guidance      guidance    missile          radar       radar       missile          command 
system       guidance                                                                            guidance    guidance                     guidance 
                                                                                                 system      system 


<H5>  Antisubmarine Warfare Weapons </H5>
  Several guided aircraft weapons systems that have no equals 
in the navies of foreign countries were displayed at the 
exhibition. 
  A mock-up of the APR-2Ye aircraft antisubmarine solid-fuel 
missile torpedo developed by the Region GNPP [State Scientific 
Production Association] and designed to destroy submarines 
moving at speeds of up to 80 kph (43 knots) at a depth of up to 
600 meters (the future American Seawolf nuclear submarine under 
construction at the present time should have a maximum speed of 
35 knots and a maximum depth of up to 500 meters) was 
demonstrated on a stand. The missile's guidance system is 
hydroacoustic with phase correlation. Target lock-on range is 
1,500 meters, space surveillance sector by the guidance system 
is 90 x 45. The probability of destruction of a submarine 
at a depth of 300-500 meters is 70-85%. The guided 
missile is 
dropped from a helicopter, after which the missile begins a 
target search in the autonomous mode, and time of completion of 
the combat mission is 1-2 minutes. 
  The system includes the AKIP-1Ye automatic verification 
unit, 
a PA-2 training missile-torpedo, and an A4 simulator that 
ensures rehearsal of the combat mission without dropping the 
missile-torpedo. 
  The SZV guided depth bomb is designed to destroy modern and 
future submarines from periscope depth to 600 meters. The small 
munition does not have a power plant and it is planned to use 
hydrodynamic force at an angle of 60. The depth bomb's 
trajectory can be changed within 120. It has an active 
hydroacoustic guidance system. The probability of destruction of 
a submarine increased by a factor of 1.2-1.5 in contrast to 
depth bombs at depths of up to 200 meters, and by a factor of up 
to 4-8 at depths of 200-600 meters. A 19 kg shaped warhead has 
been employed on the depth bomb. 
  A full-scale mockup of the Zapad rocket-propelled guided 
bomb 
designed for use with a standard shipborne RBU-6000 which was 
developed for firing unguided rocket-propelled depth bombs and 
installed on many domestically produced and foreign combat ships 
was demonstrated. 
  The bomb has a hydroacoustic guidance system (submarine 
detection range--130 meters) and can be employed at distances of 
600-4,300 meters, the sailing depth of the submarine being fired 
at can reach 1,000 meters and the probability of its destruction 
is 0.8. 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of Antisubmarine Weaponry                                   | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                  |Type of System                                          | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                  |Zapad             |APR-2Ye           |SZV               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|System class      |Rocket-assisted d-|Missile-torpedo   |Guided depth bomb | 
|                  |epth bomb         |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Length, m [as pub-|1,832             |3,700             |1,300             | 
|lished]           |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Diameter, m [as p-|213               |350               |211               | 
|ublished]         |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight, kg        |112.5             |575               |94                | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Warhead weight, kg|--                |100               |19                | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range of combat e-|600-4,300         |1,500             |--                | 
|mployment, m      |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Projectile speed, |--                |115               |16.2 mps[.sup]*    | 
|kph               |                  |                  |[/]            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Target sailing de-|1,000             |600               |600               | 
|pth, m            |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Target speed, kph |--                |80                |--                | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Type of platforms |Surface ships     |Aircraft          |Aircraft          | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|[.sup]*[/]Maximum speed of submergence                                   | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The munitions presented at the exhibition are distinguished 
by their relative simplicity of design and low cost, they can be 
used from various classes of ships and aircraft, and at the same 
time they approximate significantly more complex Western systems 
in combat effectiveness. 
<H5>  Guided Aircraft Bombs </H5>
  At the present time, guided bombs are one of the most 
effective types of aircraft weaponry, combining high destruction 
accuracy with the relatively low cost of the munition. 
  Materials on KAB-500Kr and KAB-1500 bombs that have 
television and laser guidance, respectively, were presented at 
the exhibition. The KAB-500Kr bomb is designed to destroy fixed 
ground-based targets (rail bridges and fortified transportation 
hubs during the day under good weather conditions). The 
correlational type television guidance system provides the 
capability to destroy camouflaged targets. In contrast to other 
types of guided aircraft bombs, specifically, the American 
Walleye bombs that lock on to an optically contrasting target, 
the KAB-500Kr's seeker head records the relative position of 
various optically contrasting objects and in the process the 
target itself does not have to be separated from the background 
of the terrain and the munition will be guided to an arbitrary 
point assigned by a marker. 
  After release from the aircraft, the bomb is completely 
autonomous and requires correction and the circular probable 
error is 4-7 meters. The munition is equipped with a 380 kg 
armor-piercing warhead that is designed to destroy 
well-fortified targets (there is also a variant with a 
high-explosive warhead that ensures a destruction area of 1,500 
m[.sup]2[/]. The range of speeds of the aircraft-platforms 
during release of the munition is 550-1,100 kph and the range of 
release altitudes is 500-5,000 meters. 
  The KAB-500Kr-U training munition, which permits simulation 
of the entire bombing cycle and records its results without an 
actual bomb drop (the KAB-500Kr-U is a nondroppable canister 
weighing 85 kg, is 1,830 mm long and 350 mm in diameter, and is 
equipped with a television system similar to the one installed 
on the KAB-500Kr bomb that is attached to the aircraft's 
external hardpoints), has been developed to rehearse combat 
employment of the KAB-500Kr. 
  The KAB-1500-L-Pr powerful guided bomb is designed to equip 
frontal and long-range aviation aircraft. Its targets are small, 
super-hardened facilities or facilities that are buried deep in 
the earth (powerful fortifications, nuclear munitions dumps, 
strategic command posts). 
  The munition consists of a semiactive laser seeker that 
ensures a circular probable error of 7-10 meters (up to 1-2 
meters on the latest modifications) and is manufactured 
according to a canard design. A cruciform wing with deployable 
outboard wings is located in the tail section, behind which are 
biplane control surfaces that ensure high maneuvering 
characteristics. A special subcaliber armor-piercing incendiary 
warhead is utilized in the bomb that is capable of penetrating 
10-20 meters into the ground and piercing the covers of 
fortifications up to 2 meters thick. 
  The KAB-1500L-F munition is equipped with a warhead that is 
utilized in the FAB-1500 standard free-fall bomb (upon 
detonation, a 20 meter diameter crater is formed) and is similar 
to the KAB-1500L-Pr bomb in the remainder. The KAB-1500L-Pr 
bomb's range of combat employment altitudes realized during 
utilization of the munition from frontal aviation aircraft is 
500-5,000 meters (KAB-1500L-F--1,000-5,000 meters) at bombing 
speeds of 550-1,100 kph (expansion of these parameters is 
possible in the future). 
  In April 1992, a KAB-500L bomb with a laser guidance system 
and high-explosive warhead was displayed at the "Kubinka-92" Air 
Show. 


---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of Guided Bombs                                            | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|              |Type of Munition                                           | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|              |KAB-500Kr     |KAB-500L      |KAB-1500L-F   |KAB-1500L-Pr  | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Type of guida-|Television    |Laser         |Laser         |Laser         | 
|nce system    |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Length, mm    |3,050         |3,050         |4,600         |4,600         | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Diameter, mm  |350           |400           |580           |580           | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wingspan, mm  |850           |--            |850/1,300[.sup]|850/1,300[.sup]| 
|              |              |              |*[/]       |*[/]       | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Bomb weight,  |560           |534           |1,560         |1,500         | 
|kg            |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Warhead weigh-|380           |--            |1,180         |1,100         | 
|t, kg         |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Type of warhe-|Armor-piercing|High-explosive|High-explosive|Armor-piercing| 
|ad            |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Bombing altit-|0.5-5.0       |--            |1.0-5.0       |0.5-5.0       | 
|ude, km       |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Circular prob-|4.7           |--            |7-10          |7-10          | 
|able error, m |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|[.sup]*[/]In a calculation with a folded/extended wing                  | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The Impuls State Scientific Production Association presented 
information on a television seeker for various types of guided 
aircraft bombs. The television seeker is designed for use in 250 
to 4,000 kg precision guided munitions with target lock-on prior 
to launch. The munitions can be utilized from both domestically 
produced and foreign aircraft (specifically, from Mirage and 
SEPECAT Jaguar fighter aircraft). Target selection and lock-on 
is carried out using a television display in the 
weapons-carrying aircraft cockpit. 
  The television seeker ensures precision guidance of the bomb 
against small targets such as cruise missile and mobile 
surface-to-air missile [SAM] launchers, command and control 
centers, ships, bridges, etc. The television seeker has been 
successfully tested in a combat situation. Based on a customer's 
requirement, it can be modernized for a specific type of 
aircraft and manufactured based on a buyer's product base. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Television Seeker                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Spectral range                        |0.4-0.95 microns                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Illumination                          |50-10,000 lux                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Field of view                         |2-3                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Television standard                   |625 lines, 50 Hz                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Resolution                            |550 lines                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Guidance accuracy                     |2-3 meters                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Contrast of targets                   |Any, including camouflaged targets    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  Domestically produced guided aircraft bombs with television 
and laser systems do not lag behind similar American munitions 
based upon primary specifications, however, a certain lag has 
been observed in guided aircraft bombs that are equipped with 
infrared imaging guidance systems (no munitions with an IR 
guidance system were displayed at the exhibition). 
<H5>  Unguided Aircraft Rockets </H5>
  Various types of unguided aircraft rockets and pods for them 
that are designed for installation on various types of combat 
aircraft and helicopters were demonstrated at pavilions and on 
hardstands. 
  The S-8 (80 mm) aircraft rocket system, with which the 
Su-17M, Su-24, Su-25, Su-27, MiG-23, and MiG-27 aircraft and 
also the Mi-8, Mi-24, Mi-28, and Ka-25 helicopters are equipped, 
was displayed along with the widely known S-5 57 mm unguided 
aircraft rockets. B-8M1 launch pods that are designed for 20 
rockets (length--3,550 mm, diameter--410 mm, empty weight--160 
kg, loaded weight--400 kg) and have improved aerodynamics with a 
conical nose section are used to launch them from aircraft. 
B-8V20 pods that also have a 20 rocket capacity (length 1,790 
mm, diameter--521 mm, empty weight--100 kg, and loaded 
weight--342 kg) are used on helicopters. 
  The rocket is equipped with a solid-fuel motor and has 
various warhead configurations. 


---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Primary Tactical-Technical Specifications of Different Variants of S-8 Un-| 
|guided Aircraft Rockets                                                   | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|              |Type of Rocket                                             | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|              |S-8KOM        |S-8BM         |S-8DM         |S-8-OM        | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Type of warhe-|Shaped-fragme-|Concrete-pier-|With a fuel-a-|Illuminating  | 
|ad            |ntation       |cing with a p-|ir explosive  |              | 
|              |              |enetrating wa-|              |              | 
|              |              |rhead         |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Rocket length,|1,570         |1,540         |1,700         |1,632         | 
| mm           |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Rocket weight,|11.3          |15.2          |11.6          |12.1          | 
| kg           |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Warhead weigh-|3.6           |7.41          |3.63          |4.3           | 
|t, kg         |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of exp-|0.9           |0.6           |2.15          |1.0           | 
|losives (mixt-|              |              |              |              | 
|ure, composit-|              |              |              |              | 
|ion), kg      |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Launch range, |1.3-4.0       |1.2-2.2       |1.3-3.0       |4.0-4.5       | 
|km            |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Effectiveness |Capability to |Capability to |5.5-6.0 kg TN-|2 Mkd of light| 
|              |penetrate 400 |penetrate 800 |T equivalent  |              | 
|              |mm armor      |mm of steel-r-|              |              | 
|              |              |einforced con-|              |              | 
|              |              |crete         |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range of comb-|166-330       |166-330       |166-330       |166-330       | 
|at employment |              |              |              |              | 
|speeds, mps   |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The S-13 122 mm unguided aircraft rocket launched from the 
B-13 launch pod with a five rocket capacity is another powerful 
rocket that was displayed at the exhibition. Su-27 and MiG-29 
fighter aircraft, Su-25 ground attack aircraft, and also the 
future Su-37 strike aircraft are equipped with this type of pod 
(weight of empty pod--160 kg, weight of loaded pod--510 kg, 
length--3,558 mm, and diameter--410 mm). 
  S-24 and S-25 large caliber unguided aircraft rockets are 
launched from identical launchers and there are no similar 
foreign rockets at the present time. A variant of the S-25 
rocket with a semiactive laser guidance system was demonstrated 
at the exhibition. 


Specifications of Large Caliber Unguided Aircraft Rockets 

                 Type of Rocket 

                 S-13OF                          S-13T          S-24B                           S-25OF                          S-25OFM 

Type of          High-explosive-fragmentation    Penetrating    High-explosive-fragmentation    High-explosive-fragmentation    High-explosive-fragmentation 
warhead 

Caliber, mm      122                             122            240                             340                             340 

Length, mm       1,800                           1,800          2,330                           3,307                           3,310 

Rocket weight,   68                              67             235                             381                             480 
kg 

Warhead          32.2                            31.8           123                             150                             190 
weight, kg 

Launch range,    2.5                             2.5            2.0                             3.0                             3.0 
km 

Effectiveness    1,800 fragments                 Penetrates 1   4,000 fragments                 6,500 fragments                 Destroys 1,820 m[.sup]2[/] 
                                                 meter of 
                                                 concrete 


<H5>  Aircraft Artillery Weapons </H5>
  Gun mounts that are designed for suspension on various types 
of combat aircraft and helicopters were demonstrated at the 
exhibition's pavilions. The mobile gun-cannon mounts 
manufactured by MMPP have a remote control system in one or two 
planes with an electric drive and selsyn communications with a 
target assigning device. They are designed to destroy point and 
lengthy, lightly defended targets and also airborne targets 
using 7.62 to 23 mm guns with a basic load that is sufficient to 
accomplish several attacks. The mounts function without recoil 
at temperatures from -60 to +60 C and at altitudes up to 
15,000 m, are simple to operate, reliable, and require minimum 
time to prepare for use. The pod mounts can be hung on aircraft 
and helicopters that have third group beam brackets (up to a 500 
kg capacity). 
  The SPPU-6 removable gun mount is armed with a 9A-620 or 
9A-768 23 mm six-barrel gun with a rate of fire of 9,000-10,000 
rounds per minute. The gun can be aimed in the vertical plane to 
8. Guidance along the azimuth (to an angle of up to 
12) is provided by rotating the entire canister around the 
longitudinal axis. The SPPU-6 pod is designed for installation 
on two-seat combat aircraft (specifically, the Su-27UB) and the 
second crew member carries out aiming. The SPPU-6 weighs 525 kg, 
is 5 meters long, 0.5 meters in diameter, and the basic load is 
400 rounds. 
  The UAK-23-250 pod with the GSh-23 (23 mm) gun can be 
attached to the external hard points of various types of 
aircraft or helicopters. The pod is 3,166 mm long, 340 mm in 
diameter, weighs 217 kg, and has a basic load of 250 rounds. 
  The SPPU-1 pod, also armed with a GSh-23 gun with a 3,400 
rounds per minute rate of fire, has a system to divert the gun's 
barrels 30 below which provides the capability to conduct 
fire against ground-based targets in horizontal flight. The 
pod's basic load is 260 rounds and it weighs 290 kg. 
  The GUV universal helicopter pod can be equipped with one 
YaKB-12.7 (12.7 mm) machine gun or two GShG's. The basic load is 
4,350 rounds, dimensions 3,000 x 480 mm, empty weight--140 kg, 
loaded weight--452 kg. 
  The NUV-1UM machine gun turret mount with remote control is 
armed with a 9A-622 four-barrel machine gun (7.62 mm, 6,000 
round per minute rate of fire). Angles of vertical laying are 
0-30, horizontal -30-+28. Weight of the mount is 27 kg 
and, in particular, the Ka-29 helicopter is armed with it. 
  A removable, mobile gun mount for firing at ground-based and 
airborne targets equipped with a GSh-30-1 gun (30 mm, 1,500 
rounds per minute) aimed in the horizontal plane to -15-+15 
and to 0-30 in the vertical was demonstrated on the 
Dzerzhinets MAZ hardstand. It has an electric remote control 
servo aiming drive. The system's basic load is 150 rounds, 
weight--480 kg, dimensions--3,030 x 540 x 550 mm. The mount can 
be hung on a beam bracket or can be attached directly to the 
aircraft airframe. The SPPU is designed to equip Su-25 ground 
attack aircraft and is undergoing testing at the present time. 
<H5>  7. Ground-Based and Shipborne Missile and Artillery Systems </H5>
<H5>  Antiaircraft Missile Weapons </H5>
  The division that reflects work in the sphere of developing 
antiaircraft weapons was one of the most represented at the 
exhibition. Many promising SAM systems that are being prepared 
for acceptance into the inventories of the CIS countries troops 
were demonstrated here. 
  The Antey Concern displayed the S-300V Mobile SAM System 
(known in the West under the designation SA-12A/SA-12B), which 
is designed for defense of troop formations and the front's most 
important facilities from tactical or operational-tactical 
ballistic missiles, and also from aircraft, cruise missiles, and 
UAV's [unmanned aerial vehicles]. The system has high 
jam-proofing and is capable of simultaneously firing at up to 24 
targets with guidance of up to two missiles from one launcher or 
up to four missiles from two launchers against each target. The 
entire combat operations process has been automated to the 
maximum extent possible thanks to the use of high-speed digital 
computers. 
  The SAM system (up to four units) and the detection and 
target designation unit are part of the system's combat 
components that are entirely mounted on off-road tracked chassis 
and are equipped with protective devices from the destructive 
factors of nuclear weapons. The latter includes a command post, 
a 360 surveillance radar, and a sector surveillance radar 
(all the radars have phased array antennas). Each SAM unit 
consists of multichannel missile guidance equipment and six 
launchers of two types: type 1 for two long-range missiles that 
are designed to intercept Pershing class intermediate-range 
ballistic missiles and type 2 for four lesser-range missiles 
that are designed to intercept Lance/Scud class short-range 
ballistic missiles. 
  Type 1 missiles are equipped with an additional solid-fuel 
booster which provides them with a flight speed of up to 2,400 
mps and a maximum guaranteed target destruction range of up to 
100 km (during tests, an aerodynamic target was intercepted at a 
range of 204 km). The single-stage type 2 missile attains a 
maximum speed of 1,700 mps. The remaining portions of the type 1 
and type 2 missiles have been standardized to the maximum 
possible degree. The fuselage is nearly a conical shape (similar 
to Spirit and Arrow antimissile fuselages) and is equipped with 
a radar translucent nose fairing that is capable of withstanding 
dynamic head and kinetic heating at speeds that correspond to 
Mach 6.5. It has a combined guidance system: inertial--in the 
cruise phase of the trajectory and semiactive radar--in the 
terminal phase. Target illumination is carried out using a 
special radar with round antennas that are mounted on each 
launcher and are raised up on special masts that permits it to 
conduct fire from positions in a city, forest, or rugged terrain. 
  Using the S-300V system, you can intercept targets with an 
RCS of approximately 0.02 m[.sup]2[/], which permits you to 
combat small cruise missiles and aircraft manufactured using 
Stealth technology (according to the assessments of American 
experts, the minimum RCS in a course projection of the B-2 
stealth bomber is 0.02-0.05 m[.sup]2[/] and the RCS of the 
F-117A and F-22 aircraft is somewhat greater). Lock-on and 
automatic tracking of MIRV'ed targets (specifically, of 
ballistic missile warheads) is possible. 
  The missile is equipped with a directed energy warhead 
(before detonation of the warhead, the missile is oriented in a 
bank in the appropriate manner). The fuze has two positions: for 
operations against aerodynamic targets (destruction of aircraft 
in the central section); for operations against ballistic 
missiles (destruction of the warhead). 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the S-300V SAM System                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Guaranteed target destruction range,  |                                      | 
|km:                                   |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aerodynamic                           |100                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Ballistic                             |40                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Minimum target destruction altitude,  |                                      | 
|m:                                    |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aerodynamic                           |25                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Ballistic                             |2,000                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum target destruction altitude,  |                                      | 
|m:                                    |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aerodynamic                           |30,000                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Ballistic                             |25,000                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range of speeds of destroyed targets, |0-3,000                               | 
|mps                                   |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of targets being fired on simu-|Up to 24                              | 
|ltaneously                            |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of missiles being guided simul-|Up to 48                              | 
|taneously                             |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Rate of fire, seconds                 |1.5                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Missile preparation time for launch,  |15                                    | 
|seconds                               |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|System deployment or teardown time, m-|5                                     | 
|inutes                                |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|System basic load (depending on launc-|96-192                                | 
|her configuration)                    |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The S-300V system has been accepted into the Russian ground 
forces inventory and is being series produced (the combat 
vehicles that were displayed at the exhibition are part of a 
system that arrived from a line unit where they performed combat 
alert duty). 
  Based on its combat capabilities the S-300V system has no 
equals in the world at the present time. Systems with 
specifications that approximate the specifications of the 
domestically produced system are being developed abroad within 
the framework of the American SDI Program and are only in the 
developmental stage. 
  Israel, jointly with the United States, is developing the 
Arrow Regional Antiballistic Missile [ABM] Defense System that 
is closest in capabilities to the S-300V SAM System, which they 
plan to accept into their inventory at the end of the 1990's. In 
the United States, work is being conducted on the LEDI (Low 
Endoatmospheric Defense Interceptor) Tactical ABM System. 
Furthermore, modernization of the Patriot MIM-104 SAM System is 
being conducted within the framework of the PAC (Patriot 
Antitactical Missile Capability) program directed at increasing 
its capabilities to combat ballistic missiles (missiles 
modernized during the course of the first stage of this program 
participated in combat operations in the Persian Gulf region in 
the winter of 1991). Comparative specifications of the 
antimissile capabilities of the S-300V SAM and future foreign 
antimissile systems are cited in the table. 


---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Comparative Specifications of Tactical Antimissile Systems                | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|              |Type of system|              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|              |S-300V        |MIM-104 PAC-2 |MIM-104 PAC-3 |Arrow         | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Year of accep-|1980's        |1990          |1999[.sup]*    |1997[.sup]*    | 
|tance into in-|              |              |[/]        |[/]        | 
|ventory       |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed |3,000         |1,800         |--            |3,000         | 
|of intercepte-|              |              |              |              | 
|d ballistic m-|              |              |              |              | 
|issiles, mps  |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum balli-|40,000        |20,000        |40,000        |90,000        | 
|stic missile  |              |              |              |              | 
|interception  |              |              |              |              | 
|range, m      |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum balli-|25,000        |7,500         |20,000        |40,000        | 
|stic missile  |              |              |              |              | 
|interception  |              |              |              |              | 
|altitude, m   |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Minimum balli-|2,000         |--            |--            |10,000 [.sup]* | 
|stic missile  |              |              |              |[/]Tentati-| 
|interception  |              |              |              |ve time of ac-| 
|altitude, m   |              |              |              |ceptance into | 
|              |              |              |              |inventory     | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The Tor All-Weather SAM System (known in the West as the 
SA-15) was developed by Antey Concern and is designed to 
accomplish air defense missions at the battalion level. The 
system will permit them to provide effective defense of 
facilities from surprise strikes of guided missiles, guided 
bombs, aircraft, helicopters, and UAV's. 
  The system with a transported basic load (eight missiles in 
vertical armored launchers) is mounted on a single armored 
tracked chassis that has adjustable clearance and can be 
transported by all types of transportation, including aircraft 
(chassis weight is 34,250 kg, maximum speed along hard-surfaced 
roads is 65 kph). The crew consists of the commander, operator, 
and driver-mechanic. 
  The system is equipped with a C-band Doppler surveillance 
radar capable of detecting targets while moving (detection 
range--up to 25 km, number of simultaneously detected 
targets--48, number of track-while-scan targets--10). The 
assessment of the degree of threat and selection of priority 
targets are conducted automatically. The radar antenna folds in 
the travel position. The Doppler fire control radar with a 
phased array antenna that operates in the K-band is capable of 
simultaneously identifying and tracking up to two targets within 
a 15 x 15 operating sector. The system also has an optical 
detection and sighting device (detection range of a typical 
target--20 km). Two targets can be fired at simultaneously. 
  The 9M330 single-stage solid-fuel missile with a radio 
command guidance system that is part of the Tor system is 
manufactured according to a canard design and is equipped with a 
folding wing and tail assembly. It is transported and stored in 
transport-launch canisters (four missiles in each). 
  The launch of the guided missile is carried out vertically 
from a canister using a catapult. Turning the missile onto the 
combat course after it leaves the launcher is carried out using 
gas control surfaces in the missile's nose section. The 
missile's maximum speed is 850 mps and the maximum maneuverable 
G-load is 30. 
  A special transloader vehicle (TZM) is utilized to transport 
an additional basic load of missiles and the loading device. A 
simulator has been provided to train system operators. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the 9M330 SAM System                                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of the system                  |34,250 kg                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of the guided missile          |165 kg                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Warhead weight                        |15 kg                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum guaranteed destruction range  |12,000 m                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Minimum target destruction altitude   |10 m                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum target destruction altitude   |6,000 m                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed of the missile          |850 mps                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range of speeds of destroyed targets  |10-700 mps                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Reaction time from the moment of targ-|5-8 seconds                           | 
|et detection                          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  During the exhibition it was reported that approximately 200 
Tor SAM Systems have been delivered to the troops of the CIS 
countries. The Tor systems are replacing the Osa 9K33 Battalion 
Element Mobile SAM System which is widely used in CIS countries 
armed forces and which was supplied to other countries. 
According to data that has not been confirmed by the American 
side, an F-117A stealth aircraft was shot down by an Iraqi Osa 
SAM System during the course of military operations in the 
Persian Gulf region. One of the latest modifications of this 
system--the Osa-AK 9K33M3 SAM System--has the following 
specifications: detection range of a typical target--28 km, 
target altitude range--25-6,000 m, minimum range--1,500 m, 
maximum range--10,000 m, maximum target speed at an altitude of 
more than 100 m--500 mps, kill probability--0.4-0.94. The SAM 
system is mounted on a BAZ 3937 amphibious off-road three-axle 
chassis. 
  The Ulyanovsk Mechanical Plant presented the Gang SAM System 
(export variant of the Buk Tactical SAM System or SA-11) that is 
designed to destroy high-speed maneuvering aerodynamic targets, 
aircraft-projectiles, and cruise missiles under conditions of a 
massive air raid and intense enemy electronic countermeasures 
and also fire support helicopters, including those hovering at 
extremely low altitudes. The target guaranteed kill zone is 
15-22,000 meters in altitude and 3,000-32,000 meters in range. 
Maximum speed of approaching targets can reach 830 mps, of 
targets moving away--300 mps. The system supports simultaneous 
firing against up to six targets that are flying from any 
direction at various altitudes. The target kill probability is 
0.7-0.9. 
  The system's combat elements include a command post (KP), a 
target detection station (SOTs), six self-propelled launchers, 
and six launcher-reloaders (all--on armored off-road tracked 
chassis that weigh 30-35 tonnes, have a maximum highway speed of 
65 kph and a range of 500 km). Equipment includes a vehicle and 
maintenance shop, mobile automated monitoring-test equipment to 
inspect the surface-to-air missiles, three repair and 
maintenance vehicles, a SAM transport vehicle, a compressor and 
a truck crane (all--on ZiL-131, Ural-43202, or KrAZ-255B 
off-road truck chassis). 
  The SAM system command post has an information depiction 
system, a digital computer, communications encoding equipment, a 
data transmission device, an internal telephone communications 
and switching system, a speech communications system, navigation 
equipment, documentation and simulation equipment, and an 
independent electrical power source. Habitation conditions 
permit a crew to operate continuously for a 24-hour period. 
  The command post is capable of simultaneously processing 
information on 75 targets and simultaneously tracking 15 tracks 
in the automatic mode. The target detection station, equipped 
with a radar with a folding phased array antenna, ensures 
detection of airborne targets, identification of friend or foe 
[IFF], and transmission of information on the air situation to 
the system's command post. The target detection station has a 
digital computer, a radar interrogator, a television-optical 
sighting device, navigation equipment, automatic launch 
equipment, an electro-hydraulic servo drive, a speech, telecode, 
and internal communications system, and an independent 
electrical power source. The station provides protection from 
passive and various types of active jamming and can be deployed 
in the combat configuration in five minutes. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Gang System's Target Detection Radar                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Detection zone, km:                   |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Altitude                              |25                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range (with zero angles of cover at t-|35                                    | 
|arget altitude of 100 m)              |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range with target flight altitude of 1|100                                   | 
|,000-25,000 m                         |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Detection zone for angular coordinate-|                                      | 
|s, degrees:                           |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Along the azimuth                     |360                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Along the elevation                   |40                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Resolution                            |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range, m                              |400                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Angular coordinates, degrees          |3-4.5                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The self-propelled gun mount is capable of operating both as 
part of the SAM system based on target designation data and also 
in the independent mode in a previously assigned sector of 
responsibility. Firing against airborne targets can be conducted 
both from the mount itself and also from the PZU 
[launcher-reloader] assigned to it, which significantly 
increases the system's combat capabilities. 
  The SPU [self-propelled launcher] consists of the fire 
control radar with a jam-proof system, a radar interrogator, 
command and control and information processing equipment, data 
transmission equipment, navigation equipment, a speech and 
intercom system, and also an independent electrical power source. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Gang System's Fire Control Radar                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Target detection range, km:           |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At an altitude of 3,000 m             |85                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At an altitude of 100 m in the SDTs m-|35                                    | 
|ode                                   |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At an altitude of 30 m in the SDTs mo-|23                                    | 
|de with angles of cover of 0     |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Target lock-on range, km:             |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At an altitude of 3,000 m             |70                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At an altitude of 100 m               |30                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At an altitude of 30 m                |20                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Of a hovering helicopter at an altitu-|8-10                                  | 
|de of 30 m                            |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Minimum tracking range, km            |3                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  In the event that its own radar malfunctions, the SOU 
[self-propelled gun mount] can be utilized in the firing mode 
with target illumination by another SOU. 
  There are four missiles on a self-propelled launcher which 
are launched at an angle. The weight of the self-propelled 
launcher is 32,340 kg and set up/tear down time is five minutes. 
  The launcher-loader is designed to launch, transport, and 
store missiles and also to conduct loading and unloading work. 
It consists of an internal intercom and switching equipment, a 
speech communications and telecode communications system, a 
load-lifting device, an analog computer, navigation equipment, 
documentation equipment, and an electro-hydraulic servo drive. 
  Four missiles are transported on launchers and can be 
launched and another four missiles are carried under them on 
transport brackets. Self-loading time for the launcher-loader 
with four missiles that are on the transport brackets is 15 
minutes and loading time of the self-propelled gun mount is 13 
minutes. 
  The 9M38M1E single-stage SAM is manufactured according to a 
normal aerodynamic design with a low-aspect-ratio wing and has 
semiactive radar guidance, an autopilot, a radar fuze, a system 
of contact sensors, electrical equipment with a turbogenerator 
power source, a control surface gas feed system with a gas 
generator, and a solid-fuel engine. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the 9M38M1E SAM That Is Part of the Gang System            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Missile length, mm                    |5,550                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Fuselage diameter, mm                 |400                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Control surface span, mm              |860                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of the SAM, kg                 |690                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of the warhead, kg             |70                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Target destruction radius, m          |17                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Launch ranges, km                     |3-32                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Altitude range of destroyed targets, m|15-22,000                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed of destroyed target, mps|830                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The Gang SAM System's distinctive features include its high 
mobility and combat survivability. 
  The Fakel MKB, headed by Academician P. Grushin until 1991 
(V. Svetlov heads the MKB at the present time), presented 
information on the S-200DE (SA-5) and S-300PMU (SA-10) SAM 
Systems and the future S-300PMU-1 SAM System that has been 
developed for a PVO [air defense] system. 
  The country's PVO troops cover more than 400 economic and 
military targets on the territory of Russia (including more than 
100 strategic targets) from the potential enemy's strategic 
offensive forces' air strikes. Sixty-five percent of the air 
defense weapons that previously belonged to the USSR are 
concentrated in Russia. 
  The S-200 SAM System was developed at the end of the 1960's 
to destroy aircraft, first of all strategic bombers. The 
experience of the combat employment of the S-75 SAM System in 
Vietnam was widely utilized during development of the system. 
The S-200 SAM System was supplied to Syria and employed in 
combat operations during the winter of 1982-1983 against Israeli 
and American aircraft (they were serviced by Soviet crews). In 
1986, a S-200 SAM System that was serviced by Libyans 
participated in repelling an air raid by American aircraft 
against Tripoli, during the course of which the United States 
lost an F-111 fighter-bomber and, according to Libyan 
information, several other carrier-based aircraft. 
  The missiles that are part of the S-200DE SAM System have a 
semiactive radar guidance system. A battalion has 12 
restrictedly mobile launchers, and missile firing preparation 
time is 1.5 seconds. The maximum guaranteed target kill range of 
a strategic bomber/AWACS aircraft/jammer aircraft is 300 km, the 
altitude ranges of intercepted targets--300-35,000 meters, and 
maximum target speed is 4,300 kph. 
  The S-300PMU Multichannel Mobile SAM System was accepted 
into 
the inventory in the mid-1980's and is designed to destroy enemy 
aircraft, helicopters, cruise missiles, and ballistic missiles 
at a great distance in a broad range of altitudes. The system 
consists of a command post, radar (mounted on MAZ off-road 
four-axle chassis), and 12 self-propelled launchers (each 
carries four missiles in a TPU [launcher-transporter]). The 
self-propelled launcher is manufactured in two modifications: 
5P85TE--trailer on a KrAZ three-axle truck and 5P85SE--on a MAZ 
four-axle truck. 
  The 48N6Ye single-stage solid-fuel guided missile has a 
guidance system that is similar to the one employed in the 
Patriot MIM-104 SAM. Maximum guaranteed target destruction range 
is 90 km, and the range of destruction altitudes is 25-25,000 
meters. The missile is launched vertically from a 
transport-launch canister (TPK) using a catapult and after 
launch the engine is canted by gas control surfaces-ailerons in 
any required direction depending on the position of the target. 
  The guided missile was developed based on the concept of 
guaranteed reliability, is operated in a sealed transport-launch 
canister, and does not require inspection or adjustment during 
the entire period of service. 
  The fire control radar is equipped with a phased antenna 
array with a digital beam control system that has a 
multiprocessor computer. During deployment in a city, forest, or 
rugged terrain, the radar can be raised to a great height using 
a special lift device that is transported on a separate trailer. 
  The SAM system can operate both in the air defense system 
radar target designation receipt mode and independently (in this 
case, it includes a 360 surveillance radar that is capable 
of detecting low-flying targets and is raised to a height of 
several dozen meters on a special pole). 
  System deployment and teardown time is five minutes and the 
rate of fire is five seconds. Twelve missiles can be fired 
simultaneously against six targets. 
  The future S-300PMU-1 SAM System which they plan to accept 
into the Russian PVO Troops inventory in 1993 was displayed at 
the exhibition. In contrast to the S-300PMU System, the new SAM 
system has an expanded range of speeds of destroyed targets 
(aircraft flying at speeds of up to 6,450 kph can be 
intercepted), the radar surveillance sector has been increased, 
and the maximum guaranteed kill range for aerodynamic targets 
has been increased to 150 km, for ballistic missiles--to 40 km. 
  There is a built-in simulator to train the SAM system's 
crews. 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Comparative Specifications of the S-300PMU, S-300PMU-1, and Patriot MIM-104| 
| (U.S.) SAM Systems                                                        | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                  |Type of System                                          | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                  |S-300PMU          |S-300PMU-1        |MIM-104           | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum launch ra-|90                |150               |60                | 
|nge, km           |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range of target d-|25-25,000         |25-25,000         |60-24,000         | 
|estruction altitu-|                  |                  |                  | 
|des, m            |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum target sp-|--                |6,450             |--                | 
|eed, mps          |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum SAM speed,|2,100             |--                |1,600             | 
| mps              |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of targets |6                 |--                |8                 | 
|fired at simultan-|                  |                  |                  | 
|eously            |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of missile-|12                |--                |8                 | 
|s guided simultan-|                  |                  |                  | 
|eously            |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The 9A35M3 Strela-10M3 (Western designation SA-13) Light SAM 
System is designed for direct cover of troops on the battlefield 
and on the march from low-flying aircraft and helicopters, and 
also for destruction of cruise missiles and UAV's. 
  The SAM system mounted on an MTLB tracked armored chassis 
includes: 

  -  a 9S86 zone assessment device (AOZ) that is designed for 
automatic determination of the position of the target relative 
to the borders of the missile launch zone (in a range of 
450-10,000 m) and calculation of the angles of a prohibited 
launch that are worked out by the launcher prior to missile 
launch; 
  -  a 9S16 passive direction finder (PRP) designed to detect 
and get an accurate bearing on airborne targets that are flying 
with turned-on onboard pulse radiotechnical systems (a 360 
surveillance sector along the azimuth and an elevation of 
40); 
  -  an 1RL246-10-2 ground-based radio interrogator (NRZ) 
that is designed to determine whether an airborne target is 
friend or foe at a range of up to 12,000 meters and altitudes of 
25-5,000 meters; 
  -  a 9V179-1 reception and target designation 
device (APTs) and a 9V180 target designation realization device 
(ARTs) that is designed for centralized command and control of 
the combat operation of the systems from mobile command and 
control facilities that are equipped with a standardized data 
transmission device (ASPD-U); 
  -  a 9V38M3 projectile launch device 
(AZS) that serves for prelaunch preparation of missiles in the 
manual and automatic mode of switching posts (emergency missile 
launch and the capability to train crews with monitoring of 
operator actions has been provided for. Sound and light signals 
are given to the operator as an indication of fulfillment of 
operations during combat work). 

    Four missiles ready for combat are on the launcher in 
transport-launch canisters and another four SAM's are carried in 
the combat vehicle. The missile operates in the autonomous mode, 
guiding itself according to photo contrast or target IR 
radiation. Firing is conducted in place or at short halts. The 
crew consists of a commander, an operator, and a 
driver-mechanic. An RPK (7.62 mm) machine gun is attached to the 
saddle in front of the commander's hatch on the hull of the 
combat vehicle for self-defense of the SAM system. 
  The 9A35M3 Strela-10M3 SAM System is being widely exported 
to 
foreign countries. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Strela-10M3 SAM System                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of the system                  |12,300 kg                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum target destruction range      |5,000 m                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Minimum target altitude               |25 m                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum target altitude               |3,000 m                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Temperature range of combat employment|-50-+50                          | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range of launcher guidance angles     |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Along the vertical                    |-5-+80                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Along the azimuth                     |360                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Speeds of launcher guidance           |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Along the vertical                    |0.3-50 per second                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Along the azimuth                     |0.3-100 per second               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|ZSU [antiaircraft artillery system--A-|                                      | 
|AA] maximum speed:                    |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Along roads                           |61.5 kph                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Afloat                                |5-6 kph                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range                                 |500 km                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


<H5>  Dual and Multipurpose Tactical Missile-Artillery Systems </H5>
  The 2K22M Tunguska Regimental Air Defense System presented 
by 
the Ulyanovsk Mechanical Plant is the first series-produced 
system in the world that permits the destruction of targets by 
both SAM's and artillery fire. The system is capable of 
conducting fire both on the move and from short halts and can 
destroy various airborne and ground-based targets, including 
hovering helicopters. The kill zone of one ZSU [antiaircraft 
artillery system] while firing the automatic antiaircraft guns 
is 0-3,000 in altitude and 200-4,000 m in range and 15-3,500 and 
2,500-8,000 m, respectively, while firing a 9M311 SAM. 
  The system consists of combat weapons (a battery of six 
SAM's) and maintenance equipment (six TZM's on KamAZ-43101 
chassis, two repair and maintenance vehicles on Ural-43203 
chassis, a maintenance vehicle on a Ural-43203 chassis, a 
maintenance shop on a ZiL-131 chassis, and automated 
monitoring-test equipment on a GAZ-66 chassis). 
  The 2S6M antiaircraft artillery system is manufactured on an 
armored tracked chassis and is designed to destroy airborne 
targets using artillery weapons in place, at short halts, or 
while moving under various weather conditions at any time of 
day, and also using missiles in place or at short halts under 
conditions of optical visibility. Effective firing by the 
automatic antiaircraft artillery guns is possible against ground 
troops and surface targets at a range of up to 2,000 meters. 
  The ZSU system consists of a radar, a digital computer, an 
optical gunsight with a guidance and stabilization system, 
hydraulic laying drives, two twin-barrel 30 mm automatic guns, 
eight launchers for installation of 9M311 SAM canisters, 
navigational equipment, a pitch and course angle measurement 
system, internal and external communications equipment, a 
life-support system, an electrical power supply system, and a 
tracked chassis. 


---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Comparative Specifications of the Tunguska SAM System and Other Similar S-| 
|ystems                                                                    | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|              |Type of System                                             | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|              |Tunguska      |Shilka        |Gepard (FRG)  |Roland (FRG/F-| 
|              |              |              |              |rance)        | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Length of mou-|7.93          |6.54          |              |              | 
|nt, m         |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Width of moun-|3.24          |2.95          |              |              | 
|t, m          |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Height of mou-|4.02/3.36     |2.25          |              |              | 
|nt, m         |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of loa-|34,000        |20,500        |47,300        |32,000        | 
|ded mount, kg |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Radar target  |18,000        |20,000        |15,000        |15,000        | 
|detection ran-|              |              |              |              | 
|ge, m         |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Target tracki-|13,000        |--            |--            |--            | 
|ng range, m   |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number and ca-|2 x 30        |4 x 23        |2 x 35        |none          | 
|liber (mm) of |              |              |              |              | 
|guns          |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of mis-|8             |none          |none          |10            | 
|siles         |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Reaction time,|10            |--            |--            |--            | 
| seconds      |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Airborne targ-|              |              |              |              | 
|et destructio-|              |              |              |              | 
|n range, km:  |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|By guns       |0.2-4.0       |2.5           |4.0           |--            | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|By missiles   |2.5-8.0       |--            |--            |0.5-6.2       | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Destruction a-|              |              |              |              | 
|ltitude, km:  |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|By guns       |0-3.0         |--            |--            |--            | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|By missiles   |0.015-3.5     |--            |--            |0.02-3.0      | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Effective kil-|2.0           |2.0           |--            |--            | 
|l range of gr-|              |              |              |              | 
|ound-based ta-|              |              |              |              | 
|rgets, m      |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed |500           |--            |--            |500           | 
|of an airborn-|              |              |              |              | 
|e target, mps |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Combat effect-|              |              |              |              | 
|iveness:      |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|For guns      |0.6           |--            |--            |--            | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|For missiles  |0.65          |--            |--            |--            | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Total rate fo-|5,000         |3,400         |1,100         |--            | 
|r fire from g-|              |              |              |              | 
|uns, rounds p-|              |              |              |              | 
|er minute     |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed,|65            |44            |65            |62            | 
| kph          |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The system consists of a 9M311 guided missile that is 
designed to destroy airborne targets in the range of speeds from 
0-500 mps with a semiautomatic radar guidance system with manual 
target tracking and the system automatically brings the missile 
to the sighting line based on signals transmitted over a radio 
channel. 
  The SAM consists of an onboard electronic device, gyroscope 
coordinator, control surface drive unit, a tracker, a power 
unit, a warhead, a proximity target sensor, and separating 
engine unit (the missile moves toward the target based on 
inertia after the SAM's speed run and separation of the first 
stage). 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the 9M311 SAM                                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Missile length, mm                    |2,562                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Fuselage diameter, mm                 |170                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wingspan, mm                          |225                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Missile weight, kg                    |42                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of missile in canister, kg     |57                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Warhead weight, kg                    |9                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Minimum range, m                      |2,500                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum range, m                      |8,000                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Minimum destruction altitude, m       |15                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum destruction altitude, m       |3,500                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum missile speed, mps            |900                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Average missile speed, mps            |600                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum deviation (operating radius o-|5                                     | 
|f the proximity fuze sensor, m        |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  In contrast to similar Western systems, Tunguska corresponds 
to cost-effectiveness criteria to a greater degree because the 
most expensive elements in its design (the SOU [self-propelled 
gun mount] and the tracked armored chassis) are used to 
simultaneously support combat employment of the artillery and 
missile systems (in the FRG army the Roland SAM and the Gepard 
AAA systems and in the American army the Chaparral SAM and the 
Vulcan AAA systems are used simultaneously to support air 
defense at the battalion level). 
  The 9P149 Shturm-S System is designed to combat both tanks 
and other mobile armored targets and also low-flying, low-speed, 
airborne targets (helicopters and UAV's). 
  The mount is manufactured based on the MTLB amphibious, 
armored, tracked transporter. In the travel configuration, the 
launcher is retracted inside the hull. Reloading missiles is 
carried out automatically. The multipurpose 9M114 guided missile 
that is part of the system is manufactured according to a canard 
design with folding PGO [foreplanes] and wing (the latter has a 
semicircular shape and is pressed against the missile's 
cylindrical fuselage in the nonoperational state). It has a 
launch booster that ensures the missile exits the 
transport-launch canister, which is manufactured from fiberglass. 
  It has a semiautomatic radio command guidance system with an 
IR missile tracking system that has high jam-proofing (two codes 
and five fixed frequencies are employed to guide a missile). 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the 9M114 SAM                                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Missile length                        |1,830 mm                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Caliber                               |130 mm                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Missile weight                        |35.0 kg                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of transport-launch canister w-|46.5 kg                               | 
|ith missile                           |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum launch range                  |5,000 m                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum airborne target destruction a-|3,000 m                               | 
|ltitude (launch--at sea level)        |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Average missile cruising speed        |350-400 mps                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Armor-penetrating capability          |560 mm                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Launch time (from the moment the comb-|1 second                              | 
|at button is pressed until the missil-|                                      | 
|e begins to move                      |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Temperature range of combat employment|-50-+50 C                        | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Period of guided missile storage in t-|10 years                              | 
|ransport-launch canister              |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 




------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Shturm-S System                                        | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Crew                                  |2 men                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of system                      |12,300 kg                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Basic load                            |12 guided missiles                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed of targets being destro-|                                      | 
|yed:                                  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Flank                                 |60 kph                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Frontal                               |80 kph                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Angles of horizontal guidance         |-85-+85                          | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Angles of vertical guidance           |-15-+15                          | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed of the system along roa-|65 kph                                | 
|ds                                    |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Operating range based on fuel         |500 km                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  Development of the Shturm System was preceded by work on the 
development of antitank missile systems [ATGM] that began in the 
USSR in the 1950's (similar work began somewhat later in France, 
where they utilized German ATGM development experience at the 
end of World War II). Based upon primary specifications, 
domestically produced ATGM's are close to similar 
foreign-designed systems. 


---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of ATGM's in the Armies of the CIS Countries and of Foreig-| 
|n-Developed ATGM's                                                        | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Type of ATGM  |Year Accepted |Range of Laun-|Maximum speed,|Armor-Penetra-| 
|              |into Inventory|ch Altitudes, | mps          |ting Capabili-| 
|              |              |m             |              |ty, mm        | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Fleyta        |1968          |350-2,500     |150           |650           | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Malyutka      |1968          |75-4,000      |120           |550           | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Fagot         |1973          |70-2,500      |185           |450           | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Konkurs       |1974          |75-4,000      |250           |650           | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Skorpion      |1978          |1,000-5,000   |450           |600           | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Metis         |1979          |50-1,000      |180           |500           | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Dragon (U.S.) |1968          |30-1,000      |110           |430           | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|TOW (U.S.)    |1968          |65-3,750      |300           |500           | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Hellfire (U.S.|1980          |?-6,000       |300           |500           | 
|)             |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Milan (FRG/Fr-|1972          |30-2,000      |200           |550           | 
|ance)         |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Hot (FRG/Fran-|1976          |75-4,000      |260           |700           | 
|ce)           |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  Self-propelled artillery, which has been undergoing a 
process 
of rapid improvement both in our country and also abroad in 
recent times, is one of the most effective weapons to combat 
enemy tactical SAM's and ATGM's. 
  The 2S19 Msta 152 mm self-propelled howitzer on a tracked 
chassis that has been standardized with the chassis of the T-72 
and T-80 medium tanks and is equipped with a V84A 780-horsepower 
multifuel engine was displayed at the exhibition. The 
self-propelled artillery piece was developed under the 
leadership of General Designer Yu. Tomashov at the Uraltransmash 
Production Association, was accepted into the inventory in 1989, 
and is manufactured at a plant in Sterlitamak. 
  The self-propelled artillery piece includes the 2A64 gun; a 
PZU-5 antiaircraft gun mount with a Utes NSVT 12.7 mm 
antiaircraft machine gun that has remote control from the 
turret; an automatic loader with an automatic program to feed 
rounds that permits loading to be carried out from any angle of 
elevation of the gun; mechanization of ammunition feeding from 
the ground; an underwater tank driving equipment kit; a built-in 
bulldozer blade that ensures rapid preparation of firing 
positions; a filtering-ventilation unit; and a thermal smoke 
device to create a camouflage smoke screen. The elevation of the 
gun during firing is adjusted without the participation of the 
loader (the loader controls aiming only along the azimuth). The 
Msta self-propelled artillery piece can utilize all types of 
organic munitions, including precision-guided projectiles. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the 2S19 Msta Self-Propelled Artillery Piece               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of the system in the combat co-|42,000 kg                             | 
|nfiguration                           |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Crew strength                         |5 men                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Crew strength when firing from the gr-|7 men                                 | 
|ound                                  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum speed along roads             |60 kph                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range based on fuel                   |500 km                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Length of negotiated water barriers (-|1 km                                  | 
|using the underwater tank driving equ-|                                      | 
|ipment)                               |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Depth of negotiated water obstacles (-|5 meters                              | 
|with the underwater tank driving equi-|                                      | 
|pment)                                |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Time to convert the system from the t-|1-2 minutes                           | 
|ravel to the combat configuration     |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum firing range (conventional pr-|24,700 m                              | 
|ojectile)                             |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum aimed firing range from the a-|2,000 m                               | 
|ntiaircraft machine gun               |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Angle of horizontal firing            |360                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Angle of laying along the vertical    |-4-+68                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum rate of fire of the gun       |7-8 rounds per minute                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum firing mode:                  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|During the first hour                 |100 rounds                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|During each subsequent hour           |60 rounds                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Rate of fire of the antiaircraft mach-|700-800 rounds per minute             | 
|ine gun                               |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Basic load:                           |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|152 mm projectiles                    |50                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|12.7 mm projectiles for the machine g-|300                                   | 
|un                                    |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  Joint work in the sphere of self-propelled artillery is one 
of the possible directions of the Russian defense industry's 
international cooperation. In 1992 the French firm GIAT, which 
specializes in the production of artillery systems, demonstrated 
a model of its F1 (155 mm) caliber self-propelled automatic 
howitzer manufactured on a T-72 tank chassis (they were produced 
or are being produced in the USSR, Czechoslovakia, Poland, 
India, and Yugoslavia). In the opinion of foreign experts, the 
F1 howitzer is one of the best weapons of this class in the West 
and approaches, based on its specifications, the 2S19 
self-propelled artillery piece (the weight of the F1 
self-propelled artillery piece on an AMX-30 tank chassis--42 
tonnes, speed--60 kph, firing range of a conventional 
round--23.5 km, maximum rate of fire--8 projectiles per minute, 
carried basic load--42 projectiles, crew--4 men). More than 400 
GIAT systems are in the inventories of the armies of France, 
Iraq, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia. 
  The Krasnopol Guided Artillery Projectile with a semiactive 
laser guidance system was developed in Russia for firing from 
152 mm guns. The projectile is designed both for firing from the 
most modern guns like the 2S19 Msta and 2S5 Giatsint and also 
from the older 2S3M and D-20 self-propelled and towed artillery 
systems. It can destroy with a high probability (0.7 when firing 
at a distance of 18,000 m) small mobile and fixed targets 
(tanks, motor vehicles, artillery pieces, fortified firing 
positions, etc.). So, during the course of a test firing, a tank 
that was moving at a speed of 36 kph was destroyed at a distance 
of 14,000 m. 
  A portable laser target designator installed on a tripod 
(installation of the illumination system on a helicopter, UAV, 
etc., is possible) is used for illumination. They managed to 
destroy three different targets in 30 seconds during test 
firings using one target designator. During firing at maximum 
range, the projectile's seeker is capable of locking on to 
targets in a radius of 1 km that are illuminated by the laser. 
The capability has been provided to fire at wind speeds of 25 
mps. During use of a 152 mm guided projectile in contrast to a 
conventional projectile of the same caliber, the expenditure of 
projectiles is reduced by a factor of 40-50 and the time 
required to destroy a target is reduced by a factor of 3-5. 
  The 9K112/9M117 Kobra ATGM (Western designation AT-8) was 
developed in 1981 for firing from 125 mm tank guns at a range of 
100-4,000 m. The missile has a radio command guidance system and 
is fired from T-64B, T-64B1, T-64B1K, T-80, T-80B, and T-80BVK 
tank smoothbore guns. 
  The 9K116/9M117 Bastion ATGM (AT-10) was developed in 1985 
and is designed to arm tanks and BMP's [armored infantry 
vehicles] and has a 100 mm gun (the missile is part of the basic 
load of the T-55AM2P, T-55AM2B, and T-55AMV tanks and the BMP-3; 
a special variant of this ATGM has been developed to arm the 
T-62M tank with a smooth bore gun). 
  The 9K120/9M119 Svir ATGM (Western designation AT-11) with a 
laser beam guidance system was developed in 1986. The missile 
attains speeds of up to 800 mps and is capable of penetrating 
700-800 mm thick armor and is part of the basic load of the 
T-72V, T-72S, T-80U, and T-80UD tanks. 
  The Kastet ATGM was developed for firing from the MT-12 (100 
mm) smoothbore towed antitank gun. 
  At the present time, foreign tanks do not have similar 
weapons and their development is not being conducted (the 
Shillelagh ATGM, which was launched through the barrel of a 
special short gun--a 155 mm launcher--was accepted into the 
inventory of the M60A2 medium tank and the Sheridan M551 light 
tank in the United States in 1967). However, the low ballistic 
specifications of the gun, which is incapable of conducting 
effective combat with enemy tanks using conventional projectiles 
at short and medium ranges, resulted in the rejection of this 
system. Development of a similar system in France also ended 
unsuccessfully. 


---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of ATGM's That Are Fired From Tank Guns                    | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Type of ATGM  |Year Accepted |Launch Ranges,|Maximum Speed |Armor-Penetra-| 
|              |Into Inventory| m            |of Missile, m-|ting Capabili-| 
|              |              |              |ps            |ty, mm        | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Kobra         |1981          |1,000-5,000   |400           |700           | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Bastion       |1985          |100-4,000     |375           |550           | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Svir          |1986          |100-4,000     |800           |650           | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Shillelagh (U.|1967          |?-3,000       |690           |500           | 
|S.)           |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


<H5>  Shipborne Antiaircraft Missiles </H5>
  A significant amount of the exhibition's materials were 
concerned with shipborne antiaircraft missiles. 
  The Altair NPO, the general developer of maritime 
surface-to-air missile systems, presented information on the 
Shtil Medium-Range SAM System (Western designation SA-N-7) 
designed for air defense of ships or ship formations from 
antiship missiles and aircraft simultaneously attacking from 
different directions. It has the capability to conduct fire 
against surface targets. 
  The SAM system can be mounted on ships with a displacement 
of 
1,500 tonnes or more, has a modular design that ensures great 
combat survivability, simplicity of operation, and the 
capability for the customer to acquire the configuration he 
needs, with the number of channels, rate of fire, and basic load 
depending on the displacement of the ship-launch platform and 
the conditions of its combat employment. 
  The system operates with a ship three-dimensional [3-D] 
360 surveillance radar that transmits current secondary 
information and can additionally have a built-in system of 
television-optical sights. 
  High automation of computer and execution devices, expansion 
of the missile fire zone from aimed launchers with regard to 
launch sectors restricted by the ship's superstructures, and 
stable operation of the system with seas of up to sea state five 
are ensured in the SAM system. 
  The system underwent testing on the Provornyy Design 61 BPK 
[large antisubmarine warfare ship], which was reequipped for 
this purpose in the mid-1970's, and at the present time is 
installed on Sovremennyy Class destroyers (the first ship of 
this class entered the line in August 1980). 
  The Shtil Single-Stage Solid-Fuel SAM Missile with a 
semiactive radar guidance system is standardized to a 
significant degree with the Gang/Buk SAM Systems missile. The 
SAM has a 70 kg warhead, a radio fuze, and is capable of 
maneuvering with a G-load of 20. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Shtil SAM System                                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of targets being fired at simu-|2-12                                  | 
|ltaneously (depending on configuratio-|                                      | 
|n)                                    |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Target bearing zone                   |360                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Target elevation zone (without taking |0-70                             | 
|into account operation of ship radar  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Target flight altitude range:         |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft                              |15-15,000 m                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Antiship missiles                     |10-10,000 m                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum target speeds (depending on a-|                                      | 
|ltitude)                              |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft                              |420-830 mps                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Antiship missiles                     |330-830 mps                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Reaction time (in alert mode)         |16-19 seconds                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Operating range:                      |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Against aircraft at altitudes above 1,|3,500-25,000 m                        | 
|000 m                                 |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Against aircraft at altitudes less th-|3,500-18,000 m                        | 
|an 1,000 m                            |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Against antiship missiles             |3,500-12,000 m                        | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Probability of kill using a two missi-|                                      | 
|le salvo (taking into account reliabi-|                                      | 
|lity):                                |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Of an aircraft                        |0.81-0.96                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Of an antiship missile                |0.43-0.86                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wave range                            |In the centimeter band                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 




------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the SAM that is part of the Shtil SAM System               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Missile length                        |5,550 mm                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Missile diameter                      |400 mm                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Control surface span                  |860 mm                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Missile weight                        |690 kg                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Warhead weight                        |70 kg                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum Mach of the missile           |3                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The missile is launched from a surface launcher designed for 
one missile ensuring a high rate of fire. The weight of the 
launcher (without the missile) is 30 tonnes, the area of the 
magazine is 5.2 x 5.2 m, and the depth of the magazine is 7.42 m. 
  A high degree of modularity (numbers of configurations) of 
the design permits the system to be accommodated on ships of 
various classes and displacements (a design 61 model large 
antisubmarine warfare ship with two launchers mounted on a 
single gun platform on a tank was demonstrated on a stand at the 
exhibition). 


Specifications of Different Variants of the Shtil SAM System 

                Number of configuration 

                1      2      3      4      5      6      7       8 

Number of       2      4      4      6      8      8      10      12 
channels 
(antenna 
masts) 

Rate of fire,   12     12     6      6      6      4      4       3 
seconds 

Basic load      1      1      2      2      2      3      3       4 
(number of 
launchers) 

Area of 
instrument 
posts, 
m[.sup]2[/]: 

Central         29     32     34     37     40     40     43      52 

General (with   63     72     88     98     106    119    120     156 
spare parts 
kits and 
assemblies) 

Weight, 
tonnes: 

Of the          2.4    4.7    4.7    7.1    9.4    9.4    11.8    11.8 
antenna masts 


Total           49     56     89     96     103    134    138     180 
(without 
basic load) 

Personnel,      11     13     15     19     21     23     27      32 
men 

Energy          130    180    240    320    370    400    450     530 
consumption, 
kw 


  The Klinok Multichannel All-Weather Independent 
Surface-to-Air Missile System (Western designation SA-N-9) is 
designed for self-defense of combatants and civilian ships from 
massive attacks of low-flying antiship missiles and other 
unmanned and manned aircraft that operate at low and medium 
altitudes and also ships (including wing-in-ground effect 
vehicles). 
  The SAM system is capable of simultaneously destroying up to 
four targets in a spatial sector of 60 x 60 while being 
aimed in a circle. Furthermore, the system is capable of 
controlling the fire of 30 mm automatic guns. 
  Its own airborne target radar detection systems provide the 
system with complete independence from ship radars and the 
capability for operations in the most complex situation. 
Furthermore, information that is received from any other target 
designation systems can be utilized. 
  The phased array antennas with electronic beam control and a 
high-speed computer system with developed software based on 
processing information in real time that uses a universal system 
of servicing subscribers is the basis of the system's 
multichannel capability: with sequencing, interrupts, and 
priorities. 
  The Klinok SAM System has high automation of combat 
operations--from the detection of targets to their destruction, 
low reaction time, and a high rate of fire. The system has an 
adequate depth of automated functional control and is reliable 
in operation. The television-optical target tracking devices 
built into the antenna mast increase its jam-proof feature under 
conditions of intensive countermeasures. 
  The underdeck launcher has three to four drum-type launch 
modules. There are eight transport-launch canisters with 
missiles in each module. 
  The SAM that has been standardized with the Tor Tactical SAM 
System has been utilized in the Klinok SAM System. Missile 
launch is vertical and is carried out using a catapult. After 
the missile leaves the launcher, a gas-dynamic system is set 
into motion that inclines the missile in the direction of the 
target. The engine is started at a safe altitude after the SAM 
is turned toward the target. Detonation of the 
high-explosive-fragmentation warhead is carried out according to 
the command of the pulse radio fuze in direct proximity to the 
target. The destruction of maneuvering and straight-flying 
high-speed targets is ensured thanks to the high speed of the 
missile's flight. 
  The missile is transported and stored in a transport-launch 
canister that ensures its storage, constant combat readiness, 
convenience while being transported, and safety while being 
loaded into the launcher. The missile needs to be inspected once 
every 10 years of storage. 
  According to the developing firm, there are no other 
self-defense SAM systems similar to the Klinok System. It can be 
installed on combatants and ships with displacements of 800 
tonnes or more. The system's modular design principle suggests 
different variants for its installation. The SAM system can be 
operated in various climactic conditions and can destroy targets 
under seas of up to sea state five. The crew strength of the 
Klinok System is 13 men. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Klinok Shipborne SAM System                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum detection range of targets at |45,000 m                              | 
|an altitude of 3,500 m (under autonom-|                                      | 
|ous operation of the system)          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Operating band                        |K (X, I)                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Reaction time (depending on radar mod-|8-24 seconds                          | 
|e)                                    |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Time to bring system to combat readin-|                                      | 
|ess:                                  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|From a cold state                     |3 minutes                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|From an alert mode                    |15 seconds                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Rate of fire                          |3 seconds                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Minimum target destruction range      |1,500 m                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|When the 30 mm artillery mount is inc-|300 m                                 | 
|luded                                 |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum target destruction range      |12,000 m                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Minimum target destruction altitude   |10 m                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum target destruction altitude   |6,000 m                               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Speed of targets                      |0-700 mps                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of targets being fired at simu-|4                                     | 
|ltaneously in a spatial sector of 60  |                                      | 
|x 60                             |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of missiles being guided simul-|8                                     | 
|taneously                             |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Basic load                            |24-64 SAM's                           | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Missile weight                        |165 kg                                | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Warhead weight                        |15 kg                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|System weight (without the basic load)|41,500 kg                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Required space for the system         |113 m[.sup]2[/]                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Required power                        |220 kw per hour                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  Admiral of the Fleet of the Soviet Union Kuznetsov, Admiral 
of the Fleet of the Soviet Union Gorshkov, and the Novorossiysk 
heavy aircraft-carrying cruisers, Kirov Class nuclear missile 
cruisers, Udaloy Class large antisubmarine warfare ships, and 
Neustrashimyy Class escort vessels are armed with the system. 
  The Rif SAM System, which is a development of the Fort 
Shipborne SAM System (Western designation SA-N-6), was developed 
at the Altair NPO for destruction of aerodynamic and ballistic 
targets at long range from the defended ship. The 48N6Ye missile 
that is part of the system has been standardized with the PVO 
strany S-300PMU SAM System. 
  The system can be accommodated on ships with a displacement 
of 5,000 tonnes or more. The SAM's are located in vertical 
underdeck launchers (a basic load of 48 or 64 guided missiles 
depending on system configuration). The rate of fire is three 
seconds. The SAM system is capable of simultaneously tracking 12 
targets and intercepting six targets. Maximum airborne target 
destruction range is 90 km. The missile is equipped with a 
powerful 130 kg warhead and can be employed against both 
airborne and surface targets. 
  Tests of the Fort SAM System were conducted on the Azov 
Large 
Antisubmarine Warfare Ship (Nikolayev Class) in the Black Sea 
Fleet. Kirov Class nuclear missile cruisers and Slava Class 
missile cruisers are equipped with Fort or Rif systems. 
<H5>  Multiple Rocket Launcher Systems </H5>
  Rockets that are part of the latest generation multiple 
rocket launcher systems were displayed at the exhibition. 
  The Prima (122 mm) Multiple Rocket Launcher System is 
designed to replace the Grad Multiple Rocket Launcher System and 
is also manufactured on a Ural motor vehicle chassis but has an 
increased number of launchers from 40 to 50. Remote introduction 
of the time of separation of the warhead in flight to increase 
the shrapnel kill area has been provided for. The operating 
temperature range is +/-50 C. 
  The Uragan Multiple Rocket Launcher System (on a ZiL-135 
chassis) has rockets with high-explosive and fragmentation 
warheads and also warheads that are loaded with antitank and 
antipersonnel mines. One rocket can carry 30 cluster elements, 
24 antitank mines, or 312 antipersonnel mines. The firing of 
rockets singly or in salvos is possible. The area destroyed by a 
salvo from one launcher is 426,000 m[.sup]2[/], the duration 
of one salvo is 20 seconds, and the combat vehicle's range is 
570 km. The system includes a transloader vehicle. According to 
its specifications, the Uragan Multiple Rocket Launcher System 
is close to the American MRLS Multiple Rocket Launcher System. 
  At the present time, the Smerch Multiple Rocket Launcher 
System is the most powerful system of this class in the world. 
  The system consists of combat and transloader vehicles, each 
of which is a self-propelled unit based on a MAZ-534M four-axle 
motor vehicle chassis. An artillery section with 12 launchers is 
mounted on a combat vehicle and the transloader vehicle 
transports 12 projectiles and is equipped with a crane. The 
Smerch Multiple Rocket Launcher System is manufactured by the 
Perm Machinebuilding Plant. The fire control system supports 
salvo or single rocket launches. 
  Based on the assessments of the developing firm, the Smerch 
Multiple Rocket Launcher System exceeds other countries' latest 
salvo fire systems, including the American MLRS system that was 
employed in the war against Iraq in 1991. Superiority over 
similar foreign systems is noted not only based on the 
specifications of the artillery section but also based on the 
quality of the automated fire control system that is 
manufactured by Tomsk's Kontur Production Association. The 
automated control system links several command-staff vehicles 
that are at the disposal of the commander, unit chief of staff, 
and subunit commanders. Each of these vehicles, which are based 
on a KamAZ-4310 motor vehicle chassis, has radio equipment that 
supports communications in the UHF band at a range of up to 50 
km and in the HF band--up to 350 km. The rocket that is part of 
the system is configured with various types of warheads, 
including cluster warheads with 12 elements. The time required 
to bring the multiple rocket launcher system to combat readiness 
after a march is three minutes. 


Specifications of the Multiple Rocket Launcher Systems That Were Displayed at 
"Mosaeroshow-92" and Similar Foreign Systems 

               Type of Multiple Rocket Launcher System 

               Prima    Smerch     Uragan     MLRS       Lars (FRG)     RM-70 
                                              (U.S.)                    (Czechoslovak 
                                                                        SSR) 

Caliber, mm    122      220        300        240        110            122 

Missile        3,037    5,178      7,600      3,960      2,260          3,226 
length, mm 

Number of      50       16         12         12         36             40 
launchers 

Missile        70       280        800        310        34             77 
weight, kg 

Warhead        --       51         300        139        16.2           -- 
weight, kg 

Minimum        5        10         20         --         6.5            -- 
firing 
range, km 

Maximum        20.5     35         70         30         25[.sup]*[/]    20.5 
firing 
range, km 

Area of        190      426        672        --         --             -- 
destruction 
by one 
salvo, 
thousands of 
m[.sup]2[/] 

Duration of    30       20         38         --         18             -- 
salvo, 
seconds 

Range of       990      570        900        485        --             -- 
combat 
vehicle, km 

Base           Ural     ZiL-135    MAZ-634    SPLL       Ma Yupiter 

Wheel          3 x 3    4 x 4      4 x 4      tracked    3 x 3          4 x 4 
formula 

[.sup]*[/] Firing range of latest modification of rocket. Multiple rocket launcher 
systems were previously equipped with missiles with ranges of 14.5 and 19 km. 


<H5>  8. Electronics and Reconnaissance Equipment </H5>
  The Nizhniy Novgorod Television Plant displayed the 1R13-3 
Metric Band Early Warning Radar that is designed for use in an 
air defense system. The radar is capable of detecting and 
determining the coordinates (azimuth and range) of airborne 
targets at great range under conditions of intensive electronic 
countermeasures and of determining whether they are friend or 
foe and transmitting information on the air situation to the 
command post via landline and radio communications channels. 
  The radar can be utilized as part of automated air defense 
and air force command and control systems (including those that 
are part of rapid deployment forces) and also independently. The 
entire radar system can be accommodated on four chassis and 
consists of: 

  -  a device module (weighing 12 tonnes and mounted on a Ural 
motor vehicle); 
  -  a trailer with a 2PN4-M with an NRZ 
[ground-based radio interrogator] radar antenna (weight five 
tonnes); 
  -  a primary antenna module with an APU cabin (Ural 11.5 
tonne); and, 
  -  an ED-2X30-T30P-3RA electrical power generator 
(KamAZ 12 tonne). 

    An additional configuration of the radar with a removable 
command post with two operator workstations that is mounted in a 
K1.P4 van is possible. 
  Speed along roads is 75 kph, maneuvering is possible on 
areas 
without roads, and transport is also possible by rail, water, 
and air. Deployment time from the travel configuration and 
teardown totals 45 minutes and, in the process, no special 
preparation of the area is required to install the radar. 
  The 1L13-3 Radar equipment module consists of a transceiver, 
an operator workstation, computer equipment, an information 
processing computer, built-in equipment monitoring and 
malfunction isolation equipment, a landline telecode 
communications system, two external radio communications sets, a 
simulator, and an IFF device. 
  The 1L13-3 Radar that is mounted on a separate three-axle 
trailer consists of a flat antenna array, an electric drive with 
a support-turning device, a deployment mechanism from the travel 
configuration, and canisters with an HF receiver and a removable 
protective cover. The ground-based radio interrogator antenna 
trailer consists of an antenna, a synchronized servo drive, and 
a spare parts kit. The radar is capable of detecting F-117A 
class low-observable aircraft. 
  The mobile electrical power generation unit consists of two 
30-kw diesel generators, automated and remote control equipment, 
and a panel for connection to an industrial grid. 
  The more powerful 55Zh6-1 Metric Band 3-D Radar developed by 
the same enterprise is designed for effective detection and 
determination of the coordinates of modern and future aircraft, 
helicopters, cruise missiles, aerostats, and also other aircraft 
under conditions of intensive reflections from ground clutter 
and man-made electronic countermeasures. 
  The radar can be operated under any meteorological 
conditions 
and in any climactic zones. The radar is capable of operating 
both as part of automated command and control systems and 
independently. Transportation of the radar is carried out by 
motor vehicle, rail, air, river, and maritime transport. 
Information on the radar's display can be recorded by the 
objective monitoring device. The system consists of an 
antenna-mast device (AMU); the antenna that is attached to the 
mast has a 16 x 3.24 m phased array. The vertical position of 
the mast is ensured by guy cables. The design of the 
antenna-mast device ensures its operability under conditions of 
an ice storm and wind loads of up to 35 mps. 
  The radar's transmitter and maintenance area are located in 
KPP-15 vans and include a radar reception device, a specialized 
microcomputer, two operator workstations, a function monitoring 
and diagnostics device, an IFF device, and also a simulator. 
  The transfer device contains a radar operating mode control 
device and three displays. The transfer indicator device 
equipment is designed to control and depict radar information at 
air traffic control facilities with a distance of up to 1,000 m 
via a cable line (it is possible to increase the number of 
operator workstations to five and to connect a second 55Zh6-1 
Radar). 
  The 50E6 Electrical Power Supply System consists of two 
diesel electrical power generators and a 
distribution-transformer device (it is possible to control the 
operating modes and turn the generator on from the maintenance 
area). 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the 55Zh6-1 and 1L13-3 Radars                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                         |Type of radar                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                         |55Zh6-1                  |1L13-3                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Frequency range          |Metric                   |Metric                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Field of surveillance:   |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range, km                |500                      |300                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Altitude, km             |40                       |27                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Azimuth, degrees         |360                      |360                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Elevation, degrees       |16                       |25                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Fighter aircraft detecti-|                         |                         | 
|on range:                |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At an altitude of 10 km  |300                      |230                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At an altitude of 20 km  |400                      |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At an altitude of 27 km  |                         |300                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Upper detection limit of |40                       |27                       | 
|a fighter class target,  |                         |                         | 
|km                       |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Ground clutter suppressi-|40                       |                         | 
|on coefficient, db       |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Accuracy of determinatio-|                         |                         | 
|n of target coordinates: |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range, m                 |500                      |600                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Azimuth, minutes         |24                       |60                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Altitude, m              |850                      |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Data transmission rate,  |10.2                     |10.2                     | 
|seconds                  |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Required power, kw       |150                      |29                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Turn on time, minutes    |3.5                      |3.0                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Deployment time, hours   |22                       |0.75                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The 35N6 2-D Radar was developed to replace the P-15 Tropa 
and P-19 radars. It is designed to detect targets with a reduced 
RCS (cruise missiles, UAV's, and light motor aircraft) that are 
flying at low altitudes at a range of speeds from extremely low 
to supersonic. Work on the development of the radar was begun in 
1983 under the leadership of V. Kopeykin and Yu. Stepanov headed 
the program after him. The first models of the new radar began 
to enter RTV [radiotechnical troops] units in 1986. 
  The 35N6 Radar permits the detection of small targets in the 
background of intensive reflections of the underlying surface, 
ground clutter, and hydrometeorological formations. The 
three-channel moving target selection system permits targets to 
be effectively isolated from interference. 
  The radar is mounted on two KamAZ motor vehicles: the 
electronic equipment (transmitter, receiver, monitoring and 
communications equipment, operator workstation, etc.) are 
located in the first KamAZ and the second KamAZ carries the 
antenna, a diesel electrical power generator for an independent 
power source, and an external power grid frequency transformer. 
It has a reserve power generator on a single-axle trailer. The 
operator's portable workstation can be deployed at a distance of 
up to 300 meters from the radar. 
  The radar can operate both with the main antenna and with an 
antenna that has been installed on a light mobile mast with a 
raised height of up to 50 meters. This permits the radar to be 
deployed in a forest, city, or on rugged terrain. 
  The 35N6 Radar's mean time between failures is 300 hours, 
and 
operation is possible at temperatures from -50 to +50 C and 
at wind speeds of up to 25 mps in snow, ice storms, and rain. 
During the development of the radar, an adequately high level of 
comfort for the operators was ensured: the noise level has been 
reduced, there are air heating and cooling systems, and 
individual and sanitary ventilation. The absence of high-voltage 
power sources promotes work safety for the crew. The effect of 
X-rays and SHF radiation on people has been excluded. 
  During tests the radar successfully detected small 
light-motor aircraft piloted by test pilots who attempted to 
penetrate the air defense line at extremely low altitude. 
  The possibility of developing a specialized coastal radar 
based on the 35N6 radar to detect ships with small RCS's is 
being studied. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the 35N6 Radar                                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Frequency range                       |decimetric                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Detection range                       |5-150 km                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maximum target detection range        |6 km                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|360 surveillance period          |5 and 10 seconds                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aircraft detection range (depending o-|                                      | 
|n RCS):                               |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At an altitude of 100 m               |32-58 km                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|At an altitude of 1,000 m             |95-105 km                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Suppression coefficient of reflection-|53 db                                 | 
|s of ground clutter                   |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Average restoration time              |less than 30 minutes                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Turn on time                          |less than 3.3 minutes                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Deployment time during operation with |less than 20 minutes                  | 
|an organic antenna                    |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Operational crew (one shift)          |2 men                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The 83M6Ye Command and Control Equipment System was 
developed 
at Fakel MKB for command and control of S-300PMU, S-300PMU-1, 
S-200DE, and S-200VEV SAM System formations (up to six SAM 
systems). The system consists of a 64N6Ye Radar with a phased 
array antenna and a 64K6Ye Command Post manufactured on 
four-axle off-road wheeled chassis. It provides simultaneous 
tracking of up to 100 target tracks at a range of up to 300 km 
at a target speed of up to 10,000 kph of targets flying in dense 
combat formations and automatic lock-on of separating targets. 
  The Proton MZ offered the Baykal-1E Surface-to-Air Missile 
Unit Command Post that is manufactured on a MAZ off-road 
four-axle motor vehicle chassis. The command post is designed 
for command and control of combat operations of a surface-to-air 
missile unit that consists of long-, medium-, and short-range 
SAM systems. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Specifications of the Baykal-1E Command Post                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of airborne targets being proc-|80                                    | 
|essed simultaneously                  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of ZRS's [SAM's] being guided  |4                                     | 
|simultaneously                        |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of SAM systems being controlle-|12                                    | 
|d simultaneously                      |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of firing channels being contr-|144                                   | 
|olled simultaneously                  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of automated workstations      |2-5                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Deployment and teardown time, minutes |5                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Time to bring system to combat readin-|3                                     | 
|ess, minutes                          |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Operating limits:                     |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Range, km                             |1,200                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Altitude, km                          |102.4                                 | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maintenance personnel                 |5                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The Polyana-D4 Automated Missile Brigade Command and Control 
System is designed for command and control of S-300V and Gang 
SAM System combat operations. The system consists of the MP-06RP 
staff vehicle, the MP-02R staff vehicle, a maintenance vehicle, 
an MP-45 ZIP [spare parts kit], and two ED 2X30-T4001RAM 
portable electric generators. The system was accepted into the 
inventory in 1985 and has been in series production since 1987. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Primary Specifications of the Polyana-D4 Automated Command and Control System| 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of battalions being controlled |4                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Total number of targets being process-|up to 270                             | 
|ed                                    |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of depicted targets            |up to 80                              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Number of targets being transmitted t-|up to 20                              | 
|o a battalion                         |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Deployment time, minutes              |35                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Crew                                  |13                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  Krasnogorsk Optical-Mechanical Plant presented information 
on 
stands about aerial cameras that it produces that are installed 
on a number of reconnaissance aircraft, specifically, on the 
Su-24MR. The specifications of the AK-108F oblique, horizontally 
placed reflex still camera, the A-84 panoramic aerial rotating 
lens cyclical camera, the AS-707 four-channel spectrozonal 
aerial camera, and the AP-402M panoramic prism cycle-less aerial 
camera are cited below. 


---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|              |AK-108F       |A-84          |AP-402M       |AS-707        | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Lens focal le-|1,800         |300           |90.5          |140           | 
|ngth, mm      |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Lens aperture |1:5-1:22      |1:4.5-1:22    |1:3.5-1:22    |1:2-1:22      | 
|ratio         |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Frame size, mm|180 x 180     |118 x 748     |68 x 285      |180 x 180     | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Width of the  |0.1-21.4      |6             |12            |0.5           | 
|strip in frac-|              |              |              |              | 
|tions of alti-|              |              |              |              | 
|tude          |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Aerial photog-|isopanchrom   |isopanchrom   |isopanchrom   |MSh-4         | 
|raphic film:  |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Length, m     |240           |480           |480           |240           | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Width, mm     |190           |130           |80            |190           | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Weight of the |580           |130           |62            |100-208       | 
|flight system,|              |              |              |              | 
| kg           |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Interval of p-|1.3-20        |1-17          |0.24-4.25     |0.5-10        | 
|hotography, s-|              |              |              |              | 
|econds        |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Resolution fo-|1/100         |0.4/10        |0.3/0.4       |0.3/1         | 
|r terrain/sec-|              |              |              |              | 
|onds of dista-|              |              |              |              | 
|nce, m/km     |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Altitude of p-|500-28,000    |1,000-20,000  |100-1,000     |50-10,000     | 
|hotography, m |              |              |              |              | 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


<H5>  8. Business Results of the "Mosaeroshow-92" Exhibition </H5>
  The "Mosaeroshow-92" Exhibition permitted Russian experts to 
expand business contacts with foreign partners. A number of 
contracts were signed with foreign and domestic aircraft 
companies. 
  The managers of the OKB imeni A.I. Mikoyan conducted 
preliminary negotiations with the British firm GEC Avionics on 
the possible large-scale modernization of the avionics of MiG-21 
aircraft that are widely operated in the world; signed an 
agreement on the creation of a joint venture with a German firm, 
the tasks of which will be the organization of assistance in the 
operation of the MiG-29's that are in Germany's inventory; and 
conducted preliminary negotiations on the sale of MiG-29's to 
Malaysia, and MiG-29's and MiG-31's to Portugal, South Korea, 
and Switzerland. Attempts are continuing to convince Germany to 
purchase an additional number of MiG-29 aircraft in an improved 
variant instead of the West European EFA fighter aircraft. 
  The OKB imeni P.O. Sukhoy also conducted negotiations with 
South Korea with regard to a possible sale of Su-27 fighter 
aircraft; it signed a protocol on intentions with Erbas 
Industries on certification of the Su-26 sports-acrobatic 
aircraft in France; and signed a contract with the French firm 
Thomson on cooperation in the sphere of the development of 
aircraft and navigational equipment for civilian aircraft. A 
preliminary agreement was attained on the sale of S-300PMU, 
S-300V, and Tor SAM Systems abroad. 
  On the opening day of the air show, the signing of an 
agreement took place between Russian International 
Airlines--Aeroflot, the Aviation Complex imeni S.V. Ilyushin, 
and the Voronezh Aircraft Production Association on the delivery 
of 20 Il-96M aircraft equipped with American Pratt &amp; Whitney 
engines and Rockwell-Collins equipment to Aeroflot beginning in 
1995 (the aircraft's first flight is planned for March 1993 and 
they propose deliveries beginning in 1995). At the same time, 
the receipt of an order for three Il-96M aircraft from Uzbek 
National Airlines was announced. The next day the signing of an 
agreement between Aeroflot, Rockwell-Collins, and the firm imeni 
S.V. Ilyushin took place for the installation of TCASII 
collision warning systems on Il-86 aircraft that are already 
being operated. 
  The leading Western firm Honeywell formed a new Russian firm 
under the name Honeywell Aviation Control Moscow to equip 
passenger aircraft with the latest flight-navigation equipment 
systems and delivered the first shipment for the new Tu-204 
airliner. The former socialist countries and China displayed 
interest in the exhibition and restoration of cooperation with 
these countries is considered possible. 
  The American concern Allied Signal, which sent the most 
representative delegation among Western firms to 
"Mosaeroshow-92" (30 experts), is already carrying out a number 
of joint programs with Russian partners and Bendix, which is 
part of the concern, and signed an agreement at the exhibition 
with the NII of Aviation Equipment on joint development and 
production of avionics equipment for existing and future Russian 
aircraft. This is the first major joint project of Western and 
Russian enterprises on avionics. At first, they propose 
installing liquid crystal displays (ZhKI) developed by Bendix in 
Il-96, Il-114, and Tu-204 passenger aircraft that are being 
produced for the Russian domestic market--this should be the 
first employment in the world of liquid crystal displays on 
series-produced aircraft. The liquid crystal displays on these 
aircraft will be used as part of flight mode optimization 
systems. In the future, they plan to develop complete 
flight-navigation systems based on liquid crystal displays for 
the Yak-42M, Yak-46, and Be-200 aircraft. 
  Allied Signal's projects that have already been carried out 
jointly with Russia are associated with other directions of the 
concern's activities: for example, Garret, a subsidiary of the 
firm, has begun to realize a major joint program with Omsk 
Engine Building Design Bureau for the development of a new 
auxiliary power plant that is oriented on Russian aircraft 
(which have different required air consumption than Western 
power plants) and includes Garret's turbine along with an Omsk 
MKB compressor and other auxiliary components. Allied Signal's 
large-scale presence is associated with the concern's basic 
policy toward expansion of cooperation with the CIS as a result 
of the strength of the CIS aircraft industry and the promise of 
its domestic market. 
  FLIGHT INTERNATIONAL, 19-25 Aug 1992, V. 142, No. 4332, 
p. 4, 5, 7. 
  FLIGHT INTERNATIONAL, 26 Aug-01 Sep 1992, V. 142, 
No. 4333, p. 21. 
  "Mosaeroshow-92" materials. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
