<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-15768</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CGABQAADFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920701
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  01 JUL 92 / European Finance and Investment, Germany (4): City flexes
financial muscle - Frankfurt plays psychological card to win the European
central bank
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW FISHER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
JUDGING by the arguments of many German bankers and politicians these days,
just about the only way the country's sceptical citizens could be induced to
part with their treasured D-Mark in exchange for European monetary union
(Emu) would be to put the proposed European central bank in Frankfurt.
This is the efficient, modern, but hardly scintillating city on the River
Main that is home to the Bundesbank, the German central bank which puts a
premium on stability, as well as to the country's leading commercial banks.
Ever since the Second World War, the central bank has seen to it that
Germany's steady economic growth has been accompanied by inflation rates
which are the envy of most of the western world.
It is this very record of successful monetary management that lies behind
the German drive to have the European central bank located in Frankfurt.
'The stable policies of the Bundesbank are closely linked in people's minds
with Frankfurt,' asserts Mr Martin Kohlhaussen, the chief executive of
Commerzbank. 'This is a successful track record which goes back for many
years.'
The Bundesbank itself has tried to avoid the impression that it sees
Frankfurt as the only feasible candidate for the ECB.
Not all its officials feel that the new institution has to be in Frankfurt,
though they are fully behind Germany as the country of location.
However, there have been enough references in speeches and interviews by
German central bankers to Frankfurt's suitability as the home of the ECB to
raise some hackles abroad.
'Stability is regarded as being at one with the D-Mark and Frankfurt,' says
Mr Otmar Issing, one of the Bundesbank's executive directors. 'We see a
decision for Frankfurt against this background.'
In the view of Mr Issing and other proponents of the city, it will not be
enough that the ECB will be set up largely along Bundesbank lines. It must,
he adds, 'also be backed up by people across Europe saying 'this must be
done in Frankfurt'.'
By playing the psychological card, German policymakers hope to convince
other EC members that Frankfurt is, as Mr Kohlhaussen puts it, the 'obvious
and logical' choice for the ECB, preceded by its forerunner, the European
Monetary Institute.
In other words, not only Germans would be reassured by the choice of
Frankfurt, but so would citizens in other countries whose governments and
central banks have a less solid anti-inflationary record.
There are signs that this realisation is getting through, but this may not
necessarily benefit Frankfurt.
Recent German press reports have suggested that the agreement of the French,
British, and other governments to locating the ECB in Germany may be
dependent on its being somewhere else than Frankfurt, namely in Bonn.
This is to avoid giving Frankfurt any special advantage as a financial
centre over London and Paris, its main European rivals.
It is a moot point whether Frankfurt would gain much new business from
having the ECB.
The city would certainly have an enhanced status as the location of the
central institution of Emu, assuming that this really does take place around
the end of the century. But trading in the financial markets would not
necessarily benefit from the fact that ECB policy was decided on the River
Main.
'There would still be healthy competition between financial centres', says
Mr Kohlhaussen. 'Frankfurt would not be superior to other financial cities.'
But a decision against Frankfurt for the ECB would, he reckons, 'be a very
unfortunate signal'.
Mrs Gabriele Eick, the head of Frankfurt's economic development corporation,
feels the same. 'The loss of the D-Mark is taken extremely seriously by
ordinary people.' Frankfurt, she adds, also has good communications, is not
too big, and has attractive cultural offerings and beautiful hilly and
wooded surroundings.
Whatever the politicians finally decide, however, the fact that Frankfurt's
bankers and officials feel positive enough about the city to promote it as
the site of the ECB - with strong backing from Chancellor Helmut Kohl - is
proof of its growing confidence as a financial centre.
Both Mr Kohl and Mr Theo Waigel, the finance minister, have stressed that
they want to see the city develop its financial muscle, not least because of
the extensive capital-raising programme that lies ahead to help finance
Germany's own reunification and the economic reconstruction efforts of
eastern Europe.
This means a more effective centralised stock exchange system based on
Frankfurt as the pre-eminent German bourse. It also involves tighter rules
on insider trading, much more transparency in company share registers, and
fewer restrictions on investment trusts.
Moves to implement these changes are under way, although it remains to be
seen how quickly they will happen. Meanwhile, Frankfurt waits to see if it
will be the favoured choice for the ECB.
It still seems to have the edge over London and Luxembourg, with Amsterdam
regarded as the main threat.
But a lot of water will have to flow under the bridges of the Main before
the rest of the EC accepts Germany's claims for Frankfurt.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 35
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-15769</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CGABQAACFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920701
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  01 JUL 92 / European Finance and Investment, Germany (2): Face to face
with reality - Berlin is unlikely to challenge Frankfurt
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LESLIE COLITT
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
VISIONS a few years ago of Berlin swiftly reclaiming its pre-war role as the
most important German economic and financial centre have collided head-on
with reality. West German banks have neither upgraded their presence in
Berlin since unification nor considered moving headquarters to the city.
Bankers are unanimous in believing that Berlin's financial future will be as
a regional banking centre which will scarcely make a dent in Frankfurt's
dominant position. More than 150 banks operate in Berlin compared with 95 in
1989.
Among the newcomers establishing branches were 24 foreign institutions and
several private banks including Trinkaus and Edmond de Rothschild's Banque
Privee. The Americans, however, apart from Citibank, an investment bank and
a broker, are content to observe the Berlin scene from Frankfurt.
'At present I don't see a real demand for Berlin to be a financial centre,'
Mr Kurt Kasch, board member of Deutsche Bank in Berlin and a frequent critic
of the city's inward-looking political and economic leadership. His own
branch is the largest of DB's 16 main branches and is responsible for two
and one-half east German Laender plus Berlin. Unusually, it also arranged
the bulk of Deutsche Bank's government-guaranteed Hermes export loans last
year to east German companies trading with the CIS states.
Mr Kasch said that as long as the German Government and parliament were not
in Berlin there would be little chance that the major German banks would
upgrade their presence in the capital. But the move from Bonn to Berlin has
been delayed for financial and bureaucratic reasons and is not expected to
begin until 1998.
Mr Egbert Steinke, spokesman of the Berlin Chamber of Industry and Trade
(IHK), said the delay in Berlin's transformation into a working capital is
also negatively affecting the move by service-oriented businesses to the
centre of east Berlin where the government has staked out its claim for
government ministries. Berlin has been enhanced since 1990 by serving as the
financial base for the operations of the big four west German banks in the
northern part of east Germany and has become the centre of a regional
banking network established by Berliner Bank (BB) in which the city still
holds a 56 per cent share.
BB gained branches throughout east Berlin by its takeover of Berliner
Stadtbank and is well represented in the surrounding state of Brandenburg
with its capital of Potsdam. The recent green light given by the city
government to BB's plans to merge with Landesbank Berlin, the former
Sparkasse of Berlin, means that it would overnight become Germany's seventh
largest bank and the only one with headquarters in Berlin. Dr Kurt Fischer,
a board member of Berliner Bank and chairman of the Central and East German
Bank Federation, has been active in carving out a new role for his bank
which he stressed was a 'private' one. He too saw little sense in Berlin
attempting to duplicate financial functions of Frankfurt and that it would
be a 'long time' before financial institutions in Berlin would greatly
increase their volume of business.
'We cannot move the head offices of the banks, the people, the buildings or
the technology from Frankfurt,' he remarked. He and other Berlin-based
bankers warn against neglecting the medium-sized producers, once a mainstay
of the city, who were now being tempted to move out to greenfield sites in
eastern Germany. Banks earned more from producers than from service
companies and they, in any event, were slow in coming to Berlin Mr Fischer
said.
The economic recovery of eastern Europe would enhance Berlin's role - Poland
is only 90km away - but it is still likely to be years before such a revival
takes place. Plans by Mr Manfred Stolpe, the prime minister of Brandenburg,
for a special German-Polish economic development zone on either side of the
border, have been placed on ice. The government does not have the money to
launch so ambitious a project as long as eastern Germany continues to drain
its resources.
Across-the-border economic ties between east Germany and Poland are also
hindered by the creaking Polish telephone network - it takes at least four
hours to get a call from Frankfurt an der Oder to Slubice across the river -
and monumental delays for truck traffic at the border and on inadequate
Polish roads. Additional crossing points are to be built but few companies
will invest in either western Poland or the east German border area until
the infrastructure has been greatly improved.
Meanwhile, the lack of native-owned and managed privatised east German
companies - as opposed to east German subsidiaries of west German companies
 -has placed a damper on hopes the miniscule Berlin stock exchange might
attract east German companies. Mr Dieter Hiss, president of
Landeszentralbank Berlin, doubted it would be used by newly-privatised east
German companies. Given the choice they and east European companies seeking
a stock market launch would probably opt for Frankfurt.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 34
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-15770</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CGABQAABFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920701
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  01 JUL 92 / European Finance and Investment, Germany (3): Spearheading
the transition - David Waller discusses the financial services sector in the
east
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID WALLER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
PRIOR to monetary union in the summer of 1990, there was no private sector
financial services industry in the eastern part of Germany. Since then,
banks and insurance companies have been at the cutting edge of the
transition to a market economy.
Drawn by the prospect of early responsibilities, young bankers and insurance
executives have flocked to the new Lander in their thousands, while
middle-aged executives and their families have moved eastwards in the hope
of adventure.
East Germans have travelled in the other direction, the willing recipients
of a massive private-sector education programme, the aim of which is to turn
those brought up under communism into fully-functioning capitalists. The
first graduates of these training schemes are returning to take up
management positions in the east.
The biggest investment in the east has come from those institutions which
bought the old state banking and insurance monopolies. Others have been
building their businesses from scratch.
In the banking sector, Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank, the two largest
banks in Germany, bought the Staatsbank, the old state sector bank, from the
Treuhand privatisation agency, parcelling out the branch network between
them.
Allianz, the Munich-based insurance giant which ranks as one of the biggest
financial institutions in Europe, bought Deutsche Versicherungs (DVAG), the
former East German state insurance monopoly. There are 35,000 employed in
the insurance industry in the east - 14,000 at the Allianz operation - and
this is expected to rise to 50,000 by 1996.
Information from the Cologne-based German Banks' Association shows that by
May this year, 47 banks were active in the east, with around 750 branches,
likely to increase to 1,000 by the end of next year. The total invested in
buildings, fittings and information technology amounted to DM2.7bn by May,
with another DM2.3bn earmarked for spending by the end of 1993.
At the beginning of May, the banks employed around 19,000 people in the
east, of whom 4,600 were from the west. Total lending amounted to DM50.5bn,
of which 83 per cent is lent to corporate clients rather than private
investors. Nevertheless, the volume of lending to individuals has risen from
DM1.8bn at the end of 1990 to DM8.5bn.
As Professor Otmar Issing, Bundesbank director, observed last month, one
ninth of all bank lending in Germany is now done directly in the east, and
further large sums are lent in connection with west German firms' investment
in the east.
Many of the banks claim to have made a quick return from their business in
the east, heavy investment notwithstanding. This is less due to their
entrepreneurial skills or the burgeoning demand for credit, than the fact
that the state has indirectly given them a helping hand.
Until the beginning of this year, the banks were shielded from the real
risks of doing business in the east. Guarantees from the Treuhand ensured
that the bulk of the lending done in the east was risk-free: if the borrower
went under, the debt would be repaid by the Treuhand. The interest rate
charged for such loans was lower than would be charged for normal commercial
business, but it was still comfortably higher than the banks' cost of funds.
Critics have complained that the banks charged too much for a risk-free
loan, while the banks have defended themselves by saying that the margin was
deserved given the amount of time they spent with their new customers,
helping them to get to grips with the basics of business in a free-market
economy.
Even now, several months after the Treuhand said it would put a stop to new
guarantees, more than two thirds of the total loans outstanding in the east
are protected. Business done at the banks' own risk has risen from DM4.8bn
at the end of 1990 to DM15.3bn at the end of March this year.
In future, it will be harder for the banks to find opportunities to lend
according to normal commercial criteria. Given the lack of basic business
skills in the east and the absence of anything amounting to credit history,
it is inevitable that bad debts - and provisioning against them - will
increase.
Even now, the costs of investments are beginning to tell, most notably at
Deutsche Bank. Even though the bank's activities in the east account for a
relatively small part of total business, its investment there meant that
staff and operating costs rose by DM1.5bn to DM10bn last year, disappointing
analysts when the bank announced its figures in April.
The question of costs is much more pronounced at Allianz, which laid out
DM711m in two stages to buy DVAG. On top of that it seems likely that the
eastern operations will lose more than DM1.5bn in operating losses before it
starts to make an operating profit, perhaps in 1996. It will go into
cumulative profit at some stage in the early part of the next century. If
the cost of funds is taken into account, the payback will come even later.
While Anglo-Saxon analysts scratch their heads and observe that the deal
does not make sense according to normal commercial criteria, Allianz is
convinced it has made the correct strategic decision.
It was based in Berlin before the Second World War and feels that it is
returning home by buying DVAG. It also belives that the prospects for the
market in the east are excellent - before reunification East Germans spent
on insurance about one tenth of their West German neighbours and there is
thus lots of catching up to do. Allianz also belives that rival insurers
will have to spend even more money to build their businesses from scratch.
The long-term prospects for the financial services sector in the east
depend, of course, on the development of the east German economy overall.
Sadly, not all industries have invested as vigorously and as early as the
banks and insurance companies.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 34
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-15771</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CGABQAAAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920701
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  01 JUL 92 / European Finance and Investment, Germany (1): Going for the
lion's share - Is Germany poised to make a decisive leap forward in its
campaign to challenge London as Europe's chief financial centre? David
Waller discusses the programme being mapped out by the government to
establish Finanzplatz Deutschland
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID WALLER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
HANGING ON the wall of the office of Mr Rudiger von Rosen, managing director
of the Frankfurt Stock Exchange, there is a large and lurid picture of a
lion chasing two people through a jungle.
The picture poses a tantalising question, one which fascinates Mr von Rosen
as he sits in his office working on plans to bolster Germany's standing as a
financial centre. Is the lion about to catch the people? Or are they on the
point of escaping?
Mr von Rosen is inclined to see the picture as a metaphor for his own
campaign. Is Germany about to make a decisive leap forward in its campaign
to challenge London as Europe's chief financial centre? Or is the prize on
the verge of slipping away?
These questions were discussed in this very room in January this year when
Mr von Rosen was entertaining Chancellor Kohl on his first visit to the
Exchange - by far the largest in Germany - in nearly 10 years in office.
Mr Kohl's visit to the exchange - he gave a talk to the flower of
Frankfurt's financial and business community - was charged with symbolic
significance.
It represented a turning point in the government's attitude to the
development of Germany as a financial centre.
Hitherto, the Frankfurt stock exchange and the banks had been left largely
to themselves in their battle to enhance Germany's competitive position.
True, in recent years the government had helped the German financial
services industry through deregulation, for example abolishing stock
exchange turnover tax and removing the obstacles which prevented Germany
establishing its own futures and options market, or which stopped German
companies from issuing commercial paper.
But, in his speech to assembled financiers, Mr Kohl was able to offer
something new - concrete and co-ordinated government backing for Finanzplatz
Deutschland, Germany as a financial centre.
The details of the programme had been rushed out on the previous day. A
paper drafted by Mr Theo Waigel, finance minister, outlined the government's
backing for, inter alia, a centralised supervisory body for the Germany
securities industry and a law against insider dealing (at present insider
dealing is not illegal in Germany).
It also spelt out the government's support for: greater transparency of
shareholder registers; moves to bring Germany's eight stock exchanges under
one roof; the introduction of money-market funds (which give investors
direct access to short-term money-market instruments); and further
computerisation of stock-market trading.
In decentralised Germany, Bonn is in no position to impose these changes. In
signalling its position clearly it has, however, brought pressure to bear on
the numerous parties which must come to an agreement before action can be
taken, especially the Lander (states) which play a powerful role in stock
market supervision.
Taken in total, the package could - in the long term - help to give
Germany's financial services industry a role in Europe commensurate with its
status as Europe's strongest industrial power.
At present, Germany's status as a financial centre is somewhat
schizophrenic. On the one hand, Germany has an unassailably powerful
position in European financial markets as a result of the Bundesbank and the
D-Mark. Germans hope this would be consolidated if the European central bank
were sited in Frankfurt or Bonn.
On the other hand, Frankfurt has lost out when competing with other
financial centres to provide a range of financial services, and the German
equity market is especially underdeveloped.
The Bundesbank has been fighting inflation - successfully - for decades.
This gives it, and the currency which it defends, unrivalled strength, and
investors will always find reasons to buy D-Marks and D-Mark Bunds. Last
year, for example, domestic and international investors invested record
amounts in the German Bund market (DM127bn and DM61bn respectively).
Their enthusiasm has been tempered by the unfavourable outlook for interest
rates, but the attractions of Bunds and the currency were drawn into sharp
relief by the result of the Danish referendum on Maastricht. The threat to
monetary and political union prompted investors to buy the D-Mark, and, at
the very least, to hold on to their Bunds while they sold off other
countries' government securities.
That the Bund market is structurally sound is proven by the ease with which
the government has been able to use the market to finance its increased
borrowings following reunification in 1990. But a sound bond market alone
does not constitute a strong financial centre, as the Finance Ministry paper
implicitly recognised in January this year.
Germany's fragmented stock-market structure is a source of inefficiency and
has helped to drive a significant proportion of turnover of the shares of
Germany's largest companies to London. Germany has started to hit back, in
two ways.
First, the Frankfurt Stock Exchange has promoted new technology in a bid to
bring back business to Germany. An increasing volume of trading is being
handled by the IBIS system, introduced as an information exchange system in
December 1989 but upgraded to a trading system for Germany's top 30 shares
(and leading bond issues) in April last year. According to Mr von Rosen,
this has succeeded in wrestling business back from the London-based SEAQ
system.
Second, as prompted by the Waigel paper, Germany's eight stock exchanges
have agreed to come together under one roof as the Deutsche Borse (German
Exchange), although it is not clear when this will finally take effect.
Another key element of the Waigel proposals is the commitment to introduce
insider dealing laws and a centralised regulatory body. Germany's failings
on this count were brought into sharp focus last year as a result of a
series of securities scandals in Frankfurt.
Changes are now supported by the leading financial institutions and - in
principle, at least - by the governments of the Lander. The latter will have
to cede regulatory powers to the centre, and it remains to be seen what form
the new body will take.
The Waigel paper does not tackle - indeed could not hope to tackle - the
weight of cultural obstacles standing in the way of Germany's development as
a financial centre. Here are just two of the cultural barriers:
The stock market plays a limited role in German corporate life: there are
only around 660 listed companies in Germany and the capitalisation of the
market is significantly smaller in proportion to GNP than in the UK or the
US. Equity financing plays second fiddle to bank finance and the vast
majority of quoted companies - all but about 50 - are majority-controlled by
other corporate shareholders or financial institutions.
Liquidity in all but the biggest company shares is limited. Companies cannot
easily be taken over and there are no share options to give German managers
a direct personal interest in share price performance.
Domestic institutional investment is slight: insurance companies invest
85-95 per cent of their portfolio in government securities and the pension
fund industry is in its infancy.
German individuals, with copious amounts of surplus cash, tend to avoid the
equity market in favour of Bunds, in spite of better returns on shares.
There are only about 4.2m shareholders in Germany - around 5 per cent of the
population - compared to 12m in the UK and 51m in the US, 20 per cent of the
population in each case. In fact, the average German household is thought to
spend more on flowers each year than on shares.
Many Germans will argue that the limited role of the stock market is a
source of strength for the German economy, rather than a weakness, in that
it encourages long-term thinking, liberating company management from the
need to please short-sighted institutional investors.
Whether or not this is the case, it seems improbable that Germany can
develop into a leading financial services centre without developing a
financial culture as well.
Mr Waigel's plans represent an important step forward - but it is likely
that it will be some years before Mr von Rosen will finally be able to
conclude that the lion on his wall has caught up with its human prey.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 33
</PAGE>
</DOC>
