<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5536</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAD7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Arts: Non-vintage but plenty of fizz - Edinburgh
International Festival
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY and RICHARD FAIRMAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
NOBODY would call this a vintage year for the Edinburgh Fringe: a fact which
probably reflects the recession. I won't spend time on most of the Fringe
shows I've seen this year.
I was glad to see an Italian troupe, Le Maschere, perform Goldoni's Un
Curioso Accidente at the Richard Demarco Gallery (in Italian) and an
Edinburgh student troupe, Les Escogriffes, perform Marivaux's Les Fausses
Confidences at the Adama House Theatre (in French), but my pleasure was in
the plays. Likewise Sex After Supper, a celebration of erotic poetry from
Shakespeare to the Restoration, was a welcome introduction to reams of
period sex. In none of these cases, however, were the performances
remarkable.
It is a tonic when an interpreter of real authority turns up. In the case of
Eleanor Bron there are two types of interpretation involved. She has
translated from the German Christine Bruckner's Desdemona - if you had only
spoken] (1983) - subtitled 'Eleven Uncensored Speeches of Eleven Incensed
Women' - and has had it published by Virago (paperback Pounds 5.90). She is
also presenting three of the speeches as a one-person show, directed by
Stuart Burge. At the Pleasance it is a sell-out, with several hundred
viewers a day.
Bruckner's ploy - women of history or legend telling history or legend their
way - is not new, but it is fun. This is Feminism Without Tears, devoid of
stridency; Goethe's common, fat wife does not rail at Goethe but merely
rebukes his aristocratic soul-love, Charlotte von Stein, for being so
snotty. As a stage show, it is meant to be a tour de force, and succeeds.
Everything about Bron turns into expression. The very bones of her face are
grateful for the limelight; the grand arcs of the eyebrows rise and fall;
the dark eyes themselves turn and gleam; the teeth and lips shine and open.
She turns each character, flawlessly, into someone British. Martin Luther's
wife busy at her kitchen table, is Scottish; Petrarch's Laura, dying of the
plague, speaks with the grand utterance of a Mediterranean aristocrat who
has learnt English; Goethe's wife Christiane, fat, heavy, fond of port and
not long to live, is Yorkshire.
But the show is rather too charming. I admired Bron's elegance and
virtuosity, but she didn't always make these characters real. We're too
conscious of the effect each moment is designed to make. Her diction is
beautiful, but it goes more for the music of the lines than their drama.
(The two need not be distinct goals.) Bron is always a charmer; but she
could be so much more.
As sociology and as politics, but not as entertainment, let me recommend the
late-night Moulin Russ, a satirical cabaret given by half-a-dozen Moscow
University Student Show. The intellectual age of most Festival fringe Shows
is about 19, but this one is nearer 12.
The kids begin by sending up the world's cliched idea of Russia -
Tchaikovsky, soul, high art - and then present an equally cliched but far
more cynical idea, in which all Russians are bored with work, are besotted
with vodka and keep committing suicmde.
I laughed three times. Twice at the all-male dead-drunk Siberian Tango, all
off-balance and drink-driven. And once as the cute compere behaved like a
pimp to one of his girls and took from her the tip she had just received;
beaming at the audience, he announced proudly 'Our first step towards
capitalism.'
The show's most interesting side was its pretence at decadence while
displaying a sexual innocence unknown in the West. Once I thought two men
were miming fellatio, but no, it was just part of some mirthless Russian
romp. At the end they all go swimming, and two of the men are briefly seen
naked. What larks]
The rest of the show was dire - with the kids lip-synching poorly to taped
songs in Russian and miming heavily, repetitiously and very eagerly. The
zest with which they sent up the sins of Russia was baffling. Don't these
studunts know these harsh jokes at Russia's expense have all been made
before, for decades, inside Russia and out?
                         *      *      *
WHEN so much is on offer, how best to judge the music at the Edinburgh
festival? Contrary to the headlines, which busy themselves with the big
operatic and orchestral events, the climate is probably most accurately
gauged at the recitals. A morning that starts well at the Queen's Hall, the
festival's prime recital venue, will be a day on which the sun shines for
the visiting music-lover.
Weather report this year: mostly fine so far. A series of five solo vocal
recitals has brought together an uncommonly talented group of young singers.
Three have appeared in the festival's opening fortnight; the other two are
scheduled for the final week. They promise to be very different musical
personalities, but if the ideal young recitalist is one fresh and
uncomplicated, the first in the series will have fitted the bill nicely.
The early-morning sunshine shone right through Barbara Bonney's programme.
With her bright soprano and unaffected manner, she made songs by Mendelssohn
and Grieg effortlessly sparkle.
There is more depth to some of the music she chooses, such as Berg's Seven
Early Songs and the more brooding of the Richard Strauss, that this
essentially bright-eyed, pristine singing can find. It was surprising to
find her miss the dewy-eyed delicacy of Strauss's Standchen, too. But within
her own scope of interpretation everything works.
Barber's Hermit Songs, well accompanied by Geoffrey Parsons, were
particularly engaging. This is an unusual series of songs to pre-medieval
monastic Irish poetry and Bonney's ability to resoind simply and honestly,
without the slightest trace of the sentimental, went to their heart - a
shining example of the art that conceals art.
The second to appear was Isabelle Vernet, accompanied by Marie-Jeanne
Serero. This French soprano, on whom so many hopes have been pinned, is a
more complex proposition by far. Not the least reason for that is the voice
itself, a fine, if unpredictable instrument, poorly-focused, uncontrolled at
the top, but also saturated in beautiful and sensuous colours. There is
operatic potential here without a doubt.
Unfortunately, the young Vernet arrived in Edinburgh with her luggage packed
full of ideas from her teacher, the much-loved Regine Crespin. As she made
her way through a programme of French songs, including Faure, Hahn, Ravel's
Sheherazade and even Rosenthal's Fido the dog, a favourite Crespin encore,
there was barely a phrase which was not an echo of her great predecessor.
But in replication, all that had been individual originally lost its force.
Her love for the songs is not in doubt. The promise is real. Now it is time
for the real Miss Vernet to sing out.
The third of the singers, and the most warmly received, was Andreas Schmidt,
taking the place of the advertised Uwe Heilmann. Those who have followed
this young baritone's career closely say that he, too, used to emulate a
certain great Lieder singer.
But his performance of Schubert's Die schone Mullerin was largely free from
affectation. This was a scrupulously prepared piece of singing, a bit
monochrome, with not much spontaneity, but giving pleasure in the exemplary
warmth and roundness of the voice. Schmidt must have worked hard to get the
tone sounding so natural on every vowel. Everything essential is already in
place for the mature artist to develop at his own pace.
Geoffrey Parsons was again the pianist, offering accompaniments
inidividually tailored to Schmidt's requirements, not just off-the-peg
support. His frequent presence is another feature that reliably signals a
good start to the day.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XVI
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5537</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAD6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Arts: Jilted John's comeback - Off the Wall
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANTONY THORNCROFT
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
AROUND midnight tonight, the Perrier Pick of the Edinburgh Fringe Award will
be presented to one knocked-out comedy performer. Whoever wins will collect
Pounds 2,000, a London showcase - and the inside track to a television
series.
The Perrier is a useful filter, reducing more than 500 Fringe productions to
five must-see acts (although this year's show list is more 'I might as well
pop in' rather than 'Give me a ticket or I'll kill you').
The list contains two traditional stand-ups - Jo Brand and Mark Thomas, who
both are appearing in the Assembly Rooms. Brand is a balls-breaker whose
self-deprecating view of herself is nothing compared with her disdain of
men. She reduces them to quivering wimps.
Thomas is a cross between Ben Elton and last year's winner, Frank Skinner.
He is not as maniacally right-on as Elton, or as agreeably filthy as
Skinner.
I found him too self-satisfied for words; he relished his 'this will shock
you' routine too much. I can't see the winner in these two.
Steve Coogan and John Thomson are combining their talents at the Gilded
Balloon. Both have agreeable caricatures, especially the student-hating
drunk of Coogan.
Thomson is totally original as Bernard Manning's alter ego, Bernard
Right-On. All the familiar dirty jokes have clean, happy, wholesome endings
 -weird, but it works.
The outsider is Bruce Morton, who is more a conversationalist than a wit. He
digresses at the Rifle Lodge about the Seven Deadly Sins.
It is rather like sitting next to a diverting character at dinner, agreeable
rather than transfixing. Morton is probably too minimalist to win, but his
show has charm.
Which leaves John Shuttleworth at The Pleasance. Shuttleworth is a dreadful
northern comedian, the kind you might find on a Monday night in the least
popular club in Batley. He dedicates his dire songs to his wife, Betty, and
sings off-key.
He could win the Perrier because he is really Graham Fellows, who knows how
successful you can be with rubbish. In 1978, he had a hit in his previous
persona, Jilted John.
HERITAGE minister David Mellor was quick to realise that looking after the
arts and sport enabled him to spend the summer swanning around Europe.
This took him from the Barcelona Olympics to the Salzburg and Bayreuth
festivals, with the fig-leaf that he was actually working. Hence the
quickness of the media to dub him the Minister of Fun.
Now, though, his busman's holiday must come to an end. There are some
serious decisions awaiting him on his desk.
The most pressing is the fate of Pitchford Hall in Shropshire, the most
famous timber-framed manor house in the country. Christie's has already
published the catalogue for the auction of the contents next month and,
while a rescue package for the whole estate has been assembled, it has to be
approved by Mellor.
Basically, the family has agreed to accept a knock-down price of Pounds
1.8m. plus a tax douceur on the contents. The National Heritage Fund would
dip into its kitty to buy Pitchford and its contents and English Heritage
would then maintain it (or, rather, try to find a private tenant who would
pay for the upkeep and repair bills).
This is a much cheaper scheme than the earlier National Trust proposal to
take on the house if the government supplied the cash for the endowment.
The new chairman of the National Heritage Fund, Lord Rothschild, sees it as
a fitting start to his stewardship. So does the new chairman of English
Heritage, Jocelyn Stevens, who seems to be continuing the expansionist line
of his predecessor, Lord Montagu, and taking on properties which previously
would have gone to the Trust.
But Mrs Oliver Colthurst, owner of Pitchford, wants to know now. Unless
Mellor approves the rescue plan in the next few days, the auction of the
furniture will proceed (the pictures, which offer an unrivalled run of
family portraits, may be held back because of their undoubted heritage
importance). But Pitchford in its entirety would be lost for ever.
Not only Mrs Colthurst wants a decision. The Heritage Fund needs one just as
badly because there is a sudden - and even more pressing - candidate for its
limited funds.
Buxton Crescent, in that fine old Georgian spa town in Derbyshire, is in an
advanced state of decay. It has been abandoned by its owners: indeed, its
actual ownership is in doubt.
The Fund sees the preservation of this 18th century masterpiece as almost a
test case for its existence. But it would need to act now, taking with it
the local council and, presumably, English Heritage.
Only Mellor could underpin the hefty financial price of preserving Buxton
Crescent. His presence is doubly needed.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XVI
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5538</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAD5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Arts: No let-up from America - Radio
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By B. A. YOUNG
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
WHILE the American election is pending, Alistair Cooke's Letter from America
is extra-interesting. It always is interesting, as one of the few items of
its kind on BBC radio, the equivalent of the 'middles' in the weekly
reviews.
Cooke's programme offers the view of the intelligent, well-informed private
citizen on current American affairs. Election comment has sparse time on our
news bulletins as Bush threatens to intervene in Iraq and the United Nations
in Yugoslavia.
But American electors are not likely to imagine that such matters outweigh a
presidential election. Alistair Cooke last week not only reported on the
polls, he gave background to the polls' significance, with their minute
opinion samples.
Both parties, he reckons, are in some awe of the millions of Hispanic and
Black voters. The various comments that follow The World at One are often
good, but an extended programme like Letter from America is better. We
should have more of such things.
But back at home: Radio 3. The changes cannot be fairly assessed until the
Proms are over - and the cricket season. So far nothing has struck me as
insupportable, though the new chatty style of the presenters is not to my
taste. But a word must be said about the cricket.
There are doubtless folk who need to know, ball by ball, what goes on in the
Tests, conceivably others who feel the same about the Texaco Trophy games. I
doubt, however, whether the 'large new audience for classical music and
opera' at whom controller Nicholas Kenyon says he aims really holds that
such coverage is worth the loss of so much music.
Why should not Test Matches go on to Radio 5, which happily devoted day
after day to the Olympics? True, cricket commentary is slow compared with
athletics; but even so, it is not altogether barred from Radio 5. It gets an
occasional half-day - sometimes even in competition with Radio 3, for
listeners too idle to swap frequencies.
While I am on Radio 3, a good mark for repeating Radio 4's fine reading of
Joyce's Ulysses, and a bad mark for the Summer Season of drama, which goes
on as trivial as ever. The Lyme Regis Food and Fertility Festival was John
Fletcher's surrealist (sic) joke about provincial arts festivals. It was
awful in just the way you would deduce from its title. Shaun MacLoughlin
directed.
Not a happy week-end for drama, in fact. Peter Flannery's ambitious Singer
on Radio 4 on Saturday and Sunday told of Peter Singer (played by Anthony
Sher below his optimum calibre), who survived Auschwitz to become a slum
landlord in England, where he became rich and influential enough for a
knighthood.
The synopsis may have read well, but despite the interposed commentary,
there was not enough assurance either in the prison or, in the later scenes,
in the Rachmanesque world in London. Michael Fox was the director.
What I thought would be a real novelty was Radio 4's Keep It Clean, a serial
documentary on Wednesday mornings. I hoped for something like Radio 1's
do-good programmes; but no, it was critique. The first programme dealt with
soap (and later come aftershave, deodorant, shampoo, handkerchiefs and
toilet-paper).
We were reminded what an innovation baths are, even washing itself. Between
the wars, there were children sewn into their underclothes for the winter,
boys who only took their socks off on Saturdays. In the 18th century there
was a tax on soap (Gladstone took it off in 1853).
We have the great William Hesketh Lever to thank for our present position.
Lifebuoy soap was not only for washing but for the relief of typhoid,
cholera, even carbuncles. Only after the arrival of Camay, did soap become
the luxury it is now, turning women's bathrooms into rivals to their
drawing-rooms. Next week starts with Old Spice.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XVI
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5539</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAD4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Arts: Graft and painting in 16th century Rome - Timothy
Potts on a great artistic patron, Alessandro Farnese, who commissioned
numerous paintings and buildings
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TIMOTHY POTTS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE FARNESE were relative newcomers to the courtly circles of 16th-century
Rome. But when one of their number - Alessandro Farnese the elder, alias
Paul III - managed to attain the papal tiara, he did his utmost to ensure
that they were there to stay . For all four grandsons he skilfully
negotiated duchies or had them ordained as cardinals.
In the case of his namesake Alessandro this was the only beginning: cardinal
at 14, he was appointed a year later vice-chancellor of the Roman Church (a
station only second to that of the pope himself). Miriad other honours and
benefices followed and with them an income equivalent to one-tenth that of
the whole Vatican. Even in Cinquecento Italy this was nepotism on a truly
grand scale.
Alessandro liked to boast that he owned the three most beautiful things in
Rome: the Gesu, his palace, and his daughter Clelia. That two of these were
buildings was no accident. Eager to follow the Farnese's political and
ecclesiastical position (he vainly hoped one day to follow in his
grandfather's footsteps), Alessandro lavished much of his phenomenal wealth
on erecting and decorating his various episcopal residences, especially the
Chancelleria, and his private villa outside Rome at Caprarola (a magnificent
construction which many contemporaries praised above the Escorial), as well
as a vast number of churches and other public monuments.
Titian remarked: 'The fame so great of the great Cardinal Farnese resounds
in the ears of the world in such a way that no one speaks of anything else'
 -high praise, even if his tongue may have been silvered by the hope of
finally getting paid.
The sack of Rome by the forces of Charles V in 1527 had left much of the
city in urgent need of reconstruction, presenting an opportunity for
conspicuous piety in which Alessandro was not to be outdone, becoming the
most prolific church builder of his day. His crowning commission, designed
by Vignola, was the Gesu, the largest holy edifice of the time besides St
Peter's and destined to be the blueprint for innumerable Jesuit churches the
world over.
Although no connoisseur of painting, Alessandro also made sure that his
walls were decorated by the best: Vasari, Salviata, Taddeo and Frederico
Zuccaro, Titian and El Greco.
Alessandro seems genuinely to have enjoyed the company of scholars and
artists, whom he cultivated and patronised in lavish style - indeed more
lavish than many in post-Tridentine Italy thought appropriate.
It was at one of his dinner parties in 1546 that the idea of a series of
lives of the great artists was floated. Proposed by Alessandro's artistic
mentor of the time, Paolo Giovo, it was another of his guests, Vasari, who
was eventually prevailed upon by the assembled concensus to undertake the
project - to the eternal gratitude of Renaissance historians ever since.
The life and patronage of Alessandro, from his early interest in the
decorative arts (the Farnese Hours and Cassetta Farnese) through the
propagandistic celebrations of Farnese achievement in the palace frescoes to
the sacral commissions of his more pious old age are ably expounded and
documented, replete with references and editions of the original sources, in
Clare Robertson's book.
Despite its handsome, lavishly illustrated appearance, however, the text
reads much like the doctorate from which it grew. Dense and comprehensive,
its merits are those of scholarship rather than popularisation, a difficult
metamorphosis to carry off for even as visual a subject as this.
As the latest wave in a flood of patronage studies over the past 30 years
(the watershed was Haskell's classic Patrons and Painters of 1963), this
offering sounds a rather hollow note. What was patron X's 'taste' and how
did it evolve? What influence did this have on his commissions?
Issues which marked such a novel departure when first explored by Haskell,
here have more the hackneyed tone of the examiner's favourite perennials.
With Haskell, there was a feeling of important questions which just had not
been asked before.
With Robertson, one feels they are addressed from a sense of obligation,
devoid of any intuition for what will get to the heart of this particular
subject. The answers - 'he was generally more concerned with iconography
than stylistic issues. . . His choices of architect. . . seem to be based on
aesthetic criteria, though presumably considerations such as efficiency and
speed of execution must also have been important' - are often unsurprising
and sometimes unconvincing - 'The concern for impressive facades and piazzas
in front of his churches. . . suggests that religious patronage was not
simply motivated by piety' - leaving a prevailing feeling of sympathy that
so much effort was expended for such slight returns.
So why will we study patrons? Because, Robertson tells us, 'we may therefore
increase our understanding of the constraints imposed on (the artist) during
the process of creation. . . By isolating such influences the art historian
may hope to understand more fully how the work of art was made. This will
help us to better appreciate the artist's skill in responding to external
limitations.'
This is all very well, but it is not done. The artists are never reassessed,
the loop is never closed. The early promises are left in an empty and
unfulfilled rationalisation. Better surely, and more honest, simply to
declare the importance of patronage in its own right to social history and
indeed to catholic art history.
As for Alessandro, it is an artist who should properly have the final word,
especially when the verdict of of Michaelangelo himself is preserved: '(In
France and Italy) you will find private individuals and lords who do not at
this moment appreciate painting. . . like Cardinal Farnese, who does not
know what a painting is, but who made very reasonable conditions for Messer
Perino (del Vaga), simply so that he could be called his painter. . . in
addition to paying him very well for his works'. A patron with more money
than sense - what more could an artist ask for?
'Il Gran Cardinale': Alessandro Farnese, Patron of the Arts by Clare
Robertson, Yale Pounds 35, 323 pages
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XVI
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5540</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAD3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Books: Old found land
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RODERICK DUNNETT
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
VINLAND by George Mackay Brown John Murray Pounds 14.95
AS a chronicler of community, the Orcadian poet George Mackay Brown has few
peers. An Orkney Tapestry and A Portrait of Orkney are easily the best
introductions to those islands. His short stories - A Time to Keep, followed
by the collections Andrina, Hawkfall and The Masked Fisherman - capture, as
perhaps no-one else could, 12 centuries of island continuity and change.
Vinland is Mackay Brown's fourth full-length novel. His first, Greenvoe,
coupled a Dylan Thomas-like skill at charting small-town life with a
scathing attack on 'progress' in the form of uranium mining (set to music in
Peter Maxwell Davies's cantata Black Pentecost). It is when he dwells, with
a kind of Homeric empathy, on the follies of man-made destruction or the
shifting cross-currents of historical change that Brown most powerfully hits
his mark.
The title is perhaps a misnomer. Like its predecessor, Magnus, to which it
forms a sort of spiritual prelude, Vinland (the title derives from the Norse
sagas of that name) is set as much in Brown's native Orkney as on the sea
paths that lured the Vikings to North America. Were it not for the opening
chapter one might surmise the place never existed, except in the mind's eye.
Mackay Brown's Vinland is a land of lost content - an Elysium, with echoes
of Swift and Defoe, briefly glimpsed, never-forgotten.
Stowing away on board Leif Erickson's longboat during his celebrated voyage,
an Orkney boy, Ranald Sigmundson, alights on the coast of Newfoundland,
where he and the crew encounter a peaceable indigenous Indian community whom
they term 'Skraelings', or savages. Primitivism strikes a chord and
returning to 'civilisation' - the intrigues of Norse and Scottish politics -
Ranald reviews his Odyssey with growing nostalgia, withdraws from court
bickering, settles down and turns to the images of Christianity as a source
of renewal - a Grail for a system that reeks of blood-lust and decay.
If the sentences are unhurried, the adventure itself shifts at arrow speed.
The youth retrieves a family estate, fights the Irish near Dublin, and
narrowly escapes to befriend a homicidal outcast, a Norse King and his
vassals, the EarIs of Orkney.
Ranald's growth to maturity is set alongside the gradual ascendancy of
Catholicism. Europe is on the brink of change. A new era beckons.
Mackay Brown not only brings saga vividly to life but is equally at home
with allegorical writing, akin to Hesse (Narziss und Goldmund) or Thomas
Mann (The Holy Sinner). But while the climax to his last novel, Time in a
Red Coat, served to sum up and focus an extended narrative, Vinland's
slightly self-conscious philosophical peroration seems rather less
successful than the narrative itself in underscoring Ranald's emotive shift
from heroics to asceticism.
Brown's poetry, esteemed alongside Scottish writers - Muir, McDiarmid, Dunn,
Norman McCaig - permeates his novels. 'Slow pulsings go through the elements
of sea and land'; 'The moon has gone into her cave with her pot of ashes and
her quenched candle-stump'; 'His beard a galaxy of tears'. Images are
carefully sustained, whether the recurrent Hindu notion of life as a
threadbare coat, or the ship itself, figuratively inverted into the nave of
an island church.
The characterisation is simple, but accomplished. Some might find such epic
textures irksome. Those attuned to Mackay Brown's work will appreciate
Vinland as more than just a good yarn. The adventurous reader, charting
unfamiliar territory, will be amply rewarded.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5541</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAD2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Arts: Sex, religion, politics - and acting / Interview with
actor Gerard Murphy
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL ARDITTI
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
IN 1982, the opening production at London's Barbican Arts Centre was Trevor
Nunn's Henry IV, in which Gerard Murphy made an achingly adolescent Hal. Ten
years on he returns to the Barbican, playing under Adrian Noble as Oedipus
in Sophocles' Theban trilogy, which is currently previewing in London after
last year's successful season at Stratford-upon-Avon's Swan. It opens at The
Pit on September 10.
It is Murphy's first venture into classical tragedy, although he has
appeared opposite Glenda Jackson in two later reworkings, O'Neill's Mourning
Becomes Electra at the Glasgow Citizens and Racine's Phaedra at the Old Vic.
He is acutely aware of what is lost in translation: 'Even in Timberlake
Wertenbaker's excellent version, I miss the music of the Greek. No one has
ever captured it. Even Yeats made the decision only to write the choruses in
poetry, the rest in prose.'
But the production style is no mere heightened naturalism; he describes how
Noble has aimed to capture the spirit of the original. 'It's easy to forget
that all the plays, apart from Oedipus at Colonus, were first performed at
festivals. They had the jubilance we associate today with musicals. Three
actors would come and join a group of amateurs who'd been preparing the
choruses for 18 months - like the local operatic society rehearsing the
numbers for a show.'
In today's theatre, where music with everything often seems to be the
watchword, a far more daunting element may well be the theology. 'The plays
are inhabited by the gods. The religious element is crucial, and it's
equally crucial that it's not Christian. Oedipus has to reject his son to
fulfil his destiny; it's essential to show that this is the right thing to
do in the religion of the play. . . But then all interesting plays are about
sex, religion and politics, which as a Northern Irish gay Catholic interests
me a lot.'
The three plays, Oedipus Tyrannos, Oedipus at Colonus and Antigone, were not
written as a trilogy - indeed the latter, which is the last to be performed,
was written first - but Murphy finds the juxtaposition fascinating, both for
actor and audience. He relishes the chance to age in the course of an
evening and, like Derek Jacobi, is one of the rare actors who is equally
convincing young and old.
If the age range of Oedipus is great, the emotional range is still greater.
It is the latest in a long line of mammothly taxing roles which have led
from his salad days at the Glasgow Citizens through Webster, Williams,
Marlowe, Sartre, Genet and countless Shakespeares for the RSC. He is one of
few younger actors who is happy to work on large stages. Though he talks of
his love for comedy and the camera, it is always the classics to which he
returns.
'I'm very attached to heightened work because I think it's dying, and it
shouldn't. One reason a lot of actors say that they don't ever want to do
the big parts in big spaces is because it's so exhausting. But I need it.
I'm a drug addict and my drug is adrenalin; as soon as the adrenalin tap is
switched off, I collapse. And I know nothing that gives you more adrenalin
than to play big roles on big stages.'
But the cost is clear. 'With a part like Oedipus, I have to understand and
at some level touch his emotions during the evening. Simply to do it
technically, which any skilled actor can do, is cheating. I've learnt most
about acting from great singers: Bette Midler, Van Morrison and, especially,
Lena Horne. They make every audience feel as if it's special. I have to do
the same. I have to expose my emotions. That can make you loved or hated,
because some people don't like seethings that are so raw.'
He learnt his credo, along with his craft, at the Citizens, which he joined
in the late Seventies after studying music, his first love, in Belfast.
There was no theatrical background in his family, who were all sailors and
farmers, but 'Ireland is very theatrical anyway.'
The Celtic connection was maintained in Glasgow, where the artistic
triumvirate of Giles Havergal, Robert David Macdonald and Philip Prowse
became his mentors. The work was famously challenging and he was encouraged
to take as many risks in his acting as the company took in its repertoire.
Indeed Havergal's belief that, as a subsidised theatre, they had a duty to
be adventurous has influenced him ever since.
And, though he has worked in it almost exclusively and for the past decade
the RSC has been his second spiritual home, it is the subsidised theatre's
timidity that he sees as the cause of the current malaise. 'Theatre is
becoming terminally safe. Everything is constrained by profitability. The
RSC and the National were built as centres of excellence - and there's a lot
of excellence there - but what they really are are centres of success.'
Like other actors in their late thirties, and some notoriously younger, he
has diversified into directing, with Deathwatch, The Maids and a highly
acclaimed Edward II for the RSC. This is not fuelled by dissatisfaction with
established directors but respect for them: 'Acting is a bit like
prostitution, which is not a job I demean at all. Although I know that many
disagree violently, I truly believe that it's the actor's job to do the
director's version of a play, even if it means making a fool of oneself. And
so to do a production myself is a great joy.'
In March he goes to Japan to direct and design The Merchant of Venice. He is
rapidly learning Japanese, as much to socialise with the actors in the pub
as to discourse with them in the rehearsal room. 'I originally intended to
do a very visual production; but then they can do that so much better. So I
thought I'd do a Western-style production, which meant getting to grips with
the text.'
He has commissioned a new translation. There are 42 versions of the play in
Japanese and each is in some way unsatisfactory; generations of elocution
students would be dismayed to discover their favourite speech transcribed as
'Mercy doesn't come through muslin, but falls directly from top to bottom.'
Acting remains his primary focus: 'I love my job. It's only because art in
this country is so undervalued that people like me are put in the position
of wondering whether what we do is worthless. I love going to the theatre: I
can feel more revived from that than anything, whether I laugh, think or
cry.' A welcome affirmation from an actor who boldly breaks rules and
boundaries, giving reality to the largest of emotions and clarity to the
most complex of men.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5542</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAD1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Books: Cadfael bones up - Crime
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By WILLIAM WEAVER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   IN 1977, with A Morbid Taste for Bones, Edith Pargeter
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
writing under the pseudonym of Ellis Peters - initiated the chronicles of
the 12th century monk Brother Cadfael and of his abbey of Saint Peter and
Saint Paul in Shrewsbury. If, in becoming a Benedictine, Cadfael thought he
was withdrawing from the world and its turmoil, over the past 15 years Ellis
Peters has thoroughly undeceived him, for the abbey conducts its busy life
in a veritable whirlwind of disorder and crime.
On the larger stage, there is the drawn-out conflict between King Stephen
and the Empress Maud; closer to home, there are intramural jealousies,
mistaken vocations, mysteries and murders. With Poirot-like insight into
human frailties, and a fair dose of luck, Cadfael has proved capable of
dispelling every shadow - at least until the next chronicle.
The 19th of the series had just appeared, entitled The Holy Thief (Headline
Pounds 14.99); and Peters' publishers have chosen to celebrate the occasion
 -and the author's approaching 79th birthday - by reissuing, in hard cover,
some of the earlier Cadfael stories and by announcing the recent conclusion
of a deal for a Cadfael TV series.
The holy theft that serves as focus for the new Cadfael chronicle involves a
saint's bones, which are the pride of the abbey and the envy of other, less
endowed coenobia. Actually, the remains have already been the object of some
trickery, as recounted in an earlier Cadfael volume; but this time the holy
theft is accompanied by a distinctly profane robbery and a puzzling murder.
There are some of the usual Peters ingredients - a lissome, slightly
effeminate youth, a lapsed novice, a natural calamity (a flood this time) -
and a fair amount of mediaeval erudition, notably about troubadors and
ancient instruments.
While Cadfael addicts will find nothing to complain about, the more detached
reader or one approaching the series for the first time may find this
chronicle rather too discursive, even repetitious. The prose has an
occasional slip, dropping from the usual, agreeable near-archaic into stark
modern, with references to leaving 'the options open' and even a 'roll in
the hay.'
Anne Perry's murder stories set in late Victorian times and featuring
Inspector Pitt and his intrepid wife Charlotte have by now won a loyal
audience, which will welcome the latest in the series, Highgate Rise
(Souvenir Pounds 14.99). The familiar world of hansoms and withdrawing
rooms, with references to the Queen and Jack the Ripper, is carefully
pictured. Some of the characters have a sub-Dickensian grotesque quality
(and a pompous verbosity that we seem to associate with the final decades of
the last century), and there is a great deal of reiterated information, but
Perry sets a nice problem and keeps the story moving. When Charlotte Pitt,
her pathetic maid Gracie, her sister Emily, and Emily's
great-aunt-by-marriage all take a hand in the investigations, the narration
assumes a prankish Nancy-Drew tone, and poor Inspector Pitt is reduced
virtually to a walk-on role, but never mind, it's all in good fun.
After a dozen novels featuring the sage Superintendant Tesuo Otani, of the
Kobe Police, the author James Melville has re-cast himself as a gaijin
Watson and allows Otani, now officially retired, to tell the story of The
Body Wore Brocade (LittleBrown Pounds 13.99) in his own voice, which - after
all - is hardly distinguishable from Melville's. Having quarrelled with his
wife, the long-suffering Hanae, Otani visits a Noh performance, then is
accidentally shot, and is soon deep in a murder investigation.
As usual, Melville's (or Otani's) reader is unobtrusively taught a great
deal about contemporary Japan, as exotic as Cadfael's Middle Ages or Pitt's
Victorian London.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5543</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAD0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Arts: Private sketches of Jack the Dripper's troubled psyche
 -Marina Vazey considers an exhibition of Jackson Pollock's collected
'psychoanalytic' drawings
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MARINA VAZEY
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   IS EVERY scrap by a great
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
or, at the least, both significant and controversial - artist of interest to
the general public as well as the scholar? Is every drawing, every piece of
evidence of help to us all in tracking the paths of genius and talent?
Moreover, should private notes and doodles be publicly presented? The secret
drawers of the studio turned out? The confidential files posthumously
exposed? These are increasingly pertinent questions for biographers - and
art historians.
Such speculation is inevitable in the face of the array of drawings
undertaken in the cause and course of psychotherapy by Jackson Pollock
(1912-1956), the first mythical character of American art, which have been
on view at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art. A complete and handsome
catalogue, Jackson Pollock: 'Psychoanalytic' Drawings by Professor Claudo
Cernuschi (Duke University Press) has also been published.
By his mid-30s, Pollock was probably the best known, or notorious,
contemporary painter in America, nicknamed Jack the Dripper, for his
innovative technique of pouring - even throwing - paint on to unstretched
canvas laid out on the studio floor. A member of the first generation of
abstract expressionists, the first American Ism to achieve international
recognition, he had been the subject of a picture story in Life - an
apotheosis indeed - calmly entitled 'Is he America's Greatest Living
Painter?', had represented America at the Venice Biennale, in a group show
now seen by some commentators as a conscious bid for cultural clout in the
early days of the Cold War, and had been the subject of a classic film by
Hans Namuth.
By 1958, under the inspired guidance of Bryan Robertson, Pollock's first big
retrospective was seen in Britain at the Whitechapel, and for the past four
decades Pollocks have been eagerly sought by all major museums: his 'Blue
Poles', the most costly contemporary painting of its time when purchased by
the National Gallery of Australia, was a cause celebre down under, and
graced an Australian postage stamp.
Pollock's noisy life, the subject of several biographies, continues to
command interest, while his art gains in stature, as admired in Europe -
unusually equally so in France and Germany - as it is in America. His
reputation as an artist seems relatively secure. So the question is, do we
need to see these drawings? For the public, do they cast helpful light on
his character, working methods, and illuminate his art?
The conquering hero came to New York as a student aged 15; born in Wyoming,
he had spent his childhood in California and Arizona.  He was a profoundly
neurotic and disturbed personality, as well as prodigiously prolific and
active; and in the course of his life had several sustained periods of
psychotherapy and analysis as well as in-hospital treatment, primarily for
alcoholism.
In the course of his first period of therapy, with Dr Henderson, who had
himself been analysed by Carl Gustav Jung, his analyst suggested that the
artist bring in his drawings as a means of expressing himself - Pollock
found conversation difficult - in the therapeutic situation. Nearly 25 years
after Pollock's death, Dr Henderson retrieved the drawings from his files,
exhibited them as a group, and put them on the market. Pollock's widow, the
painter Lee Krasner, went to court to prevent their sale; in her view their
public appearance violated the confidentiality of the doctor-patient
relationship. But in 1977 Krasner lost the case, and the drawings have been
in various collections since. So large a group has not been exhibited
together for more than 20 years, although they were first published as a
group in 1970, and are well documented in the Pollock catalogue raisonne
published in 1978.
The present exhibition and publication plays down to the point of
invisibility the Jungian interpretation of the drawings, and simply states
that the drawings are not the product of neurosis but the result of
Pollock's normal artistic practice. Thus there are quotation marks in the
title for the adjective 'psychoanalytic'.
Well, yes and no: Pollock studies seem all too often to reel from one
oversimplification to another. These drawings were not done for therapy,
they were part of Pollock's normal working practice, but they were used in
therapy. Pollock's communication was visual not verbal, and he was intensely
eager and receptive to a variety of visual influences, from Amer-Indian art,
heavily reliant on abstract symbols, the Mexican muralists, notably Orozco,
and, especially, Picasso and the surrealists.
These drawings do impress because of their elaborate linear structure, their
reliance on a beguiling and fascinating mixture of the representational and
the abstract, with eyes - say - or equine forms appearing from out of a
ferocious tangle of lines, stylised animal heads, stray limbs and animal
bodies, some of which appear as relatively straightforward Picassoid
variations. Anger and terror certainly are ingredients in a rather heady
emotional mix.
However, San Francisco owns a Pollock masterpiece, Guardians of the Secret,
a group of totemic figures emerging from a web of paint. To witness what
Pollock could do at the height of his powers in a full scale painting puts
the drawings into perspective as exercises, taking - in Paul Klee's phrase -
a line for a walk. After all, Jung based his study of symbols on art over
the millennia; Jungian symbols and archetypes are configurations used over
many cultures and periods. Pollock, as Picasso, drew upon this universal
seed-bed. What is characteristic of modernism in all its guises is the
wealth of visual material available to all as never before, simply in fact
of technical reasons: the abundance of museums, media and our ability to
travel.
These drawings are in fact simply a curiosity, piquant because they show
Pollock experimenting with an increasingly elaborate visual vocabulary,
playing with an increasing elaboration of form. But they were not created to
be put on public view, or to enter the public arena; they were private
works, and relatively slight. It is the circumstance of their creation, not
their actual presence, that provokes and teases. They are perhaps working
drawings of the psyche, but few are related directly to his major paintings
as we know them. Pollock's own statement, 'The source of my painting is the
unconscious' obscures as much as it illuminates, and these 'psychoanalytic'
drawings cast but fitful light on the creative process in general, and
Pollock in particular.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5544</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Books: Murder in theory - Fiction
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LUCASTA MILLER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
DEATH OF THE AUTHOR by Gilbert Adair Heinemann Pounds 13.99
FRAUD by Anita Brookner Cape Pounds 14.99
KNOWN variously as post-structuralism, deconstruction, or simply theory, the
phenomenon which invaded academic literary criticism during the 1980s was
more than a harmless excuse for students to disguise their ignorance behind
an enthusiastic tissue of jargon and bad puns.
When its high priest, Paul de Man, was posthumously unmasked as the wartime
author of pro-Nazi articles, the latent amoralism at the heart of the theory
began to look more sinister. Inspired (though not explicitly) by the case of
de Man, Gilbert Adair's The Death of the Author brilliantly combines a
serious critique of a dodgy intellectual movement with a suspense-driven
detective story.
LeopaId Sfax, European emigre and Ivy League professor, is, in terms of
Theory, the gurus' guru. His books (including the plausibly named
Either/Either - Adair's post-structuralist pastiche achieves near
perfection) have become cult objects. But their authors' background and
personality remain elusive.
When one of his ex-students proposes to delve into his past and write his
biography, Sfax begins to get hot under the collar. Then, inexplicably, one
of his colleagues, a jolly, unreconstructed liberal humanist sort of chap
who stands for everything Sfax despises - is murdered . . .
The death of the author is one of Sfax's critical shibboleths. For him, the
author's intentions are irrelevant to the meaning of a text. Indeed, texts
are mere matrices of 'polysemous ambiguity', with no stable meaning at all
and a big black hole at the centre.
This is convenient for Sfax, since, in practice, it follows that you can
make anything mean whatever you want it to mean; there are no absolute moral
values and Nazi propaganda can be made to look innocuous.
Adair's satire is clever, compact, and so lucid that no reader need be put
off by its theoretical themes. Economically written and intellectually
incisive, it exposes the sophistry and inhumanity at the heart of
deconstruction through a network of exquisite ironies.
Written in elegant shades of grey, Anita Brookner's Fraud is a quietly
melancholy book which leaves you with the taste of depression in your mouth.
Its heroine, Anna Durrant, is a 50-ish spinster who has spent her entire
life ministering to her widowed, and latterly invalid, mother.
Incarcerated in their faded pink-and-powder-blue Kensington flat, Anna finds
her only solace or means of self-expression in making her own clothes -
jewel-coloured silk tweed suits of perfect cut. Lawrence, her mother's
doctor, once attracted her attention, but he has since been snapped up by
the odious Vicky, who struts about in a bright red mini-dress, oozing
vulgarity and sex in equal measure.
Since her mother's death, Anna has left the pastel-coloured prison for a
flat of her own. Her claustrophobic existence has meant that she's made
almost no friends, and when, one day, she disappears, her absence is not
immediately noticed.
It is not until the end that we discover where she has gone and how she
plans to rebuild her life. But although the book finishes on a hopeful note,
this optimism appears fragile and unconvincing, since the bulk of Anna's
story, with its themes of heart-rending loneliness, frustration, and
emotional exploitation, is so unutterably bleak.
The title is provocatively Ambiguous. Is it Anna who's been defrauding
herself of happiness? Does the guilt lie with her mother, whose so-called
love might in fact be cruelty in disguise? Or is Lawrence the truly
fraudulent one, deceiving himself into taking the easy option and ultimately
punished for doing so?
As ever, Anita Brookner writes with a flawless sense of style. Her prose is
limpid, controlled, and unfailingly in good taste. But there is such ugly
dreariness in the human relationships she describes that, despite
appearances, Fraud provokes feelings of real discomfort.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5545</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Books: Lawrence's writing in the raw - Anthony Curtis
welcomes the original text of a famous novel
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANTHONY CURTIS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SONS AND LOVERS by D H Lawrence, edited by Helen Baron and Carl Baron
Cambridge Pounds 70, 675 pages
SONS and Lovers was published on May 29 1913 by Gerald Duckworth and was the
novel that established D H Lawrence as a writer of importance. But the text
that has been in general use for the past 79 years is not the one that
Lawrence, had he lived in an ideal world, would have wished to stand as the
true text of his novel - or so the editors of this new edition tell us.
Helen and Carl Baron have scrutinised the manuscripts of the earlier drafts
(where the novel is titled Paul Morel) and the original sets of proofs
corrected by Lawrence and have produced a text as close as possible to the
one that they believe Lawrence would have preferred to have seen in use.
That, as they realise, is a hypothetical criterion. If Lawrence could return
from the dead to read the book under review he might conceivably have second
thoughts and wish to continue to leave out material they have put back.
There is, for example, the parallel case of T S Eliot, whose Waste Land
first appeared in a text that had been drastically cut from the original
version by Ezra Pound. The poet gratefully accepted these cuts as an
improvement of his work and they have remained in force ever since. The
first printed version of The Waste Land has not been superseded, even though
the earlier and much longer uncut version was made available to the public
after Eliot's death.
But there is good reason to believe that, unlike Eliot, Lawrence was not at
all happy about the cuts made by Edward Garnett for that first edition of
Sons and Lovers and that he only agreed to them out of expediency. He
desperately needed at this crisis point in his life - when he had turned his
back on Eastwood and England and had gone to Germany with Frieda - to get
his novel published, both for the sake of his reputation and to earn some
urgently required cash. For his later books he would break free of Garnett's
editorial yoke and would in most instances refuse to compromise on points of
emendation and cuts requested by publishers.
The changes imposed by Garnett come under two main heads: those made in
deference to Mrs Grundy, and those made to give greater unity (in Garnett's
eyes) to the ultimate shape of the novel. Mrs Grundy was a fictional Mary
Whitehouse who emerged at the end of the 18th century and whose abhorrence
of any hint of explicit eroticism in the text of a novel acted as a
tyrannical restraint upon publishers and hence upon novelists, particularly
in the late Victorian period.
Mrs Grundy's views were rigorously upheld by the circulating libraries which
were the chief commercial outlet for fiction-publishing in the UK until the
1930s. Many of the leading male late Victorian English novelists suffered
grievously from Mrs Grundy. She was, for example, an important cause of
Hardy giving up novel-writing. George Moore publicly took issue with her in
his pamphlet Literature at Nurse, attacking her strictures while he defied
them in novels like A Modern Lover. But it was left to Lawrence and Joyce to
rout her totally.
The editors of this new edition give several examples of the kind of changes
Garnett made in his Grundyite capacity. One example will suffice. In the
chapter 'Passion', Lawrence originally wrote: 'He bent forward and kissed
the two white glistening globes she cradled.' This sentence has appeared
hitherto as: 'He bent forward and kissed her, held her suddenly close and
kissed her again'. It is good now in this edition to have the truly
Lawrentian passage restored and this applies at many other points in the
story.
The question of unity is more controversial. The editors point out that
Garnett, schooled in the mainstream tradition of the English novel,
conceived of unity as a narrative that subordinated everything to tracing
the fortunes of an eponymous hero or heroine. They also point out that
Lawrence finally called his novel Sons plural and Lovers and that its unity
comes from its detailed depiction of one family, a group of remarkably
well-defined individuals, their interaction with each other and with those
people outside who threaten the mother-dominated family's solidarity. The
novel is, in spite of the earlier title, a novel about a family-group, its
survival and ultimate break-up, not just a novel about Paul Morel,
Lawrence's fictional alter ego.
Thus William, Paul's older brother, competes for the reader's attention in
the opening until his untimely demise - so harrowingly described in the
chapter called 'A Death in the Family'. Mrs Morel's reaction to William's
betrothal to the vacuous Lily, who gives herself such airs when she comes to
stay with them, foreshadows Mrs Morel's attitude to Paul in his relations
with Miriam. Garnett, keen to get on with the narrative, cut some passages
relating to Will.
A comparison between the two versions suggests that in the event Garnett was
quite skilful and that nothing of really crucial importance was lost. The
character of upwardly mobile Will, the first family member to rise within
the system, renounce the pits as a bread-ticket, integrate himself into the
metropolitan middle-class and make a disastrous liaison with a woman quite
unsuited to him, has always been a distinct part of the whole picture. Here
again it is good to have precious sentences and touches, making it even
fuller rehabilitated.
Even if we do not feel that the novel emerges in quite such a radically
altered form as the editors imply, we can all be grateful for the appearance
of this much more authentic text. The explanatory notes contain a wealth of
information on everything from local Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire dialects
to music hall songs, Biblical, classical and French literature, illuminating
Lawrence's more obscure references. An Appendix reprints the Foreword to the
novel Lawrence wrote in Italy in 1913 (not actually printed until 1932).
There are also maps of the district in which the novel is set and a complete
account of variant readings in the manuscripts. In other words, the Barons
have done a highly professional job and the new text they have established
here will be the one that all readers and students of D H Lawrence will need
to use from now on.
Before eyebrows go up at the price of this book, let me end by saying that
there is also a 'trade' edition containing the newly-edited text of Sons and
Lovers at Pounds 14.95. This is some 200 pages shorter than the one at
Pounds 70 and lacks the editors' introduction and all the critical
apparatus.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XIV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5546</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Books: Poems with appeal for modern minds - FT Children's
Book of the Month
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL GLOVER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE MAGNIFICENT CALLISTO by Gerard Benson Blackie Pounds 5.99, 80 pages
POETRY BOOKS FOR CHILDREN: A SIGNAL BOOK GUIDE by Brian Morse Thimble Press
Pounds 4.50, 64 pages
THERE are always difficulties inherent in writing for an age group to which
one does not belong, and nowhere has this been more evident than in the
endeavours by grown-ups in this century to write poetry for children. Until
the early 1970s, it seemed that children's poetry would never quite manage
to crawl out from under the shadow of a handful of grey eminences: Robert
Louis Stevenson, Walter de la Mare, Eleanor Farjeon and those twin masters
of nonsense, Lear and Carroll.
Not that all these writers were not important poets, of course - to a
greater or less extent, all of them were; but their collective influence was
so pervasive that the majority of 20th century poets seemed unable to find
voices of their own. The whole territory was rooted in nostalgia; enveloped
in a Victorian-cum-Edwardian mist. The manners and the morals of the present
seemed almost wholly absent. The urban child living with his mates in the
post-war housing estates of UK cities could see at a glance that all this
poetry stuff was beyond his ken.
Someone had to arrive with sufficient courage and distinctiveness to give
voice to these children and that person proved to be Michael Rosen, whose
first collection, Mind Your Own Business, was published in 1974. It was a
book that seemed - to use a phrase fashionable among executives in American
children's television - to empower the child, written as it was in hectic
free verse, rancorous, raucous and healthily subversive.
This was not poetry handed down from above in well-sculpted quatrains,
thrice blessed by tradition; it was, although written by an adult, verse
that held up a mirror to a child's pre-occupations: all those nasty
rivalries; the swift, fearful acts of vengeance; the carefree bouts of
mental torture; all that reckless derring-do.
Rosen seemed to unlock the very spirit of modern children in that collection
and what he created was, of course, imitated by lesser talents - to such an
extent, in fact, that a respected children's novelist, John Rowe Townsend,
once gave Rosen's manner of writing the title 'urchin verse' as if to prove
that he had spawned a movement.
Since that time, poetry for modern children has not looked back; not only
have anthologies abounded but there have been many individual collections of
importance. These include books (bucking the trend I have just described)
written by the likes of Ted Hughes, a poet difficult to categorise at the
best of times, and Charles Causley, who has breathed new life into the
longer narrative poem.
This month sees the launch of an enterprising new series of poetry originals
from Blackie, a publisher that has been building up a steady reputation for
itself in this area over the past five years. The series is edited by
anthologist Anne Harvey and among the first batch of titles is The
Magnificent Callisto, an outstanding debut collection by Gerard Benson.
Judging by the ease with which he moves through different styles of verse -
from puns to Anglo-Saxon riddles; from poems rooted in urban experiences to
well-tempered fantasies; from nonsense poems to animal verse - his is a
strong and fully-mature talent.
Benson is by no means new to the poetry scene: for many years, he has
performed with the Barrow Poets, an ensemble of actors, musicians and poets
based in the north of England that takes poetry into pubs, theatres and
schools. He also helped to found Poems on the Underground, a poster campaign
on the London railway system that has proved to be one of the most
successful attempts in recent years to gain a more public audience for
verse.
Last year, he won the Signal poetry award for an outstanding anthology
entitled This Poem Doesn't Rhyme, which seemed to prove by its very title
that he, too, might be a disciple of Rosen. The new book demonstrates that
he has not only absorbed Rosen's influence but also reached far beyond it.
Not the least impressive aspect is the difficult verse forms within which he
works (the Villanelle, for example), and his thoroughgoing mastery of such
traditional matters as rhyme and metre.
Poetry, this collection seems to remind us, is of course a form of
self-expression and children need to regard it as such if it is to succeed
in helping them to unlock their own lives. But it is also an art form, and
good art is a difficult, demanding taskmaster which metes out its rewards
only in strict proportion to the amount of effort expended.
If any additional proof were required that children's poetry is alive and
well, we need only consult a useful new guide entitled Poetry Books for
Children, by the children's poet and novelist Brian Morse. He has usefully
selected, categorised and commented upon 200 titles that are now in print.
It is an embarras de richesses indeed.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XIV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5547</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Books: Biographia Trollopiana - The latest life of a
Victorian writer
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT BLAKE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
TROLLOPE by Victoria Glendinning Hutchinson Pounds 20, 551 pages
IN AN ideal world there would be some sort of central mart of exchange to
which biographers could apply for information about who else was working on
the same subject. This would be particularly helpful when the relevant
sources were in the public domain.
Official biographers who are given first and exclusive access to a person's
papers are in a different situation. Their work cannot be pre-empted. They
may or may not produce books worth reading, but at least there is no danger
of being forestalled. When Lord Beaverbrook invited me in 1950 to write the
life of Bonar Law, whose papers he owned, I felt safe on that score - if not
on others.
I was in a more perilous situation in 1958 when I decided, unprompted, to
embark on a biography of Disraeli, whose official life had been completed in
1920 and whose papers had been open to inspection for many years, though in
physically daunting conditions. I saw no way of ascertaining what might be
in the pipeline and resolved to take a risk, but I was momentarily dismayed
when a US professor published a book on Disraeli's youth which anticipated a
discovery I thought I had made about Disraeli's early sexual imbroglios.
Luckily for me the book was by a toiler in what Paul Johnson has described
as the 'Eng. Lit. Crit. Industry', and therefore unreadable.
These personal reflections are prompted by the remarkable outburst of
Biographia Trollopiana which has occurred in the last four years. When
Victoria Glendinning began her research in 1988 she had no idea that three
other authors - all of them American, as it happens - were busy in the same
field and had been for several years. The last serious life of Trollope, by
James Pope-Hennessy, had appeared in 1971.
There is no obvious reason for the revival of interest, no centenary or
other significant date, yet the appearance of four biographies, of which
this is the latest, coincides with the foundation of the Trollope Society of
London and New York which is publishing a uniform edition of the novels. It
also coincides with the placing of a memorial in Poets Corner in Westminster
Abbey and with a Prime Minister who is a Trollope fan (not the first to be)
and who took for holiday reading, no doubt as a relaxation from perusal of
the Treaty of Maastricht, The Small House at Allington, which Victoria
Glendinning, if she had to make a choice, would place among the seven best
of all the novels.
I have read only one of the three earlier biographies, Richard Mullen's
Anthony Trollope, A Victorian In His World (Duckworth 1990). Reviewing it
for the Financial Times I described it as 'a great literary biography, one
of the best to appear in recent times. It is unlikely ever to be
superseded'. I would stand by that verdict. Victoria Glendinning has not
superseded Mullen, nor has she made any such claim. What she has done is to
write a perceptive and sensitive study of Trollope's life and writings from
a slightly different angle.
Mullen saw the key to Trollope in his desire to be respected not only as a
novelist but as a serious writer who wanted to influence public life. Hence
the importance of his non-fiction works and, apart from those, his important
role as a Post Office official - inventor of the pillar box - and his
unhappy foray into politics when he stood in 1868 as an unsuccessful Liberal
candidate for the infinitely corrupt seat of Beverley.
Mullen saw Trollope's travel books and articles on British and US politics
as 'the best portrayal of his personality . . . I see his non-fiction as the
key to his fiction.' There is a great deal in this interpretation and
Richard Mullen's use of the travel books and his full analysis of the
affairs of the Victorian Post Office are very illuminating.
Victoria Glendinning's emphasis is rather different. She sees him as a man
with an outer and an inner life. Behind the bluff, noisy, seemingly
extrovert clubman, raconteur and shrewd man of business, there was a highly
emotional person who understood affairs of the heart, the ways of men and
women, the balance of power between the sexes in and out of marriage, with
an acumen unrivalled among the Victorian novelists.
She does not underplay his public life but emphasises that it was balanced
by another aspect, and she makes full use of his novels and autobiography to
explain it. The publishers make something of the first biography of Trollope
by a woman and Glendinning seems to believe that his wife Rose has been
neglected by previous writers. These matters of 'gender' can be overdone. In
fact there is just as much, if not more, about Rose in Richard Mullen's
book.
Trollopians should have both these biographies on their bookshelves, but if
they have space or money for only one I would, at the risk of the charge of
male chauvinism, advise Mullen's. His book is longer by 200 pages, more
scholarly in terms of notes and index, and equally well written. The major
sources in both books are the same and inevitably there is a great deal of
overlap.
It was brave of Victoria Glendinning to go ahead in the knowledge of these
forthcoming works but Trollope admirers will be glad that she did. Whether
the market can sustain four biographies of the same person in four years is
another matter. That is something for authors and publishers - especially
the latter - to consider, not for reviewers.
The Collected Shorter Fiction of Anthony Trollope, containing 42 short
stories, edited by Julian Thompson, will be published next month by Robinson
Publishing (Pounds 25, 959 pages)
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XIV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5548</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Books: Whites and wrongs
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW ST GEORGE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
WHITE ON BLACK by Jan Nederveen Pieterse Yale Pounds 20, 259 pages
THE KENYAN novelist Ngugi Wa Thoing'O is right: 'If you want to pity the
white man, watch him dance.' The dance on show in Jan Nederveen Pieterse's
White on Black amounts to a quickstep through white European images of
Africa and blacks in popular culture. This bold project sets out to compass
the slave trade, plantation slavery, colonialism and its aftermath.
The book is popular in design and academic in method. Pieterse's prose is
haunted by the language of academic jargon. But when he sticks to his
illustrations and examples, he is readable and informative. He shows
cultural stereotypes operating at all levels, and traces the white view of
blacks as savage, uninhibited, libidinous, athletic or musical, to name but
few. Pieterse, rightly, gathers French and Belgian examples along with the
Dutch and English.
White on Black starts with Egyptian images of blacks. In general, Egypt,
Greece and Rome took blacks as they found them: as Nubian warriors, as
emissaries from the unknown described by Pliny, or as citizens of the Roman
empire. With the rise of Christianity, the colour black accrued negative
connotations, notwithstanding the legend of Prester John (an apocryphal
Christian-Ethiopian) and extensive diplomatic links with Ethiopia as a
potential non-Moslem ally in the Crusades during the 14th and 15th
centuries.
In the 16th and 17th centuries, the focus shifted to America. The New World
fascinated such stalwarts of western humanism as Montaigne, Hobbes, Locke
and Montesquieu; for a while, Africa was forgotten. Then came slavery.
Between 1451 and 1870, around 15m slaves were imported into the Americas by
Dutch, English and American traders. The ensuing abolitionist debate spawned
anti-slavery tracts like Harriet Beecher Stowe's Uncle Tom's Cabin (1853),
the book that started the civil war. Images of blacks as slaves appeared
against a growing literature of denigration and condescension.
After slavery came colonialism, subjugation by another name. In England, C
for Colony was as natural as the alphabet: 'C is for Colonies, Rightly we
boast, That of all the great nations, Great Britain has most' (An ABC for
Baby Patriots, 1899). As the home nation reached out to impose values, it
reaped benefits from colonial products like coffee, rubber or bananas; these
reached its homes in advertisements picturing blacks.
In Africa, the props of colonialism, Christianity and commerce receive
unequal attention; Pieterse is long on missionaries and short on economics.
But, predictably, some shocking images emerge from colonial Africa,
including the Mill Hill Missionary Calendar picture from May 27 1938
depicting a black child holding a tin of shoe polish above the caption Nu
weet u warom ik zoo zwart ben ('Now you know why I am so black').
The second half of the book attends to European images of Africa and
Africans as servants, sportsmen (Joe Louis), entertainers (Al Jolson) or
erotic dancers (Josephine Baker in the famous banana skirt, 1926). These
images hardened into advertising symbols like the golliwog, which once was
the mascot of the Beatles but became more widespread as the face of
Robertson's marmalade, or the Mohr, which is the face of Sarotti chocolate
in Germany.
Blacks in advertising throughout the 1960s, '70s and '80s were associated
habitually with the tropics - with fruit and plenty; this, says Pieterse,
reinforced the white cultural prejudice that blacks were lazy and feckless.
Only with Grace Jones' 1987 Citroen advertisements and Benetton's 'United
colours' campaign did the images start to change fundamentally. These moves
relied on 'Black is beautiful' and Black Power in the 1970s, and the
crowning in 1984 of Vanessa Williams as the first black to be Miss America.
In essence, White on Black unpacks the prejudices in Euro-western staples
like Little Black Sambo or the black maid in Gone With The Wind. This is a
book about things rather than about theories, so Pieterse curbs his
intelligence and avoids thinking in favour of showing.
He has developed, albeit half-heartedly, a crucial issue. He needs to
broaden the coverage. His book should be transferrable to other cultures. It
should show why and how the fact of us seeing the Shuar or Waorani in west
Ecuador as savages makes it easy for us to cut down their rain forest.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XIV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5549</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Books: The wit and wisdom of an Irish man of letters
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MELANIE MCDONAGH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE LETTERS OF BRENDAN BEHAN edited by EH Mikhail Macmillan Pounds 45, 224
pages
BRENDAN Behan once remarked that, when his biography came to be written,
they would have trouble making out anything from his letters because he
hadn't written any. Well, he bargained without EH Mikhail. Every time Behan
set pen to paper, he unwittingly added to the scope of The Letters of
Brendan Behan.
When, as an IRA man back in 1942, he sent a package of detonators and a
Webley revolver to a friend, his accompanying note ('Please give bearer my
equipment') was fodder for this wonderfully exhaustive work. When he signed
an agreement with one Gerald C. Raffles giving him the 'sole and full
rights' to his most famous play, The Quare Fellow, the letter (including the
three halfpenny stamps) finished up in this volume.
Mikhail's intention that his book should 'restore the reality of the artist
and the man' is unlikely to be advanced much by his inclusion of Behan's
one-line note (in Irish) on the outside of a brown paper package to a pub
owner, saying: 'To Arthur, with the love of my heart.' Behan, who often had
to pawn his typewriter to get the price of a drink, would have been
prostrated by the thought that his idlest scribble would have ended up in a
book costing no less than Pounds 45.
Still, this volume will be a gift for those like myself to whom anything by
the author of Borstal Boy - the most remarkable of autobiographies - and The
Quare Fellow is a pure pleasure. But I cannot say honestly that it will do
much to explode 'the myth of the boisterous performer,' because Behan is a
performer as a letter writer just as much as he is anywhere else.
Many of the letters are included already in Ulick O'Connor's admirable
biography of Behan. The correspondence with Iain Hamilton is amusing. He was
the publisher who commissioned Behan's first book, and whom he bombarded
with excuses for late writing, requests for money, suggestions for textual
alterations, and sundry thoughts such as his reflection that sexual
frustration might have been what drove him and his IRA friends to political
violence. 'Maybe it would be a good thing for the peace of the world if sex
(boy and girl stuff, I mean) was compulsory,' he mused.
There is not much in the book to illumine Behan's relationship with his
long-suffering wife, Beatrice, except for a charming little poem apologising
for lapsing from his promise to her to foresake all other drink but stout,
which ends with the lines: 'Why does any woman/ give herself the trouble
that/ husbands are when with less trouble/ she could buy and train a cat?'
Most, if not all, Behan's letters to the newspapers are printed here. Some
are more essays than letters, such as his letter to the New Yorker which was
published at the time his play, The Hostage, opened in New York and which
summarises Behan's perception of himself as a playwright: 'You see, in The
Hostage I have nothing to sell, not religion, not a political system, not a
philosophy, and certainly not a panacea for the ills of the world. I respect
kindness to human beings first of all, and kindness to animals. I don't
respect the law; l have a total irreverence for anything concerned with
society except that which makes the roads safer, the beer stronger, the food
cheaper, and old men and women warmer in the winter and happier in the
summer.
One feud that he carried on through the letters pages of newspapers was that
with Patrick Kavanagh, the northern Irish poet, who detested Behan (it was
mutual). He also wrote to them to defend the Dublin working classes from the
charge of fecklessness and the IRA from that of sectarianism. Behan might
have left his past as a republican and house-painter behind with his success
as a playwright, but he wasn't having anyone think that he had abandoned his
identity.
Interestingly, his early letters from prison show that he was perfectly
confident in his ability to capture the diction of the Dublin working
classes in his first stab at a play: 'I do claim to have taken nine real
Dublin slummies and stuck them on paper. I even go so far as to claim that
they are as genuine as any of O'Casey's battalion - maybe more so because
O'Casey was a Protestant and that means a big lot.'
Because Behan's great charm was to represent a very fluent Dublin
proletariat, anything he writes is bound to give pleasure, receipts and all.
But the wit of an Irish republican and alcoholic cannot really be captured
by a heavy-handed Canadian academic. Anyone who wants the essence of Behan
should save the Pounds 45 and clamour for his collected journalistic pieces,
Hold Your Hour and Have Another, to be returned to print.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XIV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5550</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADTFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Gardening: Blooming, old-fashioned effort - A garden to visi
/ Arthur Hellyer revisits Rosemoor in Devon and is surprised and excited at
the imaginative planting
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ARTHUR HELLYER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
I HAVE just revisited Rosemoor, the Royal Horticultural Society's new garden
at Great Torrington, Devon, two years after its opening and was astonished
by the growth of the new planting. It is extensive and brilliant.
Rosemoor lies in a well-wooded valley through which the Torridge flows. The
B3220 road from Great Torrington to Exeter cuts through the estate. The
house and garden are on the east side of that in the upper part of the
valley. Since 1989, when Lady Anne Palmer gave the property to the Royal
Horticultural Society, a completely new garden has been designed for the
large area of land on the other side of the road running almost down to the
river. It is being planned for all-season display with great masses of
flower colour. Lady Anne's garden is much more restrained in character with
many fine trees and shrubs and a peak flower display in May and early June
when the rhododendrons and azaleas are at their best.
The RHS has built a fine visitor centre just below the road on the west side
and this not only contains a shop, restaurant and library but also serves as
a focal point for the new garden which lies below and can be overlooked from
the paved terraces around the building.
Garden design is largely formal with four huge rectangles immediately below
the visitor centre, one devoted entirely to shrub and old-fashioned roses, a
second to modern roses and the third and fourth called colour theme gardens.
These are filled with a miscellany of plants in which hardy herbaceous
perennials predominate. Shrubs and annuals are also used. The master plan
has been by Elizabeth Banks Associates, but the planting, which is
brilliantly successful is almost entirely by Christopher Bailes, the
garden's curator. He is also responsible for the planting in formal beds
around and immediately below the visitor centre with half-hardy perennials.
This is of particular interest to home gardeners. Many may be able to grow
some of these plants from summer cuttings or by division and to overwinter
them in frames, conservatories or sunny windows.
There are wide paths flanked by herbaceous borders and, again, the planting
schemes are excellent and the growth superb. Much of the explanation for
this fine performance is the fact that every square yard of ground has been
double dug in the old fashioned way, 2ft deep, the upper soil well-manured.
This is the way all good English gardens were cultivated early this century
and it is still the best way.
There is a highly original potager, or ornamental fruit and vegetable
garden, surrounded by walls on which ornamental gourds grow and with complex
wrought iron arches for vines and other climbers. Beside this is a paved
herb garden intended especially for the disabled in which the seats have
been kept low and the borders built up well above ground level. It was only
completed this spring but from the established look of the garden you would
never guess.
More is on the way. A cottage garden already has its summer house, framed
with seasoned oak which is fitted together in the old fashioned way without
nails or screws, infilled with wattle and daub and with a thatched roof. The
soil will be double-dug this autumn and planted next spring in an easy-going
cottage manner without too much thought about clever colour schemes. There
is also to be a foliage and plantsman's garden with planing by Christopher
Bailes.
Already in existence are a long, lavishly planted streamside garden coming
down the hill from Lady Anne's garden. The pool in her garden has been
filled in and a larger pond and bog garden made.
A new lecture wing is to be added to the visitor centre this winter and
there is plenty of room outdoors for further development as time and money
permits. One of the reasons for the good order and rapid growth in this
garden is that about 30 volunteers come and work free in it for a few hours
each week, each being given his or her own section and each vying to ensure
that theirs is the best.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XIII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5551</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADSFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Outdoors: Fancy a flutter?
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HILARY DE BOERR
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE HIGH Brown Fritillary, one of Britain's fastest butterflies, is probably
also its most endangered. Since 1950, its range has contracted by 94 per
cent, leaving only 37 known colonies country-wide.
The orange-brown butterfly, with chequered upper wings and silver dots
beneath, is threatened by the decline in traditional woodland management and
by the attack on bracken. High Brown caterpillars feed on violets found
among bracken. As bracken disappears, so do the butterflies.
Gardeners can do their bit to encourage butterfly conservation by choosing
specific plants and flowers that attract them. You will have a tough time
enticing the High Brown because of its specialised needs, but many of
Britain's 54 other resident species are bound to pay a visit .
Butterflies need nectar for energy, warmth to become active, and shelter
from wind. Those that might visit your garden depend on its location, soil
type and the proximity of heathland, grassland or broadleaf woodland.
Woodland species such as the White Admiral will probably not drop in, but
you can expect those that are widely distributed and feed from a range of
plants.
Long-flowering plants that appeal to butterflies include aubrieta, buddleja,
candytuft, heliotrope, lavender and scabious (annual).
Most butterflies appear in the summer and autumn, so concentrate on plants
that flower then.
The least expensive way of creating a butterfly garden is by sowing annual
seeds, but you can also buy wild flower seedlings and bulbs from specialists
such as John Chambers, which delivers by post.
Information: Gardening for Butterflies, Pounds 1.50, Butterfly Conservation,
PO Box 222, Dedham, Colchester, Essex, CO7 6E7. John Chambers' Wild Flower
Seeds, 15 Westleigh Road, Barton Seagrave, Kettering, Northants, NN15 5AJ,
tel: 0933-652562.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XIII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5552</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Fishing: Bring on the rain
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TOM FORT
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
EARLIER this year the Prince of Wales went to a drought-stricken region of
Britain to make some forthright remarks about water and the inept way in
which it is managed. The elements responded with a downpour of such violence
that his words were almost drowned.
Since then, I am delighted to say, we have had a decent English summer. We
have had enough rain to keep the countryside green and pleasant rather than
brown and blistered, as in the past two years, and to make us appreciative
of hot days, instead of blase and irritable.
One result is that drought has ceased to be an issue. But I like to think
that fishermen see a little deeper. For us, the water question remains one
of burning import.
It does one no harm to be reminded, as well, that it is highly complex. The
temptation to leap to conclusions and shout one's mouth off is immense. This
has been brought home to me by a bulky publication from the National Rivers
Authority (NRA), a report commissioned by the NRA and produced by the water
consultants W S Atkins on the condition of the upper reaches of one of our
most famed trout streams, the Kennet.
The document is dry and dusty and packed with incomprehensible statistics,
inscrutable graphs and baffling charts. But where I can understand it, it
makes sombre reading. It charts in unemotional sciencespeak the desperate
fate that has overtaken what was once a glorious chalkstream.
The broad conclusions are simply summarised. Lack of water has resulted in
complete degradation. The trout have gone, the fly life and invertebrates
have gone, the healthy weed has gone. Where there is any water at all, it is
a dark, silty, lifeless trickle. This decline has been replicated - to a
lesser but still appalling extent - along other rivers.
One assumption which the report challenges - one to which I have tended to
subscribe - is that the deterioration is a contemporary phenomenon. In fact,
the problem of lack of flow - which is at the heart of the story - has been
observed and bemoaned for at least 60 years.
The report refers to an article written just after the Second World War by a
Colonel Maurice, whose family had held fishing rights above Marlborough
since Victorian times. It is entitled 'Passing Of A River - An Obituary,'
and records the decline of flows since the days in the 1890s when the river
at Manton flowed brimfull in the longest droughts of summer.
As it happens, I have a little book called Sometimes An Angler, by Henry
Maurice. He was, I am sure, the brother of Col. Maurice, and he describes
the persistent drying out of the stream in the mid and late 1930s. Maurice
lays the blame on abstraction from the chalk acquifers - ruthless and
increasing pillaging, he calls it.
I, too, have done my bit in belabouring the abstractors. I am sure I shall
do so again, for pillaging is often the right word for it. Nevertheless,
this report also compels reassessment in this controversial area. It states
that, although abstraction is a factor in causing low flow, it is largely
insignificant beside the chief villain, lack of rainfall. It calculates the
impact of drought as being four times that of abstraction.
This conclusion has not been greeted joyously by conservation bodies
dedicated to protecting the Kennet. Abstraction by man is an evil that can
be fought, even reversed. But all one can do with drought is to shake one's
fist and pray.
I suspect that the scientists may have underestimated the degree to which
abstraction is to blame. And I am convinced that unless the supply of water
becomes an important factor in planning policy, and the conservation of
water a warmer political issue, we are guaranteeing environmental disaster.
But the key is more rain. We must have it, and soon, or these rivers will be
dead. As I write, the clouds are piling up and another storm threatens.
Splendid] The sound of water beating on the cobbles in my courtyard, the
sweep of window-wipers on my car and the splash of wheels through deep
puddles - all these, more than ever, are music to my ears.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XIII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5553</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Travel: A gloomy monument to Columbus - Kevin Rafferty
visits the Dominican Republic's capital
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN RAFFERTY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
IN 1492, as every schoolchild on either side of the Atlantic knows, Columbus
sailed the ocean blue and landed - second stop - on the shores of the island
that he christened Hispaniola. Almost 500 years later, Joaquin Balaguer,
president of the Dominican Republic, is set to milk the quincentenary for
all the political capital it is worth.
The organising committee claims the republic is the starting point for the
transfer of 'the values of western civilisation to America.' The old
colonial quarter of Santo Domingo, the Dominican Republic's capital, is
being renovated. Roads and bridges are being repaired. New tourist
facilities are being prepared for the 1m or more visitors expected for the
October celebrations.
In the biggest and costliest venture of all, the government is finally
completing the 60-year-old plans of former dictator Rafael Trujillo for a
mammoth Columbus lighthouse. This is meant to be the last resting place for
Columbus's bones and from the top it will project a 1m-candlepower crucifix
into the night sky. Pope John Paul II will be on hand to bless the
lighthouse when it is formally opened.
There are plenty of ironies here. The blind octogenarian President Balaguer
is responsible for lighting the light. The lighthouse that the Pope will
bless has been carved out of one of the capital's slums. And hundreds of
people have been displaced and scattered to provide room for the monument,
its vast grass surroundings and pools and fountains.
Yet when the lighthouse light has been switched on, all surrounding
electricity has frequently gone off, for up to four hours a time. Even
without the lighthouse, power cuts are frequent in the Dominican Republic.
The monument cannot be counted as one of the seven or even 77 or probably
even 777 wonders of the modern world. Do not start to think of the
lighthouse as a gracefully tall tower on the edge of land warning of rocks
and treacherous seas. There is nothing graceful about this hulk, a chunk of
gloomy grey concrete faced with marble and engraved with crosses. It is not
on the edge of the sea, and the only noteworthy landmark is the slum now
pushed 700 metres away.
I had expected to see some phallic monster. In fact, the Columbus lighthouse
is broader than it is long, covering two street blocks of the former slum.
It shows all the imagination of some communist functionary's dreams.
Of all the projects the Pope has blessed, this seems the hardest to justify
for a man of God or a man of compassion. At least the massive new basilica
at Yamassukro, in the Ivory Coast countryside, modelled on  - but bigger
than - St Peter's in Rome, could claim to be a monument to God as well as to
President Houphouet-Boigny.
Perhaps a stern Polish Pope will appreciate the austere grey outlines of the
Columbus lighthouse. But didn't his advisers ask awkward questions about a
cross on top of a lighthouse? Normally, a light warns ships to keep their
distance. Is the cross in the night sky meant to be a beacon or a warning to
the world?
Among other plans, the government of the Dominican Republic is going all out
to attract tourists. It has an eye on cruise-ships, which it hopes to
persuade to call at the rundown port where only a few rusting tramp ships
are now in evidence. It makes sense to a hard-pressed economy where tourism
is already the largest money-spinner, worth Dollars 800m last year.
But there is still a long way to go before anyone would rate Santo Domingo a
must destination, even on a sun-soaked cruise.
The old town has its nice points: some delicate old Spanish-style houses,
pretty squares, the house where Columbus's brother lived, the oldest
cathedral in the New World begun in 1596. But you can walk around it all
very quickly.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XI
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5554</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Travel: The sound of tour buses - James Henderson traces the
hallowed footsteps of Julie Andrews
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JAMES HENDERSON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BARE mention of Salzburg is enough to send some people into a spin. They
hear the intoxicating strains of Strauss and see a host of waltzers
processing around a baroque ballroom. And Salzburg is Mozart's birthplace.
My sophisticated friends made a pilgrimage there last year to honour the
bicentenary of his death.
Rightfully, the town has a special place in the heart of every music lover.
So why was it that the first thing I discovered in Salzburg was The Sound of
Music minibus tour? I could feel my sense of the absurd twitching at once.
I scuttled to the back of the bus and surveyed my fellow passengers. Up
front were three college girls from Ohio on a lightning tour of Europe; next
were two Australians, who looked as though they had been on the road for a
couple of years (their rucksacks were emblazoned with flags from almost
every town between Athens and Glasgow); next to me was a timid South
American who hid behind his camera bag.
Gingerly, we sounded each other about Sound of Music knowledge - director
(Robert Wise); date (1964); how many Oscars (five). Spontaneously the bus
began to hum. Girls in white dresses with blue satin sashes, snowflakes that
stay on my nose and eyelashes . . .
As we drove, scenes of the film appeared before me. We passed the suspension
bridge, now ageing, beneath the castle. I half expected to see Julie Andrews
race by with a crowd of children.
Pieter, the tour guide, was a fount of information. Although the story is
based in truth, The Sound of Music was adapted from an earlier German film,
sanitised for family consumption, then turned into a musical.
He corrected a few of the most flagrant myths: the butler, the arch-baddie
in the film, was not so bad in reality, as he helped the family to escape
from the Nazis; sorry, but the Baron was not against the family singing,
either. He had been bankrupted and the septet was his main earner.
We headed off, through the alley of trees where the children played in their
clothes made from bastardised curtains, to the Leopoldskron Villa, one of a
profusion of palaces built by the prince-archbishops of Salzburg and used in
the film as the Von Trapp family home.
Now it is owned by an American business school, so it cannot be visited, but
the view across the lake is as attractive as ever. The gazebo is gone,
though. Obviously too many couples were creeping in there at night and
singing cloying duets.
Pieter even took us to the original Von Trapp family villa in the suburb of
Aigen. It was taken over by the SS as a communications centre during the
war. Although the family returned there briefly afterwards, it is now the
headquarters of a Catholic mission to South America.
As we drove up into the mountains, Pieter snapped The Sound of Music
soundtrack into the tape machine. The bus burst into song. The
Salzkammergut, in the mountains above Salzburg, is a remarkably beautiful
region of lakes, alpine peaks and gorges, where we were given a chance to
practise our yodelling.
Finally, we came to the spot where the film opens, with Maria chasing across
the hills, turning circles, arms flung wide. It is not surprising that she
was late for prayers when she heard the bell ringing - it must be 10 miles
back to the abbey.
The college girls danced and skipped down the hillside. The Aussies
sauntered off and bought a Salzburg sticker. Occasionally a vast lens
emerged from behind the camera bag.
It makes me squirm just to think about it. But somehow it suited me better
than a couple of hours of Mozart. Even if my smile was not entirely
innocent, there was an infectious joy about The Sound of Music minibus tour.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XI
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5555</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Travel: India - a penitential ride to Madurai / David
Pilling joins the tide of humanity pressing towards Shree Meenakshee, where
'nothing is remotely intelligible'
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID PILLING
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE ONLY signs of activity at Pondicherry railway station were two goats
gnawing at the door of a stationary box-car and the window of the ticket
office slamming shut to mark the start of a three-hour lunch break.
My mission to buy tickets to Madurai, a holy city in the southern Indian
state of Tamil Nadu, had hit its first, but by no means its last, obstacle.
I was bound for Madurai to join the torrent of pilgrims that gushes the
length and breadth of India to visit the Shree Meenakshee temple, a medieval
walled city that daily draws 10,000 Hindu devotees into its mysterious
labyrinth.
The path of the Indian pilgrim - spiritual considerations aside - is not an
easy one, the most earthly hindrance being the bureaucracy that chokes the
railway system.
I was just preparing myself to do three hours' penance at Pondicherry
station when an old man with a gnarled face like a tree stump took pity on
me. Barging through a door marked 'Strictly No Admittance', he barked
something in Tamil to a reclining figure in the inner sanctum of the ticket
office.
The only part of this official's anatomy in sight was the blackened soles of
his feet resting on the desk top. The feet shifted slightly, as if in
thought, and then a reply wafted back on the stifling midday air.
The tree stump wrinkled his brow and translated: 'No tickets left, master.'
Pondicherry's four-seat quota had been sold. I would have to travel to
Villupuram, an hour's drive away, to 'try my luck'.
My object was to secure myself a reservation on the Vaigai Superfast
Express, an Indian bullet that 'races' the 300 miles between Madras and
Madurai in 10 hours. I would intercept the train about half-way.
The next day, in accordance with the tree stump's advice, I caught a bus to
Villupuram where the mainline station exuded the same sleepy air that I had
encountered in Pondicherry.
The windows at each counter, about the size of a fist, were at chest level,
obliging customers to stoop to make their inquiries. Adopting this ungainly
posture, I peered into the Dickensian gloom of the inner office. Through the
fug was revealed a world of dusty ledgers, rows of pigeon holes, and mounds
of yellowing papers. Clerks, squinting over thick spectacles, scratched away
at dog-eared forms which flapped in the gust from helicopter-like ceiling
fans.
It was a full five minutes before someone shuffled over to the window. He
stuck his head to the opening, displaying a set of splayed, yellowing teeth
like windswept tombstones. Tickets for Madurai had to be purchased at the
other counter, he said.
I was the only customer, so I slid across to the neighbouring window. Here
the same official, who betrayed not the slightest sign of recognising me,
informed me that all reservations had been sold. He could, however, supply
an unreserved ticket. I would, in a phrase to which I was growing
accustomed, have to 'try my luck' when the train arrived.
I traipsed through an enclosed wooden walkway to the platforms on the other
side of the tracks. Resuscitated by a beer - served in a chipped ceramic
teapot to bypass the state's licensing laws - I went in search of the
station master.
The station master was most friendly when I showed him my unreserved ticket
stub, but he could not help. He advised me to see the chief ticket inspector
in the next office.
The chief ticket inspector, a man with a clipped military bearing and a
clipped military moustache, thought he could find me a reserved seat. He
motioned for me to wait and hurtled off down the platform. Some time elapsed
before he returned, somewhat deflated, with the news that all reserved
tickets had been sold.
I guessed he must have gleaned this information from the man with the
tombstone mouth, from whom I had bought my ticket an hour earlier. I
resolved to abandon all attempts to finagle a reservation.
When the train finally pulled in, the much-touted luck on which I had been
encouraged to rely was not in evidence. After the stampede of red-outfitted
porters and frantic passengers had subsided, the dust cleared to reveal
every seat on the train taken.
My only recourse was to stand in one corner of the carriage near a stainless
steel washbasin, gulping water in the stultifying heat and closing my eyes
as gusts of dust swept through the open window.
The train moved along at quite a respectable pace, sliding past a landscape
of brick-red plains and neon-green paddy fields. Hawkers rushed up and down
the ailes peddling samosas, warm cartons of mango juice, sweet tea, sweeter
coffee and Indian sweets, which were not sweet at all.
After several hours of this pandemonium, the sun set and calm descended as
the train slipped through the night air. At 10pm, Madurai station stole upon
us and I joined the scramble to disembark.
Outside, the streets were a tangle of bicycles, rickshaws and carts pulled
by bullocks with painted horns curved like crescent moons. Everywhere were
wheels turning, wheels bumping over stony roads, wheels skidding into muddy
potholes and tangling with the spokes of other wheels.
The atmosphere was frantic, even by Indian standards. Television sets blared
in the absence of viewers, rickshaw drivers touted for business though no
one sought their services, and a snake charmer treated me, in spite of my
protests, to the gruesome display of a mongoose biting the head off a cobra.
I retired early to bed.
The next day, I joined the tide of humanity that swept through Madurai's
streets to the Shree Meenakshee temple. A walled city within a city, the
Shree Meenakshee lives and hums according to its own arcane rules. The
complex is entered through one of its four main gopurams, 150-ft-high
pyramidal towers smothered in gargoyle-like sculptures of gods and animals.
If the ticket office had presented a Dickensian world, then to cross the
temple threshold was to enter a medieval kingdom. Inside, barefoot pilgrims
milled around. There were gaunt, half-naked men with tousled hair and
staring eyes; ladies resplendent in silk saris; musicians blowing on long
pipes; beggars in rags; men in orange with shaved heads; men in dhotis; men
in suits and men in trances. Everywhere I looked were things I didn't
understand.
Many people had their heads daubed with yellow, red or white powder; some
had intricate tattoo-like patterns etched across their forehead.
I wandered through the many-pillared halls, alternately illuminated with
shafts of blinding light, and shrouded in grimy blackness. Bats fluttered in
the rafters and the eerie sound of chanting echoed through the corridors.
In each of the halls were characters from Hinduism's pantheon of gods. There
was many-limbed Kali, elephant-headed Ganesha, figurines representing the
planets, Shiva, Vishnu, and the sacred bull Nandi.
Many of the deities were housed, rather sacrilegiously to my eyes, in
padlocked cages. Some were gaudily painted, others charred by incense and
candle smoke. All drew a constant procession of worshippers who prostrated
themselves before the blackened deities or presented them with garlands of
flowers.
I became more and more lost in the maze-like city, trying in vain to make
sense of a religion that produced such devotion. It was hard to understand
how such bizarre representations of gods could exert so strong an influence
over Inidia's 700m Hindus. Everything in Shree Meenakshee was endlessly
fascinating, nothing remotely intelligible.
Hinduism, I concluded, was not unlike the railway system. To the uninitiated
it made no sense. But to Indians, well versed in its mysterious ways, it was
as good a way as any to navigate the sub-continent's hostile terrain.
David Pilling travelled c/o Bales Tours (Bales House, Junction Road,
Dorking, Surrey, RH4 3HB, brochures: 0306-885923) in conjunction with the
Government of India Tourist Office.
Accommodation was with Taj Hotels. Bales organises 10-day escorted tours of
southern India starting from Pounds 1,195, which include a visit to the
Shree Meenakshee temple, Madurai.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page X
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5556</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Independent Schools - FT 500: Day single-sex schools take
top slots / Analysis of a survey of this year's A-level results in private
schools in England and Wales
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW ADONIS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
WESTMINSTER School, the London day and boarding school, tops the second
FT-500 survey of A-level results from independent schools in England and
Wales. Westminster has girls in the sixth form and is one of Britain's
oldest public schools.
It is not, however, a typical top school. Most of the top 50 are single-sex
city day schools, many of them former direct-grant schools which were part
of the state system until the mid-1970s. Only one of the top 50 - The King's
School, Canterbury - is fully co-educational throughout the school. In all,
nearly three-quarters of the top 100 are predominantly day schools, and more
than nine-tenths are single-sex, though some of those are boys schools with
girls in the sixth form.
Many leading public schools performed better this year than last. Excluding
general studies from last year's results, Cheltenham Ladies College is up
from 32nd to 12th, Malvern Girls' College from 52nd to 15th, and Harrow from
82nd to 43rd. (The positions are not fully comparable because a different
ranking methodology was used last year).
Yet famous names still languish far below: Rugby at 106th, Haileybury at
109th, Repton at 110th, Marlborough at 85th, Clifton at 152nd and Lancing at
179th. Boarding schools are finding life particularly tough going, with
boarding numbers down 10 per cent in the last three years alone.
Significantly, more than 60 per cent of Westminster's pupils are now day
only. None of the old public boarding schools is as favourably sited to make
the transition.
The results for the survey were supplied by the Independent Schools
Information Service. They include all A and AS levels sat this summer,
excluding general studies. Schools with fewer than 10 pupils entered for
examinations have been excluded. Including them, Princess Helena College,
Hitchin, with two A-level candidates, came out second.
AS-levels comprise about half the workload of an A-level. They are intended
to enable schools to broaden their curriculum, and are used by the
government as a reason for not reforming England's extraordinarily narrow
A-level curriculum. In fact, the results show them to be largely ignored by
the independent sector: most schools recorded only a handful, if any, AS
results.
The exclusion by ISIS of general studies will cause some controversy. For a
number of schools, particularly in the north, general studies is a taught
subject; but for many it is a non-taught extra A-level, while a large number
of top-notch schools do not do it at all, so its inclusion only creates
distortion. The guide to the tables explains the columns. A special feature
is an FT score giving the position of each school on a 21 to 100 scale, with
100 representing the top-performing school and 21 the bottom school.
This scale is an important counter to the 'raw' ranking of each school from
1 to 479, given in the left-hand column. On any measure of exam results,
about 25 schools stand out at the top. There is an equally evident rump of
about 50 schools at the bottom. In between, however, the gap separating each
school is tiny, with most schools scaled at between 50 and 80. In all, some
90 schools have an FT score of between 70 and 80, all of which produce a
typical three A-level profile of grades BBC, give or take a little. About
another 130 have an FT ranking of between 60 and 70, implying a typical
A-level profile of CCC.
Prospective parents should, therefore, beware of reading too much into the
raw ranking, even if A-level results are their main concern. They should
also look at the performance of the best of the state sector in their
locality, which may turn out to be at least as good. In October the FT
intends to publish a comprehensive national guide to schools across the two
sectors, not restricted to the top few hundred.
Exam results are emphatically not the 'be all and end all' of a school's
achievement. Nor are they the only, or even necessarily the main, factor
that parents should consider when choosing a school. Says Mr David Woodhead,
director of ISIS: 'We always advise parents that exam results illustrate
only one aspect of a school's success and should be seen in the context of
everything else a school does.'
The selection policy of schools varies widely and needs to be taken into
account, though it is a fallacy of those opposed to publishing 'raw'
information that league tables reveal nothing but selectivity. As to value
added, parents should make their own judgement from visiting the school.
There is no adequate numerical measure: assessing progress from GCSE to
A-level, the current fashion, simply begs the question of the progress a
pupil has made to GCSE - usually in the same school - in the first place.
Many schools not even ranking in the table deservedly have excellent
reputations. Sibford School in Oxfordshire, for instance, is well known for
the quality of the vocational studies in its sixth form. Its staple diet is
the City and Guilds diploma in vocational education and it offers only a few
traditional A-level courses. 'We do not select on academic ability, beyond
basic competence, and nobody comes here to do three A-levels,' says Mr John
Dunston, Sibford's headmaster. 'But there is a growing demand for what we
do. It would be greater still if hidden barriers against vocational courses
could be broken down.'
The FT-500 survey shows little direct relationship between fees and results.
Westminster charges annual fees for day pupils of Pounds 7,575 a year.
Winchester, second in both this and last years' surveys, charges Pounds
8,775 a year. By contrast, most of the old city grammar schools in the top
fifty - Portsmouth, Bradford, Leeds High, St Albans High, Loughborough High,
Guildford, the two at Chester - charge between Pounds 3,500 and Pounds 4,500
a year; and most award around a third of their places on bursaries or
through the government's assisted places scheme. A school's physical
facilities generally have more to do with the wealth of its foundation than
the scale of its fees - only the prospectus or a visit will reveal them.
King Edward's, Birmingham, ranked 4th in the survey, makes the point
forcefully. Its fees are around Pounds 4,000 a year. About 40 per cent of
its pupils go on to Oxbridge each year. A similar proportion are financially
assisted to a greater or lesser extent, with a third of its total entry
subsidised by the assisted places scheme. Yet the school is just completing
a Pounds 2m capital investment programme, providing a new swimming pool, a
design centre, and refurbished laboratories. Half of the Pounds 2m came from
local businesses and much of the rest in loans from the wealthy Kings
Edward's foundation.
King Edward's also highlights complications on the 'single sex' front. Mr
Hugh Wright, the school's headmaster, claims to be a 'firm supporter' of
co-education. But, he says, 'it is simply not necessary here in Birmingham,
because we are one of two schools on the same site, working in partnership
and close proximity with King Edward VI High School for Girls.' The two
schools share the same governing body, and undertake a wide range of
activities in partnership.
Such 'twinning' is common with city grammar schools - Bolton, Oldham,
Chester and Guildford have a similar arrangement, to name but four. It is
proving an attractive model for the traditional public schools too. This
term Malvern College and Malvern Girls College come together on a single
site, together with a local prep school. 'It was a straight response to
market forces,' says Mr Roy de C. Chapman, the headmaster. Forest School in
south London has done much the same.
'Market forces' are not new to the independent sector. But they are
altogether more bracing than hitherto. It is not just league tables and the
recession. The state sector is coming to pose a stronger challenge than at
any time since the end of direct-grant, with the national curriculum, a new
emphasis on achievement, and liberation from town hall bureaucracy acting as
driving forces. Parents want more than an old school tie for Pounds 8,000 a
year.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page VIII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5557</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Independent Schools - FT 500: How To Read the tables
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Rank: all schools are ranked on a single scale from 1-479
4-year rank: based on an average of each school's results for 1987, 1988,
1990 and 1991 unless otherwise indicated.
FT Score: all schools are ranked on a scale from 21 to 100, 100 being the
score of the top school, 21 the score of the bottom
UCCA points: based on the UCCA system for A-levels: grade A=10 points; grade
B=8; grade C= 6; grade D=4; grade E=2; grade N=0; grade U=0.
For AS examinations: grade A=5; grade B=4; grade C=3; grade D=2; grade E=1;
grade N=0; grade U=0.
Rankings and scores are all based on an average of a school's UCCA points
per entry and its UCCA points per pupil.
All details are provisional and subject to correction by the Independent
Schools Information Service.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page VIII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5558</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Wine: Brighter Bavarian beers / A look at the changes in
Bavarian brewing
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By GILES MACDONOGH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE NEWS from Munich is not good: the Bavarians have gone over to light if
not alcohol-free beer. What is the world coming too? Soon we will learn that
the people of Munich have traded in their Lederhosen for Bermuda shorts and
that the Bavarian Landtag has put them on a collective diet.
The big changes in Bavarian beer took place a generation ago. In those days
Munich was famous for its strong, dark fruity beers. Since the 1960s they
have got progressively brighter and lighter. There is even a rumour doing
the rounds that the people are turning to wine.
Beer drinkers may be reassured, however, that there is still beer made in
Munich, and traditional beer too. Paulaner is one of half a dozen breweries
making beer above its traditional well in and around the metropolis. The
brewery was founded by Pauline monks in 1634 and continued as a monastic
concern until the 1880s. The monks made the beer for themselves and their
guests, but the word got round and soon the local inns began to serve it
too.
From the beginning, the monks observed the tradition of brewing a strong
beer for Lent, when the absence of meat called for a beer of a higher
alcoholic strength. This Doppelbock was called Salvator, or the Saviour.
In 1886 the firm of Paulaner, Salvator and Thomasbrau was set up to make the
beer on the original site. Salvator Doppelbock was still conceived to be a
major part of their production, but the local population had grown to expect
other beers too. From Pilsen in Bohemia had come the taste for bright beer
made from the local soft water. There was also Hefebier or yeast beer,
bottled with its yeast to make the fruitiest of all German beers.
Paulaner makes 16 different beers, mostly for the local market. The most
popular of these now is the light beer with only 2.9 degrees of alcohol. The
alcohol-free beer is naturally favoured by motorists. I asked the chief
brewer whether he personally drank this emasculated brew. No, he told me, he
could not stand it.
Munich beer is made from barley. Paulaner is unique among Munich breweries
in that it still malts the barley on the premises, a process which takes a
week. The sweet 'wort' is made in huge, copper-lidded backs much in the same
way as an English beer. The big difference, however, is that all Munich beer
is lager and as such bottom fermented.
Bottom-fermented beers use yeasts which ferment at far lower temperatures
than the British 'top-fermented' ones. Good bottom-fermented beer should
then be matured for several months before being put on the market.
Munich beers are only lightly hopped, and Paulaner actually uses the much
despised pellets, perhaps because hopping is relatively unimportant in south
Germany. The 'bitter' style of British beers is echoed in the more heavily
hoppy styles of the north: Dusseldorf and to some small extent the Berlin
Molle.
Most of Paulaner's output is sold in bottles or cans and only a very small
proportion leaves the brewery in casks. Cask- conditioned beer is not so
important to Germans anyway: the famous Reinheitsgebot which limits the
ingredients to water, cereals and yeast does not allow them to add sugars to
the casks to provoke a second fermentation.
The only way in which the law is occasionally loosely interpreted is in the
recycling of carbonic gas to add fizz. This gas is taken from the fermenting
process and later added back to the casks. They justify this by saying that
the beer made the gas in the first place.
I repaired with my hosts to the big inn which lies next to the brewery. It
was spring but big gobbets of snow were falling. I felt grateful for a big
glass of Salvator drunk as much to ward off the cold as to make up for the
deficiencies caused by a non-meat diet.
Information: Paulaner beers are distributed in Great Britain by Deinhard &amp;
Co, of 95 Southwark Street, London SE1. Tel: 071-261-1111.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page VII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5559</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Wine: Auction prices fall / Consider a year in the wine
auction rooms
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By EDMUND PENNING-ROWSELL
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ALTHOUGH the 1991-92 season was a difficult one in the London wine auction
rooms, Christie's total net turnover, without buyer's premium, of Pounds
8.16m was just a little down on the previous year's Pounds 8.24m. Sotheby's
Pounds 2.3m marked some recovery from its all-time low of Pounds 1.7m.
Christie's benefited from its long-established overseas auction programme.
The wine always most prominent in the catalogues is claret, and the classed
growths attract the most attention. Their prices peaked in 1990, and the
average highest successful bids this year, listed in the adjoining tables
(taken from Christie's King St sales, with a few higher results from
Sotheby's) show that the first growths have all fallen since then.
Petrus has been excluded. Although its prices have mostly dropped, they are
on such a special level as to distort the general picture. Some unusually
high classed-growth figures in Christie's sale in March of Robert Maxwell's
cellar have also been omitted as a personality factor played a part in the
results.
The most sought-after other classed growths have generally declined also,
save occasionally for the '82s, '83s, and '85s that normally would be
expected to rise much more as their development and drinkability increases.
Moreover, comparisons on all the tables here must take into account
inflation of 10 per cent since the beginning of 1990.
These falls are reflected in Christie's drop in their claret auction
turnover. With only seven sales compared with nine in the previous year,
their receipts without premium totalled Pounds 1.35m as against Pounds
1.76m. A 15 per cent fall in the number of lots offered was accompanied by a
decline in the average price per sold lot: from Pounds 435 to Pounds 398 -
and from Pounds 465 in 1989/90. The reduction in the number of lots
demonstrated potential vendors' reluctance to sell because of the market's
depressed state.
The other vintage wine commonly bought on opening offer for long keeping or
investment is vintage port, and the table shows their weakness in price now,
particularly for the celebrated '63s. Much less vintage port was offered for
sale than normally. Is this because in the present economic climate
post-prandial port is a luxury that can be dispensed with, or is it a
longer-term factor that less than ever is being drunk outside corporate
bodies? Certainly the US market for mature vintages has been cut, as for
older leading clarets and rarities for which in good times there is an
important market.
Both auctioneers are reasonably confident for the coming season, but prices
are unlikely to rise, as the best results are usually obtained in the first
half of the year, and this year's best prices were mostly paid in earlier
sales.
What is certain is that those consumers prepared to take advantage of
existing price levels should secure some excellent bargains.
 ---------------------------------------
        AVERAGE HIGHEST AUCTION
     PRICE IN POUNDS S PER DOZEN
          IN 1990 AND 1992
        FIRST-GROWTH CLARETS
 ---------------------------------------
Vintage         1990      *1992
 ---------------------------------------
1961           3,567      2,750
1970             865        803
1975             622        562
1978             623        540
1982             908        707
1983             385        335
1985             402        388
1986           **443        425
 ---------------------------------------
Cheval-Blanc; Haut-Brion; Lafite;
Latour; Margaux; Mouton-Rothschild
 ---------------------------------------
          SECOND AND OTHER
       CLASSED-GROWTH CLARETS
 ---------------------------------------
Vintage         1990      *1992
 ---------------------------------------
1961           1,560      1,460
1970             497        435
1975             284        249
1978             297        259
1982             342        360
1983             192        194
1985             187        193
1986           **226        210
 ---------------------------------------
Beychevelle; Cos d'Estournel;
Ducru-Beaucaillou; Grand Larose;
Leoville-Las-Cases; Lynch-Bages;
La Mission-Haut-Brion; Palmer;
Pichon-Lalande
 ---------------------------------------
             VINTAGE PORT
 ---------------------------------------
Vintage         1990      *1992
1963             493        391
1970             256        254
1977             244        261
1983             143        129
1985             157        141
 ---------------------------------------
*Jan-July 1992 ** 1991. Cockburn; Croft;
Dow; Fonseca; Graham; Noval; Taylor;
Warre. *in calculating average
prices account has been taken if a wine
has not been auctioned in that
year or, in the case of vintage port
if a shipper has not declared that
vintage.
 ---------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page VII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5560</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Food and Wine: A top-class treat
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
SHOULD you need to say thank you and want to give a present that will be
really welcome, then why not choose a custom-made hamper? Panzers at 13-19
Circus Road, London NW8 (tel: 071-435-0165/071-722-8162) will put together
hampers from a big selection of upmarket goodies: virgin olive oil with
peppercorns, wild mushrooms, fresh truffles, caviar and pure Ceylon tea.
Prices are from Pounds 40 per hamper. In a year when all things Japanese are
fashionable you could order ingredients such as parched laver seaweed,
bonito flakes, Japanese noodles, tofu, sake and Sapporo beer. Homesick
Americans might be glad of a hamper containing candy canes, pecan nuts,
Skippy peanut butter and root beer. There are more than 6,000 items to
choose from and Panzers will deliver anywhere in the UK within 24 hours of
ordering.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page VII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5561</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / How To Spend It: The infernal cost of the Eternal City -
Robert Graham, the FT man about Rome, knows all about free spending
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT GRAHAM
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE ETERNAL City is expensive. By expensive, I mean the rapid conversion
made when calculating the cost of a taxi ride, a drink in a cafe, a quick
lunch in a restaurant chosen at random because your feet are weary, or the
price of an item of clothing you are tempted to buy.
Curiously, though, while people tend to complain about prices they do not,
on the whole, challenge the value for money. Rome has to be seen in the
round, and you can get a lot free. So, let us start with what is free.
Above all, Rome is a walking city. Only by walking can you gain a sense of
its unique and omnipresent qualities of light, colour and architectural
harmony.
The golden light, especially in the early morning or evenings, is
unforgettable from the top of the Spanish Steps or the Campidoglio. The
ochres, the russets and the faded yellows of the buildings can be enjoyed in
any piazza or street (my favourites are Campo dei Fiori and Piazza Navona),
and do not forget the striking green of the firs and holm oaks in the parks
of the Villa Borghese and Doria Pamphili (which, incidentally, has an
unusual population of beavers around its lake).
Then there are the endless fountains, like those designed by Bernini in
Piazza Navona or the tiny 'tortoise' fountain in Piazza Mattei. Many still
have highly drinkable water, like Piazza di Spagna; and just off the Corso,
by the Gallery Pamphili, there is a little barrel with a dribbling tap where
you can still find Romans filling plastic bottles.
Free, too, is the world's finest selection of churches and basilicas - more
than 300. My favourites are the early basilicas on the Aventine, or those
with magnificent paintings like the Caravagios in St Maria del Popolo or San
Luigi dei Francesi.
And, if you do not want to pay for museums, there are the Colosseum, the
Pantheon and the Villa Borghese. I would also recommend entering the Palazzo
Borghese from Via Ripetta. This is now an auction house but you can see some
marvellous decorated ceilings (plus the antiques the Roman aristocracy is
off-loading).
Then, of course, there are the free shows of people at night in Piazza
Navona, by the Pantheon, in Campo dei Fiori, Santa Maria dei Trastevere, on
the Spanish Steps, Piazza del Popolo, or the Villa Borghese gardens on
Sunday afternoon.
Having savoured what is free, one is in a better mood to spend. But first, a
coffee in the Cafe Greco in Via Condotti, right in the heart of the shopping
area. The 18th century decor is forever suggestive, no matter how crowded,
and the espresso is hot. Alternatively, just off the Corso there is an
excellent cafe in the corner of Piazza San Lorenzo in Lucina; it serves the
best sandwiches in Rome, has tables outside and is not patronised by
tourists. If you want a drink, try the discreet decadence of the Plaza Hotel
bar on the Corso. If an ice cream or brioche (cornetto), make for D'Angelo
in Via della Croce.
All the big names for clothes, shoes, bags and jewellery (Armani, Bulgari,
Fendi, Gucci, Missone, Valentino, Versace etc) are in a small area between
Via Borgonona, Fratina, Condotti, Piazza de Spagna and Babuino. These names
speak for themselves but visitors may well find, to their chagrin, that
prices of these 'names' are sometimes cheaper at home and the designs
tailored to, say, London or New York.
It is also worth remembering that shops in Rome often cater for the local
tastes and climate. Compared with Milan, the colours of clothes are more
sensual, the weight lighter, the designs less adventurous and the stocks
smaller (quite often, and maddeningly, your size is not in stock). In the
case of men's suits, trousers, jackets and shirts, the cut also tends to be
tight-fitting.
With these caveats in mind, it is best to just to wander: the area you need
to cover is small enough to permit this without homing-in on any particular
shop.
In clothes, the best value for both men and women is in the upper end of the
market where a mixture of styling, quality materials and finish really tell.
You can get a good idea of this from Batistone (Via Condotti) or Caltrucco
(off Piazza San Silvestro). At the cheaper end, beware of the many
superficially good-looking imitations of 'names' which simply do not last or
can shrink when washed or dry-cleaned. The exceptions are shoes and leather
goods.
For women, Rome has a number of small shops with excellently-made cocktail
and evening dresses and suits in the L800,000 (Pounds 375) to L1.5m (Pounds
700) range that follow fashion rather than set it. These shops, in and
around Via Sistina, are filled with attentive, family-controlled staff,
often stock only one of each item in a limited range of sizes, and are
willing to make superb alterations or adapt old items once bought.
My favourite man's shop is Carlo Palazzi (Via Borgonona), where you walk in
intending to look for a tie and are seduced into buying a jacket (L1.2m)
after trying it for size in the 16th century fitting room upstairs.
My wife maintains that Rome excels in the selection, quality and good value
of shops selling gloves, stockings, tights, socks and underwear, extras for
the hair and bijouterie - again, all in the city centre. For my part, I
would add that socks, especially light summer socks, are a good buy.
If you are looking for something for the bedroom or bathroom, try Bellini
(Piazza di Spagna). This Florentine firm has a fine selection of linens and
cottons as well as sheets, bathrobes, nightshirts and gowns, as does Frette
in the Corso.
Of the more recondite items, Rome has a long tradition of candle-making and,
if nothing else, it is worth a visit to Pisoni (on the corner of
Rinascimento and the Corso Vittorio Emmanuelle). Antiques are pricy and
taste favours the large and the baroque, but do not deny yourself the
pleasure of browsing in Via dei Coronari, or along Via Babuino and Via
Marguta.
In Piazza Farnese, there is a decorator's paradise (Farnese) which makes
columns, mosaic tables and sundials, using ancient pieces to stunning
effect. I have my eye on a L10m marble table when the recession ends . . .
In these hard times, though, food could be the best bet. In the city centre,
in Via delle Croce, there are three good food shops and a superbly-decorated
wine shop (where you also can taste). I would buy some specially-bottled,
extra virgin olive oil (the Tuscans now have special controls on origin), a
chunk of parmesan cheese, some fresh pasta (which will keep for a couple of
days), a truffle (in season) and a whole salami.
If you are more adventurous, buy some Bottarga, a pressed row of fish (tuna
and a variety of others) which can be grated over pasta or served, sliced
thinly, with a squeeze of lemon. Delucchi, in Via della Croce, also sells an
extensive selection of crystallised and dried fruits as well as nuts (stock
up on those pine nuts for pesto sauce).
And now you deserve lunch. You cannot go wrong at Otello, in Via della
Croce, which has a closed courtyard (open in summer). At this time of year,
a light plate of parma ham (prosciutto crudo) on top of freshly-peeled green
figs, followed by vitello tonnato (a salad of rugetta and tomatoes) and
washed down with house Frascati and a cup of coffee, will cost two around
L80,000.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page VII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5562</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / On a wing and a prayer: Experts seem divided about the
meaning of the turmoil and stresses in the global financial system
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOHN PLENDER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
TURMOIL ON the foreign exchanges, wild gyrations in the capital markets,
riots in Germany, French doubts about Maastricht - this is no mere silly
season crisis. Yet at the end of a week in which sterling wavered, currency
realignments were rumoured and calm temporarily reasserted itself, financial
experts seem curiously divided about what is going on.
According to one line of thought, it is the collapse of the US currency that
is chiefly responsible for chaos in the markets. Yet few in the US seem
aware of it, least of all the country's financial establishment. Much of the
Federal Reserve Board and more of Wall Street is spending this weekend at a
jolly symposium in the mountains at Jackson Hole, Wyoming. The name says it
all. Clearly their heart is not in this so-called crisis.
Others take the view that the strength of the D-mark is the problem. Yet a
maverick member of the Bundesbank council hinted earlier this week that the
real snag was the reluctance of other members of the European exchange rate
mechanism (ERM) to devalue - whoops, realign - against the mark.
The French electorate, if the opinion polls are to be believed, appears to
be developing a wholly different agenda for the European Community than the
one cooked up by the French political establishment in the run-up to the
treaty of Maastricht. This is a source of joy to the Bundesbank, which would
happily wave goodbye to monetary union; also to those Tory ministers who
would dearly love to come out of the Euro-closet singing Rule Britannia. But
it does nothing for short-run currency stability.
The British, meantime, are threatened by a rise in interest rates, which
might be necessary to prevent sterling from falling through its ERM floor.
Yet sterling is strong against everything that matters apart from the
D-mark, while the economy remains flat on its back. Increasingly the
decision by prime minister John Major to take Britain into the ERM is being
compared with Winston Churchill's catastrophic return of sterling to the
gold standard in 1925.
For his part the UK chancellor of the exchequer, Norman Lamont, wrapped in
his ERM bands and stranded before the cameras on the Treasury steps in
London, risks being compared with Philip Snowden, the hapless Labour
chancellor who presided over the devastation of the British economy before
the decision to go off gold in 1931.
In the face of this seemingly paradoxical set of circumstances, the layman,
conscious of uncomfortable echoes of the 1930s, might ask the significance
of this week's battle royal on the exchanges. Is it a harbinger of nastier
political and economic trouble to come?
The worries are arguably overdone. True, the fluctuations on the exchanges
are disturbing for investors since exchange rate movements exercise an
important influence, through their impact on competitiveness, on the
distribution of growth and industrial profits around the global economy.
Yet, for reasons that will become clear, currency fluctuations are best
regarded as part of the solution, not the problem. They are no more than a
symptom of large countries pursuing mutually inconsistent economic policies
and of past failures of international monetary coordination.
The story really starts in the 1980s with Reaganomics, that euphoric
economic upheaval which combined loose fiscal policy with tight money,
together with a plethora of financial and tax reforms. The internal
consequences for the US economy included a decline in savings and a huge
accumulation of debt. The chief external results of US overspending were an
overvalued dollar and a huge balance of payments deficit.
This was sustainable just as long as other countries were prepared to mop up
the dollars that Americans were pumping on to international markets. And for
most of the 1980s, Japan and Germany were happy to do that. The Japanese did
the lion's share of the work, buying a growing share of US Treasury bonds.
They also bought a significant slice of the Californian banking and film
industries, together with great chunks of real estate across the union. The
appetite for foreign assets spilled over into other countries, including
Britain, where Japanese banks pumped money into office blocks in the City,
Docklands and elsewhere.
While it lasted, this flow of capital across the exchanges meant that debtor
countries, of which the US was by far the most important, enjoyed lower
interest rates, cheaper mortgages and ready access to high-quality Japanese
consumer durables and German capital goods. Creditor countries were thereby
spared from the contractionary impact of excessive savings on their domestic
economies.
But the party went on too long. From the mid-1980s, egged on by central
bankers after the famous Plaza Accord, the dollar fell relentlessly, leaving
foreign investors with huge currency losses. At the Louvre Accord in 1987
the central bankers agreed to put a floor under the dollar to prevent a free
fall.
For the Japanese, who led the supporters' club, the consequences were
catastrophic. Just as the US decision in 1927 to reduce dollar interest
rates partly in response to Europe's monetary problems helped fuel the stock
market boom that ended in the 1929 Crash, so Japan's recent decision to keep
yen interest rates low to support the dollar fuelled a domestic stock market
and property bubble, followed by a Tokyo crash to rival 1929 on Wall Street.
Currency fluctuations in the 1990s are largely to do with the hangover after
this American-Japanese binge, together with the economic shock arising from
the unification of Germany. In response to a sluggish US economy, the
Federal Reserve has repeatedly cut the discount rate, which now stands at 3
per cent, a 29-year low. Yet the economy has failed to respond more than
fitfully, chiefly because of the reluctance of a shell-shocked banking
system to lend.
Keynes, in the 1930s, described attempts to revive the economy through
stimulatory monetary policy as 'pushing on a piece of string.' That would
serve equally well for the US economy today. With a system of deposit
insurance in place, there is no banking panic to compare with the aftermath
of 1929. But in the wake of excessive lending for real estate, energy and
financial engineering, individuals and companies are seeking to pay down
their debts and risk-averse bankers are reluctant to lend. With short-term
interest rates low and government bond yields high, US banks have invested
more than half their assets in US government bonds, leaving the small
business sector, the chief generator of employment, high and dry.
Germany, meantime, has gone from a current account surplus of 4.8 per cent
in 1989 to a deficit of 1.3 per cent last year, as it switches resources
into the former German Democratic Republic. And it is conducting its own
version of Reaganomics in which the federal government puts its foot on the
fiscal accelerator - deemed necessary to bribe the inhabitants of the former
GDR to stay in the east - while the Bundesbank keeps all four feet on the
monetary brake to dampen the inflationary consequences. The result is high
rates of interest, rising unemployment in the D-mark bloc and a huge inflow
of foreign capital.
This is where the conflict in the currency markets is at its fiercest. With
money market rates in New York at around 3 1/2 per cent and comparable rates
in Frankfurt at nearly 10 per cent, the temptation for speculators to hold
dollars for the short term is minimal. But neither the Americans nor Germans
are unduly worried about the resulting flight of capital across the
Atlantic. The inflationary impact of the collapsing dollar scares no one at
Jackson Hole, because US imports are less than 10 per cent of gnp and the
economy benefits from the boost to exports. And the Bundesbank welcomes the
appreciation of the D-mark because it puts an additional brake on inflation.
In short, currency fluctuations can be an escape valve and an adjustment
mechanism. And there lies the conundrum for sterling and other weaker ERM
currencies. By tying themselves to a strong currency, the D-mark, which is
subject to the pull of great tidal flows of capital on the global markets,
they ensure that the burden of adjustment falls not on the exchange rate but
on domestic demand. Instead of sterling collapsing like the dollar, and
monetary policy continuing to loosen in response to the huge debt left from
the late 1980s boom, the squeeze is felt in the real economy as real
interest rates rise and inflation falls.
The drama within the ERM does indeed bear striking similarities to the
1930s. Then, France was the lynchpin of the gold bloc - a defensive
arrangement, according to Charles Kindleberger, the economic historian,
rather than an optimum currency area, which is the economist's definition of
a group of countries that stand to benefit from joining a monetary union.
The French paid a high price, in deflation and constantly changing
governments, for their politicians' commitment to gold, until the Tripartite
Monetary Agreement of 1936 took the franc off the hook. In contrast, the
British enjoyed one of their highest growth rates of the century after
Britain went off the gold standard in 1931, although unemployment remained
high and growth was unevenly distributed between regions and industries.
Today, the French are again spearheading plans for a monetary union. Optimum
currency area considerations have been less important than political
imperatives: worries about how to manage relations with an enlarged and more
confident Germany. Much of Europe is importing deflation from Germany as the
D-mark - a modern equivalent of the gold standard - rockets upwards. And a
British chancellor finds himself in the extraordinary position of
confronting a sterling crisis in which the troubled currency walks tall at
nearly Dollars 2 to Pounds 1. The question is whether there will be a
similar resolution to the 1930s, with sterling and the lira pursuing a
different path from the franc.
This week's signals from the French polls could turn out to be of greater
long-term importance than the currency fluctuations. For if the French, of
all people in Europe, offer at best a lukewarm endorsement of the Maastricht
treaty, following the Danish 'No', the European political establishment may
be forced to acknowledge an inadequate mandate to pursue its ambitious plans
for political and monetary union. ERM turmoil will increase. And some form
of realignment, perhaps even the fragmentation of the ERM, might follow,
with Italy precipitating the rot.
For investors in British equities, the prospects could be similar to those
after the devaluation against gold in 1931. Initial turbulence in the
markets was followed by a five-year bull market. According to BZW's annual
survey of equity and gilt returns since 1918, the real return on equities in
1931 was 40.2 per cent; in 1932, 30.4 per cent; in 1933, 24.4 per cent; in
1934, 11.2 per cent, and in 1935, 16.1 per cent. Surprisingly, since
devaluation usually means more inflation, gilts did well, too, with a return
of more than 45 per cent in 1931. Falling gilt yields and rising prices
reflected the new government policy of cheap money.
Whether UK gilts would benefit from devaluation this time, after the
unprecedented post-war inflation, seems more questionable. Much would depend
on whether the government implemented other institutional changes, such as
independence for the Bank of England, to stabilise prices. But some time
over the next few months equities could be back in fashion with a vengeance.
And in due course the dollar will bounce back.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page I
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5563</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / The Long View: Your A-Z of the D-word
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By BARRY RILEY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THERE IS much talk among pundits just now about devaluation. Here is an A to
Z guide.
Alternatives. Perhaps this is a misleading way to begin. In the terminology
of currency politics there are no alternatives. There is only one possible
strategy at any one time, although it might change abruptly one Friday
night.
Bundesbank. The German central bank does not believe in devaluation. The
Bundesbank is selfish, ignorant, pig-headed, disruptive, old-fashioned,
nationalistic and inflexible. In short, it sets the standard for what a good
independent central bank should be like.
Constant competitiveness. An economic concept designed to distract people's
attention from the fact that the currency keeps going down in value.
Devaluation. A complex foreign currency market adjustment mechanism which
can be characterised as: 'I ain't askin' DM2.95 for this pound sterling, I
ain't askin' DM2.83, I'm givin' it away for DM2.40. Cross my heart, in 1981
it was worth five. Yes, sold to the gent with the Reuters screen in
Frankfurt.'
ERM. The exchange rate mechanism is a baffling concoction of fluctuation
bands, divergence indicators and intervention limits. Life is terrible
within it but even worse outside: your currency might go up and down like
the dollar.
Floating currency. Sometimes known as a sinking currency. When politicians
tire of fixing exchange rates, they sometimes choose to 'let the market
decide.' Between 1972 and 1990, the market decided that the pound should
float down from over DM8 to under DM3.
Gold. Once, it set the standard for international monetary value. But gold
is not what it used to be. In 1980, gold hit DM1,550 an ounce; it is now
DM520.
Hyperinflation. Ordinary inflation is what has happened in the UK, where the
pound has lost 84 per cent of its purchasing power in the past 20 years.
Hyperinflation is when that happens in one year.
Independent central bank. After you devalue the currency, you might declare
your intention to give independence to your central bank. You cannot do so
beforehand because it might refuse to devalue and could raise interest rates
instead.
J-curve. The aim of devaluation is to improve the trade balance.
Unfortunately, the immediate effect is to make it worse (because imports
rise in price) and the chart goes down before it goes up again. This is the
J-curve effect, although some economists believe the J stands for 'Jeepers]'
Krona and krone. The Swedish krona has been devalued this year but the
Norwegian krone has not, nor the Danish krone. So be careful when you go to
Scandinavia and change currency.
Lira. Well-known devaluation-prone Italian currency. But there were 2,100 to
the pound in 1948 and 2,150 today, which is not a great change.
Maastricht. Little Dutch town on the German border where it was decided by
European heads of state last December to abolish the D-Mark by merging it
into the Ecu which could then be devalued. The Bundesbank is, however,
mounting an effective rearguard action.
N is for nineteen thirty-one, nineteen forty-nine and nineteen sixty-seven,
all famous occasions of sterling devaluations. But they were all
odd-numbered years, so perhaps we are safe in 1992.
Ouguiya. The Mauritanian currency has been devalued, but not recently.
Pound in your pocket. Famous Harold Wilson observation in 1967 on
devaluation. 'It does not mean, of course, that the pound here in Britain,
in your pocket or your purse, or in your bank, has been devalued.' Of course
not. But since then, the pound has lost 89 per cent of its internal
purchasing power.
Quit. Often the fate of devaluing British chancellors of the exchequer.
James Callaghan stood down in 1967. Philip Snowden and Sir Stafford Cripps
did not last long, either, in 1931 and 1949 respectively.
Realignment. Valuable euphemism for devaluation, used when countries in the
European monetary system devalue against the D-Mark. If different countries
move their central rates by different amounts and also change their
fluctuation bands, it can be hard to see what is really going on.
September. Historically, the autumn equinox marks the most dangerous season
for the pound sterling, which left the gold standard on September 21 1931
and suffered a 30 per cent devaluation against the dollar on September 18
1949.
Threadneedle Street. Home of the Bank of England, manager of the UK's
currency, which is dignified, responsible, co-operative, deferential,
technically ingenious and flexible. For these reasons, it is a rotten
central bank.
U-turn. The manoeuvre executed by a government when it devalues the currency
after having dismissed the possibility fiercely for many months.
V-turn. Like a U-turn, but even sharper.
Weekend. Devaluations usually happen over a weekend. Governments have nearly
two days, in which markets are closed, to put the arrangements into place.
But, these days, there could be opposition from the Keep Sunday Special
movement and from millions of tourists unable to change travellers cheques.
Xenophobia. A common affliction of finance ministers trying to shore up
sickly currencies. They are liable to lash out at 'gnomes of Zurich' and
other symbolic speculators. Unfortunately, the foreign exchange markets are
infested with foreigners.
Yield differential. Weak currencies must reward investors with higher
interest rates than strong ones to compensate for the extra risk. So why
have US treasury bonds been yielding less than German bunds? Well, any
theory can break down sometime.
Zero inflation. A dream of monetarists and governments. Achieved only once
in Britain - in 1959 - since the Second World War. Since 1970, the UK has
failed to get closer than 3.7 per cent over a calendar year. Zero inflation
could mean the end of annual wage increases; for some reason, voters are not
as keen as politicians.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page I
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5564</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / A saintly 'cure' for rabies: As a terrifying disease nears
the shores of Britain, Patricia Morison tells the story of a bizarre healing
cult that flourished in the Ardennes
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PATRICIA MORISON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
OF ALL diseases, none has a more fearsome reputation than rabies. For
reasons no one can explain, it died out in Europe during the later part of
the 19th and first half of the 20th century. In 1939, though, there was an
ominous outbreak close to the Polish-German frontier. Since then  - spread
mainly by red foxes - the virus has travelled inexorably west across Europe
at a rate of about 40 kilometres a year.
Rabies was eradicated from Britain by 1903, but with fox-borne rabies now
only just across the English Channel, some scientists are convinced that it
will soon be back. In 1986, James Murray, professor of mathematical biology
at Oxford University, published a computer model warning that rabies will
return to Britain - and will spread rapidly.
Prof Murray points to the rarity of deaths from rabies in Britain, where it
seems never to have reached epidemic proportions.
In Murray's view, however, the Channel Tunnel will be an irrelevance as far
as the spread of rabies is concerned. English sentimentality about animals
and the vast number of pleasure craft crossing the Channel make it
inevitable that one day a pet animal will come ashore somewhere - and
reintroduce the virus.
When that happens, the British, like their neighbours and most of the rest
of the world, will need to become accustomed to viewing parks, woods and
fields as the haunt of a lurking killer.
In the early 5th century, St Augustine of Hippo compiled a daunting list of
the disasters that may at any moment fall on our defenceless heads:
insanity, bankruptcy, imprisonment, torture, fire, stroke. Among them he
included rabies.
Fifteen centuries later, does rabies really deserve its horrifying image?
After all, rabies vaccine is available both as a prophylactic and for
treating those who have been in contact with an infected animal. Vaccinated
bait is widely and expensively used in programmes intented to control the
spread of the disease among wildlife.
Yet the horrors of rabies can hardly be less fundamental today than when it
stalked the cities of Roman North Africa. There is still no known cure. Once
clinical symptoms appear - fever, headache and 'a sense of apprehension' -
its victims are doomed to a horrible death.
Both in France and in England, it used to be common practice to suffocate
victims under mattresses. Read any description of the effect of rabies and
one sees the case for euthanasia. In its most common form, furious rabies,
sufferers develop hydrophobia - a dread of water  - which has been described
by Prof David Warrell, an expert in tropical medicine, as 'the most terrible
and mysterious symptom in the whole of medicine.' Rabies, says Warrell,
'remains the most . . . hopeless of human infections.'
In short, there is little room for late 20th-century complacency. All the
more reason, then, to look with interest, if bemusement, at an extraordinary
healing cult that flourished in a small village in north-west Europe for
nine centuries. Fear does strange things to people and so does hope. Those
two emotions, working powerfully together, with a dash of the profit motive
thrown in, played a large role in the extraordinary and little-known history
of St Hubert of the Ardennes.
St Hubert was an early 8th-century bishop of Liege who preached Christianity
in the Ardennes. A century after his death, monks carried his holy (and
still incorrupt - ie, not mouldy) corpse from its grave in a church in Liege
to an impoverished monastery high in the forest of the Ardennes.
The abbot and his monks badly needed a miracle-working relic to boost morale
and attract pilgrims, and St Hubert conveniently started to perform healing
miracles in his tomb. After miraculous cures, many grateful pilgrims settled
nearby, some of them with useful trades to ply, such as blacksmith.
And so, thanks to a saint's holy bones, a village sprang up. Today
Saint-Hubert-les-Ardennes is a charming, slate-roofed town modestly famous
as the birthplace of the flower-painter Redoubte - and for the fetes de
Saint-Hubert.
St Hubert is still known and loved throughout catholic northern Europe as
the patron saint of hunters. The tourist office, housed in the former
mansion of the mighty abbots of Saint-Hubert, dispenses leaflets telling the
picturesque legend of the saint's conversion. Sadly - but not untypically -
the legend has nothing to do with the real St Hubert. It is a barefaced
example of monastic plagiarism, lifted from the Life of St Eustace.
The story goes that Hubert, a young nobleman, went hunting on Good Friday
and was confronted by a white stag with a crucifix between its antlers.
Christ reproached Hubert, whereupon he decided to enter the Church.
On September 25 and November 3, mass is celebrated in honour of St Hubert in
the town's magnificent gothic church, punctuated by huntsmen blowing
fanfares. Tourists turn up for the fete in September, which is modestly
promoted by the Belgian tourist office as a hunting festival: St Hubert
still has a role to play in bringing revenue to his town. In November, the
atmosphere is more obviously spiritual. Local people bring dogs and even
horses to be blessed.
In all this ceremony, there is nothing to remind visitors that the key to St
Hubert's centuries of fame was his reputation as the saint who could prevent
 -and cure - rabies. As early as the 11th century, a monk wrote that it was
standard practice for people bitten by rabid dogs and wolves to visit the
shrine.
What happened there was very odd indeed and quite without parallel in the
history of medieval shrines. A priest would make a cut in the pilgrim's
forehead and push in a thread pulled from the saint's episcopal stole.
Later, the monks claimed that this stole had been woven in Heaven by the
Virgin Mary and flown down to the saint by an angelic messenger.
As for the origin of the ritual, known as la taille, it is surely an
instance of sympathetic magic. In antiquity, rabies was one of many diseases
blamed on worms - relatives of the poet William Blake's 'invisible worm that
flies in the night.' Worms, under a dog's tongue or in its anus, were
thought to cause rabies. It could well be that someone decided that because
a white thread resembles a worm, it might expel the diabolic sickness of
rabies if placed inside the head, close to the soul. With the saint
literally under their skin, people would not only be 'inoculated' against
the risk of rabies: it was claimed they could be cured of the disease.
The disappearance of St Hubert's holy relics when Huguenots sacked the abbey
was - and is - keenly felt. However, the holy stole was safe, so the
pilgrimage was unaffected. Moreover, it was said that the holy stole never
became any shorter. Whether or not that is true, today it is a length of
silk 105cm by 42mm of 11th- or 12th-century workmanship. Normally, it can be
seen in a reliquary on one of the altars. However, on November 3, after
mass, when the church has almost emptied, a priest holds it to the heads of
the more devout.
In the 17th century, doctors of Paris University attacked the credibility of
the stole and were furiously rebutted by supporters of this enormously
popular pilgrimage. Proof of its appeal is the sheer size of the church, its
marble floor and magnificently carved stalls. Records, kept at the shrine
from 1653, were continued even after the abbey was secularised in the French
revolution. Early in the 18th century, a monk had noted that in four years,
1,956 people had been given la taille. Between 1806 and 1834, some 4,800
were still seeking out St Hubert's healing power.
La taille still had its devotees in the 1920s. It was said to be common for
people fearful of contracting rabies to go to the Pasteur Instititue in
Paris for inoculation, and - just to make sure - visit St Hubert.
What, we may ask, was going on? How could people have been deluded for so
long into thinking that a visit to this saint's shrine had power over this
most terrible of diseases? On the face of it, the pilgrimage must seem like
a mockery, a tragic waste of effort and expense. The only justification
would seem to be that during an agonising period of uncertainty, as
sufferers and families waited to see if the dread symptoms appeared, the
pilgrimage offered solace.
But there are more things to be said in explanation of the long 'success' of
the pilgrimage to St Hubert. Many of the pilgrims must simply have made a
mistake. They thought they had been bitten by a mad beast, but it ran off so
they had no proof. Only pilgrims brought to the abbey from homes within a
few days' journey could possibly have had furious rabies, since death occurs
swiftly.
Many raging, barking, convulsing wretches who were tied to an iron ring by
St Hubert's altar to await la taille must have been malades imaginaires.
They were suffering from rabies hysteria, a strange phenomenon which has
been well documented in countries where rabies is prevalent. Deluded
sufferers are said to exhibit a terrifying range of symptoms associated with
furious rabies.
Doctors today suspect that they are dealing with this bizarre phenomenon
whenever the symptoms follow hard on the heels of an animal bite. One of the
horrible features of rabies is that the virus commonly lies dormant for
between 12 and 60 days. The hysteric gives the game away by claiming he or
she has been bitten only hours or a day or so earlier. At the shrine, many
an hysteric was no doubt swiftly 'cured' the instant they received the
supernatural thread.
Conversely, and tragically, there were people who made the journey on foot,
horse, or latterly by train, received la taille and, once they got home,
faithfully kept the novena, the nine days of ritual observance. It appeared
they were cured, for the virus can take two years to become active. In the
end, they succumbed.
Did anyone then think to inform the priest at Saint-Hubert, let alone accuse
St Hubert of impotence?
The 'fail-safe' principle that explained the success of so many healing
cults was not that Christianity taught that God's power, and that of his
saints, worked automatically; on the contrary, God's power was an abyss
which the mind of man could not plumb. The silk stole of a saint was like a
ladder over the abyss.
Many would cross in safety thanks to the power of their faith and the
prayers of their loved ones. But some would perish. Even here, though, faith
held out comfort to the bereaved - the thought that all those hours of
racking agony would surely incline God to mercy at the hour of judgment.
Today, rabies is at large once more in Europe. But there is no sign, so far,
of a return of the cast of mind which, for nine centuries, gave St Hubert's
stole its power.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page VI
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5565</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Motoring: A Volvo to hurl round the track - Stuart Marshall
improves his driving at a racing school
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By STUART MARSHALL
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
YOU MIGHT think a Volvo would be the last car anyone would choose as the
standard training vehicle for a racing and high-performance driving school.
I am not being unkind. But if you were asked to name a car with sharp,
sporty handling, high cornering speeds and sparkling performance, you would
hardly think first of a Volvo.
Yet there I was, lapping the Castle Combe circuit in Wiltshire at speeds one
would not dare use on a public highway. The Volvo 480 Turbo coupe seemed to
be enjoying it as much as I was.
The 480 Turbo coupe is built in the company's Dutch plant. It is a pretty
little car, with a 1.7-litre Renault-supplied engine putting out 120
horsepower at 5,400 rpm and developing maximum torque (in other words,
pulling hardest) at 4,500 rpm. It costs Pounds 16,695 but there are two
other non-turbocharged versions: a 1.7-litre, 102-horsepower 480 S (Pounds
13,895) and a just-introduced 110-horsepower, two-litre ES (Pounds 15,295).
Because they are Volvos, they are strong on safety and security as well as
performance. A driver's side airbag is available and all have a standard
burglar alarm with a visible warning flasher.
Volvo suggests a 480 would make a good alternative to the hot hatchbacks of
various makes that have been hit by sky-high premiums. The insurance
companies seem to agree: even the 480 Turbo is in group 13. That means it is
regarded as a better risk than a Ford XR2i or Peugeot 205 GTi 1.9 (both
group 14), Ford XR3i or VW Golf GTi (both 15).
The 480, launched five years ago, has always been refined and sporty enough
to attract the kind of buyers - many of them women - who felt they could not
quite afford a BMW 320. Detail changes, including development of the
suspension by Lotus, have made it go and handle better each year.
Now, the 1993 model Turbo - the car I drove at Castle Combe - has an
electronic traction control system, using the same sensors as the ABS
brakes, to stifle wheel-spin when accelerating hard.
The Racing and Performance School finds its 480 Turbo coupes are standing up
well to the tough life they lead. Many who drive them are not exactly
experts, nor do they want to become racing drivers. Their aim is to enjoy
themselves while improving their car control skills and becoming better,
safer motorists.
On the circuit, wearing full harness and with an instructor beside them,
they can explore their own (and the car's) limits without risk to life or
licence.
A point the school makes is that, unless they have had advanced driving
instruction, all motorists have taught themselves how to drive at over 40
mph (65 kmh) - with, it has to be said, varying degrees of success. So, one
of the first principles to take on board at Castle Combe is that good fast
driving is, above all, smooth and safe driving.
You are told always to brake and, if necessary, change down when in a
straight line on the approach to a corner and then turn into it. With the
car nicely balanced, you apply power progressively, clipping the apex of the
corner and using the full width of the track as you exit, accelerating hard
up the straight.
After a few practice laps you find that not only are you getting it right
but that it is the natural, relaxed way to drive a car quickly. Of course,
the tyres whimper when cornering; but if they howl, you know you are losing
speed as well as smoothness by steering coarsely, putting on too much power,
or both.
Is any of this relevant to driving on the road?
Obviously, the racing line on corners is for circuits only. But the
consistent smoothness, unbroken concentration and proper use of brakes and
gears which also are taught are the hallmarks of a good driver. Just as hard
acceleration, inattention, sudden swerves and harsh braking are those of an
indifferent one.
Compared with the cost of a no-claims bonus lost through thoughtless
driving, an Pounds 89 half-day introductory session at Castle Combe with
expert tuition and the use of the Volvo 480 Turbo is money well spent.
At Racing and Performance School a full day, with both introductory and
higher-standard intermediate sessions, is Pounds 175. Call or fax
0793-751-855 for details.
IT IS not just the average driver's skill that needs improving. We are, it
seems unsure to woefully ignorant of some of motoring's basic rules.
According to a survey of 1,000 drivers of all kinds carried out for Volvo
Car UK, four out of five do not know the correct stopping distance from 70
mph (112 kmh) or - unbelievably - even the speed limit in built-up areas.
For the record, it is 245ft (75 metres) plus thinking time before applying
the brakes - say, 300ft (92 metres) in all, and that is on a dry surface.
The speed limit is 30 mph (48 kmh).
The survey showed that the 20 per cent of drivers who hog the outside lane
on a motorway, thinking it is meant for fast cruising and not overtaking,
are likely to be young (17-24 years old) or over 65.
Fewer than half of us know that headlamps should be flashed only as a
warning. The rest think a flash means anything from 'Get out of my way - I
want to overtake' to 'Come through - I'm waiting for you.'
Women drivers are revealed as knowing just as much about the rules of the
road as men, and are said to be more aware of correct speed limits. Do they
take greater notice of them? The survey is tactfully silent.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page VI
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5566</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / As They Say In Europe: Royal reports
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JAMES MORGAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
'THE question is whether the monarchy has the resilience to survive being
converted into an object of the morbid tastes of a newly enriched class of
shopkeepers.' Manuel Vicent in El Pais was worried about the future of the
monarchy now that the entanglements of King Juan Carlos were the subject of
public speculation. 'In this country such matters are commonplace.
Aristocrats, artists, bankers and politicians parade half naked with their
respective mistresses or wives.'
Vicent argued that increasing wealth had meant the throwing over of ancient
taboos. Once national income reached around Dollars 10,000 per head there
was a 'qualitative change' in social mores. Perhaps that is also true if
income moves in the reverse direction, hence the parallel phenomenon in
Britain.
Those two staples of British news, the royal family and the pound, have
aroused less interest than might have been expected this week. That may be
because of royal fatigue and a general view that sterling 'crises' are old
hat. So it was a surprise to find that in Croatia, which surely has other
matters to worry about, there is an obsessive concern with the Royal family.
Novi Vjesnik of Zagreb carried a piece from its London correspondent, Jasna
Zanic-Nardini, headed 'Princezin novi skandal.' (The 'princess' turned out
to be a duchess). There were some charming lines about 'Fergie u toplessu'
with her 'americki kavalir.' Maybe it seems better in Croat because of the
contrast with the surrounding horror stories.
A hitherto unremarked difference between Serb and Moslem is that the former
is less interested in the doings of British royalty, and this has been
aggravated by the oddity that arises when 'Fergie' is transliterated into
the Cyrillic alphabet. Leafing through the Belgrade Borba in search of such
material, I was struck by a headline nestling between its routine horror
stories - 'Don't miss the revenge match of the twentieth century' it read.
Serb vs Croat? Serbia vs everybody? It turned out to be about next month's
Spassky-Fischer chess series taking place in Belgrade and Montenegro.
That provided one of the few lighter moments in a horrible week which saw
the Yugoslav madness come to London and the citizens of Rostock provide a
re-run of the 1930s. Fortunately the French are still able to display their
contempt for others without actually having to commit arson or murder.
The Republican convention inspired a considered demolition piece in Monday's
Tribune de l'Expansion by Daniele Gervais. 'It really needs very little to
reverse the opinion of Middle America: a great media show in the course of
which one exalts the superpower of the United States. But what is most
disturbing about the speeches at the Republican convention are the diatribes
against intelligence. The speakers smugly flattered the most mediocre
aspects of their society. That is not what will cure America's ills for
these result from the disintegration - orchestrated by the retreat of a
demonised state - of the education system, of the infrastructure and of the
social safety net. However, without a somersault aimed at reversing the
degradation and guaranteeing modernisation, American society greatly risks
pursuing the path of dangerous degeneration.' France may now be recovering
from the pro-American malaise of the eighties.
Boris Yeltsin, always the innovator, has developed a technique that prevents
hostile questions at press conferences. He was asked by a Japanese
journalist about his solutions for the problem of the northern islands
claimed by Japan from Russia. He replied, 'I have 12 alternative
approaches.' Nobody pursued the matter.
James Morgan is diplomatic correspondent of the BBC World Service.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page VI
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5567</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Briefcase, Q&amp;A: Share gift question
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
IF I transfer by gift at nil cost to my adult son, shares on which I would
have a capital gain if sold at full value, what is the capital gains tax
position first for me and second for my son were he to dispose of the shares
in the future?
You will be taxed as though you had sold the shares to him at their market
value on the day of the gift (on the quarter-up basis). He will
correspondingly be treated as having bought them from you at that price on
that day.
Ask your tax office for the free introductory pamphlet to capital gains tax,
CGT14. This reply is based on the assumption that you are talking about
shares in listed companies.
No legal responsibility can be accepted by the Financial Times for the
answers given in these columns.  All inquiries will be answered by post as
soon as possible.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page V
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5568</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Briefcase, Q&amp;A: Query on estate claim
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
PLEASE would you advise me on whether I have any claim on my former
husband's estate or pension.
We were divorced after nearly 40 years of marriage and his second marriage
lasted only 1 1/2 years until his death.
During that time maintenance payments were made to me. On divorce my husband
and I each put Pounds 15,000 into a trust to provide for me in the event of
his death expecting the sum to increase significantly, and not anticipating
his death 1 1/2 years later.
I now live on my old age pension and the interest from the trust and the
capital gained selling our home.
Under normal scheme rules and practice, entitlement to any spouse's pension
rights ceases on divorce. Where there is a new spouse he or she would
automatically qualify for spouse's pension rights under an occupational
scheme.
This position is generally regarded as unsatisfactory given the high
percentage of marriages that end in divorce and the UK Pensions Management
Institute is currently gathering evidence for a major report aimed at
recommending changes in the law.
Some pension schemes do, however, give the trustees discretionary power to
provide a survivor pension to a person other than a spouse. Some schemes
enable a member to sacrifice part of his or her pension so as to provide for
such a dependant's pension. In your case it may be worth writing to the
trustees of your former husband's pension scheme, giving details of your
case and asking whether they will make a lump sum and/or pension payment to
you.
No legal responsibility can be accepted by the Financial Times for the
answers given in these columns.  All inquiries will be answered by post as
soon as possible.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page V
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5569</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTADAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Briefcase, Q&amp;A: Avoiding double tax
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
WHEN I last bought government stock the broker sent me a statement splitting
the acquisition cost into the capital value purchased and the accrued
interest in the price. The end result was that, for the accrued interest
element, I had converted my capital into income and therefore had to include
that as income in my tax return and on it, pay 40 per cent tax. Does it mean
that I should only buy and sell gilts during the ex-dividend period if I
want to avoid the double taxation I have described?
It is a pity that you did not give us the precise figures and dates, because
it looks as though you have paid too much tax - but we cannot be sure on the
bare facts outlined. Ask your tax office for the free pamphlet 1R68 'Accrued
income scheme: taxing securities on transfer.'
No legal responsibility can be accepted by the Financial Times for the
answers given in these columns.  All inquiries will be answered by post as
soon as possible.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page V
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5570</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAC9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Briefcase, Q&amp;A: CGT and a second home
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
I RESIDE in Glasgow but I have a second house in England. At some time I
shall sell the house to reduce the liability to Capital Gains Tax. I would
like to transfer a half share in the second house to my wife. I shall be
obliged if you will answer the following questions:
Would it be necessary to employ a solicitor to prepare a conveyance of the
half share to my wife?
Would the transaction be subject to stamp duty?
The solicitor will be able to guide you in deciding whether to hold the
house as joint tenants (survivor takes all) or as tenants in common (each
half share can be disposed of by will to a third party).
The solicitor will also be able to guide you on the important question of
joint main-residence notices, under what is now section 222 (6) of the
Taxation of Chargeable Gains Act 1992, which could significantly reduce the
potential CGT bill on the English house (without producing an unacceptable
CGT bill on any eventual sale of the Scottish house).
We take it that your existing main-residence notice (under section 101(5) of
the Capital Gains Tax Act 1979 or section 29(7) of the Finance Act 1965, as
the case may be) nominates the Scottish house as your main residence, from
some date in the past.
Assuming there is no outstanding mortgage there should be no stamp duty.
No legal responsibility can be accepted by the Financial Times for the
answers given in these columns.  All inquiries will be answered by post as
soon as possible.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page V
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5571</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAC8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Finance and the Family: Directors' Transactions
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANGUS MACDONALD, Directus Ltd
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
CONCERN about the prospect of a rise in UK base rates has kept all but the
most determined of directors from dealing in the stock markets.
Christopher Gent of Vodafone has sold 20,000 shares at 323p. Sir Ernest
Harrison, chairman of Vodafone, sold 580,000 shares in December last year at
355p and was buying heavily in Racal Electronics, at the time as the
abortive bid by Williams Holdings. That switching has proved well timed.
Of all the shares in the stores sector, Burton seems best supported by its
board members. There has been consistent buying by a variety of directors
since February this year. The latest purchase of 30,000 shares at 32.5p was
by G Powell, who joined the board recently.
Shares in Hartstone Group, the leather and hosiery distributor, have
underperformed the market sharply over the last three months. Stephen
Barker, chairman, and John Padovan bought 50,000 and 5,000 shares at 130p
and 125p respectively. Barker remains the largest shareholder on the board
with more than 2.1m shares.
Martin Sorrell, chief executive of WPP Group, purchased 100,000 shares in
the company at 39p per share. The debt-laden marketing services company
recently finalised arrangements for a capital reconstruction which will
convert a large portion of the bank's debt into equity.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  DIRECTORS' SHARE TRANSACTIONS IN THEIR OWN COMPANIES (LISTED &amp; USM)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         No of
Company                     Sector   Shares    Value  directors
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
SALES
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Acal                         Elec     28,728     64       1
British Land (Bnds)          Prop  1,000,000    790       1
Hogg Robinson                BuSe      6,000     11       1
Learmonth &amp; Burchett         Elec     10,000     10       2
Smaller Comp's IT            InvT     19,000     13       1
Vodafone                     Tele     20,000     65       1
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
PURCHASES
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
African Lakes                BuSe     40,000     15       1
Argos                        Stor      7,250     16       2
Beverley Group               EngG  1,544,117     97       4
British Land                 Prop    500,000    810       1
Burton                       Stor     30,000     10       1
Daily Mail                    Med      8,000    486       1
Expamet                      OthI    138,327     60       4
Fairway Group                Misc    150,000     68       1
Great Portland               Prop     10,000     13       1
Hartstone                    Misc     55,000     71       2
RHM                          FdMa     18,000     30       1
Sedgwick                     InsB     48,100     54       5
Telegraph                    NewI      5,000     14       1
Transatlantic CPref          InsL    750,000    506       1
WPP Group                     Med    100,000     39       1
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Value expressed in Pounds 000s.  Companies must notify the Stock
Exchange within 5 working days of a share transaction by a director.
This list contains all transactions, including the exercise of options
(*) if 100% subsequently sold, with a value over Pounds  0,000.
Information released by the Stock Exchange  20-24 August  1992.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source:  Directus Ltd, Edinburgh
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page V
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5572</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAC7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Minding Your Own Business: From swine to wine - A former
farmer who traded pork for port
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NICK GARNETT
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
TURNING A hobby into a business can often turn a dream into a nightmare. In
the case of Phil Parrish, former pig farm manager and now wine importer and
wholesaler, the transition progressed rather smoothly, providing a living
for him and his family.
'It's given me a kind of freedom and I enjoy the benefits of working from
home, but I'm hardly ever not working,' Parrish says. 'A two-week holiday?
What's that?'
Parrish was earning Pounds 16,000 a year when, three years ago, the farmer
he worked for abruptly announced that the pig operation Parrish managed was
to close. His redundancy pay was only a few thousand pounds.
'The lucky thing was that a couple of years before that I had started buying
and selling wine on a part-time basis, partly for fun but also to bring in a
bit of extra income,' Parrish says. 'I decided to try and make that into a
full-time business.'
In the 12 months to April, Parrish, operating from his home in Driffield,
north Humberside, sold Pounds 250,000 of wine, producing a pre-tax return of
about 15 per cent. Parrish says all profit has been pumped back into buying
stock and expanding the business, but he also takes out a yearly salary of
Pounds 20,000.
Turnover this year will be up 'substantially,' but the recession's impact on
Parrish's principal customers - restaurants and hotels - is bringing margins
down by 2 or 3 percentage points.
'We've also noticed more competition,' Parrish says. 'A lot of wine
merchants are coming up from the south to get in on the trade up here. There
are maybe 20 or 30 others operating in this area. The worst problems are
posed by the big drinks companies, which offer to put in initial stock
without a charge up front. It's like an interest-free loan.'
Some 90 per cent of Parrish's business comes from 50 or so accounts. The
rest is made up of direct sales to the public. Minimum sale is a case of 12
bottles. Parrish uses a bonded warehouse in Rotherham, an hour or two's
drive away, and a much smaller 'overnight' warehouse in Driffield. Promising
a 24-hour delivery service, Parrish uses his own mini van to get supplies to
the customer. The only other workers involved in the venture are a part-time
driver and Parrish's wife, Denise, who spends a day a week preparing
invoices and issuing wine lists.
Parrish has been interested in wine for a long time and says he has a good
nose. Before he left the farm, his part-time business was turning over
Pounds 60,000. The breakthrough was winning a contract to supply all the
wines for a large country-house restaurant close to the cathedral city of
Beverley, near Hull. 'We got one wine in there and then more until we had
the whole list.'
To get going, Parrish remortgaged his home for Pounds 40,000 and raised a
small bank loan.
Using hotel and restaurant guides and tips from friends, Parrish sends out
his 20-page wine list to establishments in an area from North Yorkshire to
Lincolnshire.
'I don't ring them unless they get in touch with me. Then, I will always
visit them personally.' So far, Parrish says he supplies to every
establishment he has visited.
'In obtaining an account, price is initially a factor. Chinese restaurants
are the toughest on price margins. But we also sell on our service. That is,
we supply any wine on the list within 24 hours, and that we supply good
quality wine.'
Parrish buys the bulk of his wine direct from vineyards. He uses books on
wines and vineyards by authors such as Hugh Johnson, and says he visits all
the vineyards in Europe from which he buys, and some of those in California.
'It gives you a feeling for the place and the people, and there's another
story to tell customers.'
Some 60 per cent of Parrish's total volume comes from France, and 25 to 30
per cent from the New World producing areas of Australia, New Zealand and
California. So-called 'fine wines' - 'that's anything with quality and
character' - make up about 70 per cent of turnover. The rest is booze
destined to be sold as house wines.
Restaurants make their biggest margins on house wine, but for Parrish they
carry the tightest margins for himself. Vin de Pays might cost Parrish 50p a
bottle, with duty added at about Pounds 1 a bottle. His sale price to a
restaurant is perhaps Pounds 2.50, which ends up on the diner's bill at may
be Pounds 8. 'Best margins for me are probably on Burgundies.'
Parrish reckons he carries about Pounds 80,000 of stock. The warehouse
charges him 3p a case per week for storage. Stockholding and cash flow are
the company's biggest headache. 'It makes it very tight for us.'
An order for 100 cases of Champagne requires a single pay-out by Parrish of
perhaps Pounds 10,000. 'For every new customer we need Pounds 4,000 to
Pounds 5,000 to service them. After buying the wine, the second biggest cost
element is financing restaurants' wine stocks. Most will not pay on
delivery. Some pay on delivery or after four weeks. For others, it might be
two or three months.' Vineyards usually allow Parrish 30 or 60 days to pay.
About 10 per cent of the Parrish wine list - which extends to about 300
items - is changed every year.
'One of the real pleasures of the business is getting out and meeting
people. The other is offering customers a new wine and finding that they
have a lot of success in selling it too.'
Phil Parrish, Specialist Wines, Warren House, 5, St John's Road, Driffield,
North Humberside, YO25 7RL. Tel: 0377 42373.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page V
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5573</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAC6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Finance and the Family: Don't play into the hands of Burglar
Bill - Soaring crime means higher home insurance premiums / What
householders should look for
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
IT WAS Hurricane Andrew in Florida but it is more likely to be Bill, your
neighbourhood burglar, in the UK.
Whatever the disaster, if you do not have insurance for damage or loss to
home contents, you may regret it.
The insurance company Top-UK estimates that around 40 per cent of homes are
either not insured for loss to their contents or are underinsured.
One reason may be the rise in premiums over the past year because of the
increased number of claims. This is caused by the substantial rise in crime,
but insurance companies also believe that there has been an increase in
fraudulent claims, with victims of theft exaggerating the value of their
missing goods. The Association of British Insurers estimated in June that
the cost of domestic crime claims had risen by up to 75 per cent last year
compared with 1990.
As homeowners face up to heavier premiums, it becomes more and more
important to obtain more than one quotation.
Many people are happy to buy a home contents policy through their mortgage
provider - but they may be paying over the odds for the convenience. As the
table shows, quotes vary widely between companies, because the cover they
provide, while similar, is not identical.
Many companies offer the incentive of reduced premiums to those householders
who fit security devices to windows and doors, or who are part of a
Neighbourhood Watch scheme. Usually, the older you are, the lower the
premium. Some insurers also offer no claims discounts, similar to motor
insurance.
Type of policy
The policy you choose depends on the type of cover you need and the amount
that has to be insured. There are two basic types of policy: bedroom-rated
cover, which is the more common, and sum-insured.
The first often represents better value for those needing larger amounts of
cover, typically Pounds 30,000. 'Insurers offering bedroom-rated policies
know that the average person has not got Pounds 30,000 worth of goods to
cover but around Pounds 16,000 instead,' says Charles Stollery of Directline
Insurance, which provides sum-insured cover. 'For those with Pounds 30,000
of goods it is a very competitive deal, but those with Pounds 16,000 can do
better elsewhere.'
For many people, the drawback with sum-insured policies is that they are
cumbersome. The homeowner has to estimate the value of all the home's
contents, often needing to seek professional advice regarding the value of
items and running the risk of underestimating.
It was partly for these reasons that bedroom-rated policies took off in the
1980s. Countrywide Insurance says that premiums for bedroom-rated policies
have been low for the amount of cover provided and an increase in premiums
in this area may revive interest in sum-insured policies.
What the policy should cover
All policies should insure your possessions against disasters such as storm,
flood, fire, earthquake, theft, vandalism, falling trees, riot/political
disturbance and subsidence.
In addition, you should ensure the policy offers new for old cover and not
simply indemnity, which only replaces the cost of the item with deduction
for wear and tear. Note the exclusions to the new for old cover - some
insurers will not extend this to carpets and curtains and most exclude
clothes.
Accidental damage. Most companies provide cover for accidental damage to
hi-fis, videos and home computers but you are likely to pay more to have
accidental damage cover extended beyond those products.
Good policies should also pay for new locks if you lose your keys and
temporary accommodation if your house is made uninhabitable. You should also
be covered for legal liability. For example, if a visitor to the home sues
you because the chandelier fell on his head, you would be covered for the
claim, usually up to Pounds 1m.
Check that the policy has inflation protection and is adjusted in line with
the Retail Prices Index every month.
Optionals: You can pay more to take out all-risks cover to cover your
belongings outside the home. Extra insurance can also be taken out to cover
cash in the home, which is usually insured to Pounds 250.
Where claims can fail
Note the exclusions to the policy. Many insurers have come up with
user-friendly policies, stating clearly what is and is not covered.
Vagueness on the part of the insurer can sometimes be to your advantage. The
Insurance Ombudsman said in his 1990 annual report that in cases where the
phrase 'personal effects' is not clearly defined, 'any uncertainty in
construction must benefit the policyholder.'
Most policies will not cover you if the house is left unoccupied for more
than 30 days.
Colin Taylor of Frizzell Insurance says that people insure their basic
contents but forget about their personal valuables, such as spectacles or
watches. Another common failing is to forget that most insurers have a
single article limit (usually around Pounds 1,000) and neglect to insure
high value single items separately.
The Consumers' Association warns homeowners not to undervalue their
possessions because insurance companies will pay only a portion of your
claim and may not pay at all. By the same token, if you have overvalued your
possessions, you will only be paid what the insurance company calculates
they are worth.
If you take in lodgers or rent out your home you must inform your insurance
company as your cover will be affected.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page V
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5574</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAC5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Finance and the Family: The Week Ahead
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE interim results season, which had taken a breather during most of
August, springs back to life on Thursday with a large clutch of companies
reporting.
Williams Holdings, the industrial conglomerate, is expected to have suffered
a fall in half-year pre-tax profits from Pounds 76.5m to around Pounds 73m.
Earnings per share are also likely to be down to 10.5p from 10.9p. The
interim dividend is expected to be unchanged at 5p.
Most of Williams' divisions have been affected by the recession on both
sides of the Atlantic and are expected to show a fall in profits. This is
expected to have more than offset profit contributions from Yale and Valor,
the locks and domestic appliances group, bought last year in an agreed deal.
Rolls-Royce, the aircraft engine maker, continues to claw its way back from
its dismal interim results last year. Pre-tax profits should be back to
nearly Pounds 40m from Pounds 11m a year earlier. A positive factor has been
the slow recovery in sales of engine spares which had plunged because of
reduced flying during the Gulf War.
Burmah Castrol, the lubricants, chemicals and fuels company, is expected to
announce interim pre-tax profits for the six months to 30 June of about
Pounds 78m, resulting in net income after tax and minorities of about Pounds
39m. This compares with profits and net income of Pounds 72.2m and Pounds
33m respectively for the first half of last year.
Lubricants, which include Castrol automotive oils, is expected to have
performed well although the chemicals division is expected to be down
because of weak world markets. Foseco, the chemicals company acquired in
1990, is thought to have had another difficult half.
Ladbroke should edge ahead about 5 per cent to interim pre-tax profits of
Pounds 100m-Pounds 105m. Its Hilton hotels have been helped by their
geographic spread; betting has come under some pressure; property remains a
problem; and Texas Homecare is engaged in a price war with other DIY chains.
T&amp;N is likely to turn in a creditable Pounds 30m in interim pre-tax profits,
up from Pounds 20.3m a year earlier. Although the car parts business remains
very tough, it has picked up market share and won orders on new vehicle
models.
Reckitt &amp; Colman, the food and household products maker, has had a static
first half with pre-tax profits close to last year's Pounds 128m.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page IV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5575</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAC4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Finance and the Family: Pensions may be split in divorces -
Scheherazade Daneshkhu on moves to give women a share of their ex-husbands'
pensions
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A FURTHER step towards the day when many divorced women will be entitled to
half their husband's pension was taken this week. The National Association
of Pension Funds, the industry's trade association, is proposing a split of
pension rights when divorce occurs.
Brian MacMahon, the chairman, emphasised the inequality in the present
system. 'If it is right for assets to be divided on divorce, it must be
wrong to ignore what is one of the biggest assets, particularly when those
rights are becoming increasingly significant and when one-third of marriages
ends in divorce,' he said.
The NAPF is recommending that courts be given the power to divide pension
rights on divorce, regardless of whether the pension is occupational,
personal or state earnings-related. This has important implications for
married women. Many have little or no pension of their own, relying instead
on their husband's or the basic state pension.
During a divorce, their pension rights are left to the discretion of the
courts or - in cases where pension benefits are ignored - the ex-wife is
left to compete with a new wife for pension payments.
'The present law is impractical,' says James Marcus, a partner at Gordon
Dadds, a legal firm specialising in divorce. 'In many cases, the husband
does not have sufficient other assets to compensate the wife for the loss of
pension rights on divorce.'
The situation is different in Scotland where 'matrimonial property' includes
the proportion of pension and insurance rights that are accumulated during a
marriage.
The NAPF's proposals would confront the problem of women facing poverty in
old age because of divorce. The association says that one in eight women
over 65 will be single because of divorce in 2025. Even women with pensions
are exposed to financial hardship when they retire because of the time taken
off in their working lives to look after children.
In a study of women and personal pensions, the Equal Opportunities
Commission has predicted that 64 per cent of women retiring with pensions in
2023 will be below the poverty line, (assuming state benefits are up-rated
in line with prices, and a real rate of return of 0.5 per cent on personal
pensions).
The main difficulty with pension-splitting on divorce has been assessing the
value of the pension and deciding the most equitable way of allotting it.
The NAPF is recommending that pension rights earned during a marriage should
be based on the present value of a pension calculated in the same way as for
a transfer. It would be revalued to allow for inflation up to retirement.
Half this amount would be paid to the divorced wife, who could use it only
to buy a pension - she could not take cash instead. The husband's pension
would thus be reduced at retirement. The split of rights would not be
delayed until retirement but would take place at the time of divorce.
The NAPF does not, however, believe that pension rights should be split when
a marriage has lasted less than two years or when the difference between the
pension rights of the couple is less than Pounds 5,000.
The recommendations are in response to proposals put forward by a Pensions
Management Institute working group on pension and divorce, which was set up
in February. But the NAPF says it does not expect pension-splitting on
divorce to be made law in this parliament.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page IV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5576</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAC3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Finance and the Family: Mixed news for owners of farms and
businesses - Caroline Garnham unravels a complex set of IHT rules
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CAROLINE GARNHAM
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
INVESTMENTS in agricultural land and business property have been eligible
for inheritance tax (IHT) relief at 100 per cent since March. This means
that these investments can be passed on to the next generation on death, or
put into discretionary trusts during your life, completely free of IHT.
This is good news - or is it? There would appear to be a lot of people who
are not at all pleased.
For a start, not all agricultural land or business property qualifies for
the full 100 per cent relief, only:
Interests in unincorporated businesses.
Holdings above 25 per cent in unquoted companies and 25 per cent in USM
companies.
Owner-occupied farmland, which includes farmland where the farmer can obtain
vacant possession in 12 months.
Farm tenancies.
If, therefore, you have a controlling holding in a fully-quoted company or
an interest in permanently-let farmland, you will not get the full 100 per
cent relief although you might be entitled to a reduced relief of 50 per
cent.
Even if you have, or are able to buy, the right type of investment, the
relief still will be refused if you have not owned it for two years (or
seven years if it is agricultural land). But it is not the restrictions on
the reliefs which make them so unpopular, but the lack of them.
Under long-standing rules, you can make a gift to your children free of IHT
provided you do not die within the next seven years. This gift also attracts
a deferral of capital gains tax (CGT) if it is an interest in a business,
shares in an unquoted company, or shares in your family company.
These rules created an incentive for an entrepreneur to pass on his business
to his children during his lifetime, before he was too old to spoil it for
them. But this incentive has been superseded. With the introduction of the
new relief, more are inclined to hang on to their businesses until death.
Exemption can then be guaranteed, not only for CGT but also from IHT.
It is, however, possible to pass on your business, or the shares in your
family trading company, during your lifetime and be guaranteed the
exemptions. You can settle your business interests in a trust, appointing
your children as trustees and yourself as life tenant. In this way, they
will have control of the business but, for IHT and CGT purposes, it stays
with you. When you die, your estate can take advantage of both the CGT
exemption and the new IHT provisions.
As life tenant, you will be entitled to the company share income; but this
does not mean you need to deprive your children. You could create a class of
preferred shares with dividend rights but few, if any, rights on a
winding-up of the company. The value of the company would then remain in the
settled shares.
A similar, if not more vociferous, criticism is focused on the increase of
relief for agricultural land. But, in this case, it is not just limited to
the impatient children of landowners.
The Tenant Farmers' Association fears for the future of its members. To get
the full 100 per cent relief for themselves, landowners are more likely in
the future to want a share farming arrangement than an agricultural tenancy.
This arrangement would not only deprive farm managers of their relief but,
more importantly, of their security of tenure.
The criticism does not stop with the tenant farmers. The Ramblers'
Association, English Nature and the Countryside Commission also are up in
arms, although for a different reason.
Land of outstanding scenic, historic or scientific interest, and buildings
of outstanding historic or architectural interest, can be passed on to the
next generation (or into a discretionary trust free of IHT) if the Treasury
designates the land as such and undertakings are given over public access
and proper maintainance.
Under the new provisions, though, a 'designated building' probably will
qualify for total exemption if it is run as a business; and land of
outstanding scenic, historic or scientific interest will qualify if it is
agricultural.
The result is that IHT relief will be available without any undertakings on
public access or proper maintenance. This is a retrograde step and will
disappoint all those concerned about the English heritage.
Caroline Garnham is a tax and trusts lawyer for the City firm of Simmons &amp;
Simmons.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page IV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5577</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAC2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Finance and the Family: The cost of credit card queries
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID BARCHARD
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SOME OF the credit card charges being introduced by banks are more insidious
than they look. It now seems that if customers dispute a transaction, they
may in some cases be charged for having the item checked and a replacement
voucher provided.
An FT reader writes that he is trying to get Barclaycard to investigate why
he appears to have paid twice for a British Airways London to Glasgow air
ticket. He notes that he was travelling with a colleague who shared the same
surname and also paid by Barclaycard.
A letter to Barclaycard produced a promise to check out the details - and a
warning that, if he was wrong, he would be charged Pounds 3.
Credit card operations are highly computerised these days and there is
little personal service. A customer who rings an issuer is likely to be sent
a cumbersome form to be filled-in, rather than being given an on-the-spot
explanation.
Barclaycard sticks to its guns on this. 'It is very costly for us to go back
to the original bank which issued the voucher to the retailer and request a
copy of it. The Pounds 3 charge, in fact, doesn't even cover the cost of
doing that,' a spokeswoman said.
She added: 'It is sometimes the case that people simply forget what they
have paid for, or don't keep their vouchers, so we may have to charge them
for issuing duplicate ones.'
No other mass retailer would dream of charging customers for writing them a
letter or checking their account details to see if they are accurate. Banks
commonly make mistakes and, as some of them admit in private, these tend to
be at the customer's expense. If clients know they may be fined for
challenging a payment, they will be even slower to defend their rights.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page IV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5578</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAC1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Finance and the Family: Capital gains tax - your July
allowances
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE TABLE shows capital gains tax allowances for assets sold in July.
To use it, multiply the original cost of the asset by the figure shown for
the month in which you bought it.
If you subtract the result from the proceeds of your sale, the difference
will be your taxable gain or loss.
Suppose that you bought shares for Pounds 6,000 in February 1985 and sold
them in July 1992 for Pounds 14,000. Multiplying the original cost by the
February 1985 figure of 1.510 gives a total of Pounds 9,060.
Subtracting that from the proceeds of Pounds 14,000 gives a gain for tax
purposes of Pounds 4,940 - which is below the 1992-93 Pounds 5,800 capital
gains tax allowance. If you realised no other gains during the year, the
profit should be tax-free.
If you are selling shares bought before April 6 1982, you should use the
March 1982 figure.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                   CGT INDEXATION ALLOWANCES: JULY
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Month          1982     1983     1984     1985     1986     1987
January           -    1.680    1.598    1.522    1.442    1.388
February          -    1.673    1.592    1.510    1.437    1.382
March         1.747    1.670    1.587    1.496    1.435    1.380
April         1.713    1.647    1.566    1.464    1.421    1.363
May           1.701    1.640    1.560    1.458    1.419    1.362
June          1.696    1.636    1.556    1.455    1.419    1.362
July          1.695    1.627    1.558    1.457    1.423    1.363
August        1.695    1.620    1.543    1.454    1.419    1.359
September     1.696    1.613    1.540    1.454    1.412    1.355
October       1.687    1.607    1.531    1.452    1.410    1.349
November      1.679    1.602    1.526    1.447    1.398    1.342
December      1.682    1.597    1.527    1.445    1.393    1.344
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Month          1988     1989     1990     1991     1992
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
January       1.344    1.250    1.162    1.066    1.024
February      1.338    1.242    1.155    1.060    1.018
March         1.333    1.236    1.143    1.056    1.015
April         1.312    1.214    1.110    1.043    1.000
May           1.307    1.207    1.100    1.040    1.000
June          1.302    1.203    1.096    1.035    1.000
July          1.301    1.202    1.095    1.037        -
August        1.286    1.199    1.084    1.035        -
September     1.280    1.190    1.073    1.031        -
October       1.268    1.181    1.065    1.027        -
November      1.262    1.171    1.068    1.024        -
December      1.258    1.168    1.069    1.023        -
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Inland Revenue
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page III
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5579</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAC0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Finance and the Family: Crunching the numbers
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Will a with-profits policy repay your mortgage?
The economy must get much worse before there is any danger of this
happening. Mortgage endowments are written on very conservative assumptions:
premiums are normally fixed so that the maturity value will pay off your
mortgage exactly if there is no terminal bonus at all, and reversionary
bonuses continue at only 80 per cent of their current rate.
For many offices, terminal bonuses make up more than half their final
pay-outs. Money Management magazine's latest survey of with-profits pay-outs
says that this applies to eight out of the top ten paying offices for
25-year contracts - for example, Standard Life pays 61.5 per cent in
terminal bonus, Scottish Life pays 60 per cent, and Equity &amp; Law pays 62.0
per cent. In many cases total pay-outs would need to fall by more than half
before failing to pay a mortgage.
Which is the cheapest with-profits policy?
Offices with high reversionary bonuses usually offer the lowest premiums for
paying off a set mortgage. According to Money Management, the lowest
premiums on endowments come from Eagle Star (Pounds 47.80 for a 24-year-old
man with a sum assured of Pounds 40,000) and Tunbridge Wells (for
30-year-old and 40-year-old couples). Other offices named by Money
Management as low-cost are: Royal Life, Standard Life, Friends Provident,
Pearl and Scottish Widows.
Which is the highest paying with-profits policy?
League tables are available, but cannot predict the future. Money Management
says that the top 25-year pay-outs this year, assuming the policies were for
Pounds 30 per month and started by a 29-year-old man were: Pounds 110,771 by
Commercial Union, Pounds 110,399 by Standard Life, Pounds 110,093 by General
Accident, Pounds 108,200 by Scottish Life, and Pounds 106,948 by Friends
Provident.
Which company has the strongest reserves?
Only very raw data is available on this, which should be treated with great
caution. According to Money Marketing, returns made by life companies to the
Department of Trade and Industry show that 'free-asset ratios' are falling.
This is the technical term for the amount by which a company's assets
exceeds its liabilities. Money Marketing's figures show that Pearl (29.6 per
cent), Commercial Union (23.6), Equity &amp; Law (23.2) and GA Life (22.7) are
all relatively strong, while Equitable Life (2.6), NPI (4.6), Scottish
Amicable (5.6), Norwich Union (6) and Scottish Life (6) have much smaller
margins.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page III
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5580</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Finance and the Family: Counting the losses of with-profits
policies - John Authers considers a big problem for actuaries
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOHN AUTHERS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
YOU MIGHT think Norman Lamont, the chancellor, has difficulties reconciling
the demands of the currency markets and the UK economy. But the actuaries
who determine the bonuses payable on with-profits policies know exactly how
he feels.
The with-profits policy has been the staple product of the life insurance
industry. The beauty of the product was the combination of a guaranteed sum,
with stock market growth on top. Delivering those rewards was simple while
share prices were rising. Now that markets appear to be locked into lower
performance, those guarantees grow much more expensive.
Actuaries are hemmed in on both sides - both past performance, and
projections for the future, put pay-outs under extreme pressure. None of
this is good news for the UK's mortgage-holders, as the bulk of mortgages
are backed by with-profits endowments.
This week, Guardian Royal Exchange rang alarms by announcing it would stop
selling conventional with-profits policies. Instead, it will sell policies
which require lower capital reserves when first established. This follows
the move of Standard Life, which last November stopped offering conventional
with-profits policies for supporting mortgages (although contracts are still
available for other purposes).
GRE went on to claim that the bonuses paid by other life offices could not
be sustained. James Morley, finance director, said it was possible that, in
the industry as a whole, some policies might not pay enough to cover
mortgages. He added: 'Membership of the ERM means low inflation and low
returns from equities. Paying out bonuses requires a high rate of return. If
you are getting a low rate of return from your assets, you have a mismatch
which can be addressed only by reducing bonus rates.'
This echoes arguments from Norwich Union, which last year cut bonuses and
switched out of equities to take a 16 per cent holding in bonds - having
held no bonds a year earlier.
A GRE spokesman said: 'We believe that the returns being declared by other
companies simply cannot be sustained. The historical returns we got in the
1980s cannot be maintained in the 1990s.'
These arguments may sound abstruse, but they are important. Most people in
the UK hold a with-profits investment. Many in the industry agree with GRE's
line.
Whether with-profits policies will fail to pay off the mortgage is dubious,
but they look a much less exciting investment than they did. Many people
will not even regard a with-profits policy as an 'investment' at all as it
comes with 'guarantees.' But that is changing. The recession has forced life
insurers to confront difficulties which had been masked by the complex bonus
system used to distribute investment profits.
When you invest in a with-profits fund, some of your money goes into bonds
and property but most goes into the stock market, as in a unit-linked fund.
The core of the with-profits system is two forms of bonus:
Reversionary bonuses, which are added annually and cannot be taken away if a
policy is held to maturity. These are expressed as a percentage of an
underlying 'sum assured.' If you have an endowment policy and die during its
term, your relatives will receive the sum assured plus all the accrued
reversionary bonuses. They will not, however, receive:
Terminal bonuses, which are added to the value of a policy only when it
matures. These give the fund managers scope to profit from strong equity
market performance.
They are meant to reflect performance over the last few years of the policy,
but should also take some account of earlier performance which has not been
passed on to investors adequately through reversionary bonuses. Terminal
bonuses can be cut from one year to the next if the markets require it.
If you keep the policy for its duration - for a mortgage, this will almost
always be 25 years - the 'maturity value' you receive will be the sum
assured plus all reversionary bonuses plus the terminal bonus. Note,
therefore, that the sum assured - all that you are technically guaranteed at
the beginning of the contract - is a tiny proportion of what you might hope
to get in a pay-out.
The attraction of the bonus system is that it allows the peaks and troughs
of the market to be smoothed. Actuaries can award a healthy bonus in a bad
year, if they forecast good performance in the future, and need not pass on
all the gain from a good year if it is obviously exceptional.
Since 1987, though, the UK market has had a succession of poor years.
Actuaries have assumed repeatedly that better returns will come along, and
have awarded bonuses accordingly. Now, according to Angela Cooper, of
actuary Noble Lowndes, 'realism must creep back into calculations.'
Any reductions will be smoothed, to an extent, but returns still seem
certain to administer an uncomfortable jolt. Charles Cannon, actuary with
Mercer Fraser, says: 'Looking at the past five years, it is clear that the
bonuses being paid out by some companies are greater than could have been
earned by the funds over those five years.'
After reserves have been used for a few years, an office's freedom of action
is impeded. The law obliges them to keep a certain proportion of their funds
in relatively risk-free assets. So offices can find themselves required to
forego some of the gains that might be available in equities.
Nick Dumbreck, actuary with R. Watson, put it this way: 'We've seen a number
of offices switching out of equities and into fixed interest, not
necessarily because they believe fixed interest is going to perform better
but because they need it to maintain cover for their solvency margins.'
Preliminary evidence (see below) from the returns filed by life companies to
the department of trade and industry indicate that free assets are under
stress, although this is a complicated area and there is room for argument.
Companies with low ratios, such as Norwich Union and Scottish Equitable,
have made well-publicised switches to bonds.
Then there is the impact of past business. It is not difficult to pay out
large bonuses if relatively few people bought policies 25 years ago or hefty
amounts of new money are being attracted. But when many policies mature
together, life could get more awkward.
Business in 10-year policies was strong in 1984 because tax relief on
premiums was removed that year. Paying for these policies when they mature
in 1994 will cost money. Later on, the 25-year policies taken out in the
mid-1980s' peak of the property market will also exert a strain.
None of this is good news. Rosy expectations of hefty payments should
perhaps be abandoned. For those unencumbered by an endowment these
developments strengthen the case for keeping it that way.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page III
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5581</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Finance and the Family: Bonds - just too good to be true
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
WITH-profits bonds are beginning to look misnamed. In theory they sound
wonderful. They allow for lump sum investments in the same with-profits
funds which life companies use for endowments.
Each bond buys a number of units within the fund. Reversionary bonuses are
declared and added to the value of the bond each year, along - normally -
with a terminal bonus when surrendered.
The bonds are open-ended, so investors can cash them at any time. This has
made them a top seller over the last two years. For example, Prudential took
Pounds 350m for its Prudence Bond in the first six months of this year, and
Norwich Union's bond took Pounds 700m last year.
This begins to look too good to be true. And, indeed, it is. This week,
Lautro, the life assurance watchdog, bit into the claims which had been made
when selling the bonds.
After reviewing the promotional material for the bonds, Lautro ordered 13
companies - more than half of the 22 which have sold them - to withdraw some
advertising. Of the 13, Equity &amp; Law and London &amp; Manchester were told to
write to clients to clarify the bond's characteristics.
Any clients of these two companies who claim, on receiving clarification,
that they had been misled, will be entitled to refunds.
So what was the problem? First, some claims were exaggerated. In particular,
the watchdogs disliked the comparison many sales agents made with building
society accounts. As must be the case with any with-profits investment,
these bonds simply do not have the flexibility of a building society.
But the problem goes beyond flexibility and convenience. These bonds also
lack the security, not only of building societies, but also of other
with-profits policies.
This is because offices retain the right to make a Market Value Adjustment
(MVA) when the bonds are surrendered. A reversionary bonus may be declared,
but if market performance has been poor, the life office can withhold it by
applying an MVA.
There are valid reasons for this. Taking on big commitments in one go puts
strain on life funds. This is hard enough to cope with when the money will
not need to be paid out for 25 years. Paying out full reversionary bonuses
after a year, when the market has fallen, would harm the funds of
longer-term savers.
There would also be the danger of investors exploiting the fund - selling
when the market was at the bottom, and reinvesting elsewhere.
So the actuaries need the MVA as a defence. Indeed, the MVA is as central to
a with-profits bond as are reversionary and terminal bonuses.
Unfortunately, MVAs did not look that way from the advertising. And, while
actuaries need to make public bonus announcements, they have almost total
discretion over how to apply an MVA. This is bad news for investors. For
example, Equity &amp; Law, recently applied an MVA of 11 per cent - in other
words, it took the value of the orignal investment plus bonuses, and then
took off 11 per cent. The investor had bought on September 1991, and sold in
July this year, a ridiculously short timespan for a with-profits investment,
and as a result he was down on the deal.
The bonds are not the greatest of news for life offices either. Norwich
Union withdrew its bond citing capital strain, while several others are
withdrawing early.
These include Scottish Provident. Its bond proved popular because it
guarantees not to apply MVAs on death, on regularly drawn income, or on the
bond's fifth anniversary. It does not have a building society's flexibility,
but at least it has some security.
Otherwise, the bonds, like endowments, should only be considered by those
who can look to the very long term.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page III
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5582</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Markets: At a Glance - Correction
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The minimum monthly investment in an employee share scheme is Pounds 10, not
Pounds 30 as we reported last week.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page II
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5583</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Markets: At a Glance - Divorce guides
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
With one in three marriages collapsing, two books on divorce are
unfortunately likely to come in handy. The new edition of The Which? Guide
to Divorce published last week and The Divorce Handbook out on 10 September,
both deal with the bread and butter issues of the effect of divorce on
finances, ways of cutting down on legal costs and the effect of law changes
on the custody of children. Both have separate chapters on divorce in
Scotland and Northern Ireland.
The Which? Guide to Divorce by Helen Garlick, Consumers' Association and
Hodder &amp; Stoughton, Pounds 10.99.
The Divorce Handbook by Fiona Shackleton and Olivia Timbs, Farrer &amp; Co,
Pounds 6.99.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page II
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5584</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Markets: At a Glance - Smaller companies index falls
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The fall in smaller company shares accelerated this week. The County smaller
Companies Index fell 2.1 per cent to 798.71 over the seven days to August
27; the Hoare Govett Index (capital gains version) also fell 2.1 per cent to
1004.73 over the same period. The indices have fallen by around 23 per cent
over the last three months.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page II
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5585</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Markets: At a Glance - M &amp; G launches income PEP
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Fund management group M &amp; G is offering a monthly income personal equity
plan, based on six of its unit trusts. By investing Pounds 6,000 in the
Dividend, High Income, European Dividend, Equity Income, Extra Yield and
Midland &amp; General trusts, M &amp; G estimates plan holders will receive an
initial annual tax-free income of Pounds 418. There is the risk, of course,
capital loss. Investors will pay the normal unit trust initial charge of 5
per cent and the annual charge of 0.75 to 1 per cent; there are no
additional charges for the PEP itself. The minimum investment per fund is
Pounds 500.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page II
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5586</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACTFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Markets: At a Glance - Latin American trust has a mixed
first half
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Latin American Investment Trust, the best performing trust of 1991, had much
more volatile markets to deal with in the first half of 1992. The Brazilian
stock market, for example, jumped 90.1 per cent in the first four months of
the year but then dropped so sharply that the total rise for the first half
was just 1.3 per cent. The trust's net asset per share increased 4.5 per
cent to Dollars 1.85 over the six months to June 30.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page II
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5587</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACSFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Markets: At a Glance - Net building society funds fall again
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Building society accounts saw a net monthly outflow in July - the fifth
outflow in the past nine months. Money continued to drain out of building
society accounts last month, partly because of competition from National
Savings. The net outflow was Pounds 325m, up from Pounds 314m in June - a
far cry from a net inflow of Pounds 774m in May 1991. However, the figure
was not as bad as the industry had feared. The societies had forecast an
outflow of Pounds 450m to Pounds 500m for the month.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page II
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5588</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Markets: Blue Chips make investors see red - Serious Money
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PHILIP COGGAN, Personal Finance Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MOST shareholders do not want miracles. They do not expect to buy the kind
of share that doubles overnight or turns Pounds 1,000 into Pounds 100,000
over a decade. Many simply would like to buy a share in a good, solid
company and lock it away for several years while enjoying steady capital and
dividend growth.
But recent corporate news has highlighted how difficult it is to rely on
companies that most would classify as 'blue chip.' Take BP, which recently
halved its second-quarter dividend. If an investor had bought BP shares five
years ago, he would now be sitting on a 50 per cent loss.
There are plenty of other blue chip names where investors are looking at
hefty losses over a five-year period - ICI is down 31 per cent, Land
Securities 32 per cent, P&amp;O 52 per cent and Pilkington 73 per cent.
Admittedly, those figures cover a period that began at the peak of the bull
market in 1987. Nevertheless, most investors in those companies would expect
to have seen some sort of gain over as long as five years. After all, the
FT-SE 100 index has risen 2.9 per cent over the same period.
Perhaps the answer is that investors simply cannot lock their shares in a
drawer and forget about them for 10 years. 'It is a salutory lesson to all
of us that you can never leave your equities alone,' says Paul Killik, of
broker Killik &amp; Co.
'If you look back at the constituents of the FT-30 index 20 or 30 years ago,
you find names that don't exist today.'
Simon Sharp, of stockbroker Albert E. Sharp adds: 'We do not think there is
a permanent investment for our discretionary accounts. Circumstances can
change so much.'
Brian Tora, of Greig Middleton, notes: 'Locking shares away and forgetting
them is less easy to do in today's volatile markets.'
Tora says that one important problem is how market-makers can mark down
prices without any selling activity. The result is that shares move so
sharply on bad news that private investors cannot possibly react in time.
So, should the private investor despair? According to the experts, there may
still be some companies which can be bought as core holdings.
Killik points out: 'We do have a sector of the market that doesn't guarantee
massive rates of growth but does offer security - the utilities. And, as a
result, they have massively outperformed.'
Indeed, the FT-A Water index is up 32 per cent since the start of April.
People will always use water, electricity and the telephone, so the theory
goes; thus, the shares of such companies are safer bets.
'With utilities, the future is more predictable' says Tora. 'The main thing
you have to do is second-guess how the regulator will treat the industry.'
The recent strength of the utilities' shares could have diminished the
future rewards, though. From averaging 1.6 times the yield on the All-Share
at the start of 1990, the water sector now offers a yield only 1.1 times the
market return.
Killik says there may be other companies which still can be relied upon.
'Nothing is guaranteed,' he warns, 'but there are companies which seem to
have an in-bred management culture and which are not acquisition-driven -
companies such as Marks &amp; Spencer and Unilever.'
The experiences of the last few years, however, may have persuaded many
investors that there are no longer any such things as blue chips. For them,
one answer might be the big international investment trusts.
Their share prices may rise and fall with world stock markets but they
normally contrive to provide more reliable income streams. Foreign &amp;
Colonial, for example, recently announced its 21st consecutive annual
dividend increase.
Nevertheless, there can be a vast difference in their relative performances.
Over five years, the best international trust (Law Debenture) is up 45 per
cent while the worst (SPRAIT) is down 19.6 per cent.
An obvious alternative to this uncertainty is a tracker fund. These attempt
to match the performance of a chosen index and buy and sell shares only to
make sure they reflect changes in the index.
Transaction costs are reduced, and the investor knows that his holding will
keep up with the market.
City folk are rather sniffy about tracker funds, saying that a good manager
should be able to beat the market, not just match it. Of course, they would
say that since, if tracker funds become successful, many fund managers will
be out of a job. But the evidence so far is that tracker funds have done far
better than average.
The James Capel and Gartmore UK index funds each shows a 1 per cent rise
over the two years to August 1. That places them 16th equal out of 96 funds
in the UK general sector.
Admittedly, the tracker funds have hardly made their investors rich. But
they seem to have met their objective - the All-Share index fell 0.7 per
cent over the same period.
The funds have 'beaten' the index only because the change in the All-Share
does not include any dividend income.
So, with blue chips hard to find and few fund managers able to beat the
index, the arguments in favour of tracker funds are stronger than ever. They
could just be the kind of reliable investment you can leave in the attic for
the next 20 years.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page II
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5589</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Markets: Hurricane rages but dollar storm blows out - Wall
Street
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PATRICK HARVERSON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
WHILE Hurricane Andrew was wreaking havoc across large parts of southern
Florida and Louisiana this week, a grade two dollar crisis (on a one-to-four
scale, four being most severe) was blowing itself out at the end of a
tumultuous few days for US and world financial markets.
On Wall Street, most of the damage from the currency storm was inflicted a
week ago Friday and on the following Monday, when bond yields jumped sharply
and the Dow Jones industrial average plunged by more than 75 points.
The flimsy walls erected hastily by the Federal Reserve and other big
central banks to protect the vulnerable dollar from a tidal wave of selling
on foreign exchange markets failed to hold; and as the sellers poured
through the breached barricades, the currency dropped to DM1.40. This was
its lowest-ever point against the D-mark.
The conditions necessary for a dollar crisis had been building up in
currency markets for some time. Interest rate differentials between US and
Germany widened over the summer as the Fed eased, and the Bundesbank
tightened, their respective monetary policies.
The failure of the US economy to climb out of recession with any vigour was
also making overseas investors increasingly unhappy about holding the
dollar.
So, too, was the political hole President Bush had dug for himself in a
re-election battle that only a year ago was supposed to be a shoo-in for the
incumbent.
Moreover, the fact that almost every central bank worth its salt was in the
markets trying to prop up the dollar served only to convince foreign
exchange dealers that the currency was heading in one direction  - down.
While there were plenty of reasons for the dealers to sell the dollar, the
logic for such a strongly negative reaction from bond and stock markets was
less obviously compelling.
There are two standard explanations why a weak dollar prompts bond prices to
fall. The first is that it raises import prices and, as a result, adds to
inflationary pressures.
The second is that it makes it hard for the Fed to engineer another cut in
interest rates to stimulate the flagging recovery, and raises the
possibility that rates may actually have to go up to protect the currency.
The first explanation is not particularly convincing - imports account for
not much more than 10 per cent of US gross domestic product, so higher
import prices do not greatly effect the overall price level, which is now
around 3 per cent and heading lower.
The second explanation carries more weight. Although there is not much
chance, given the present economic and political climate, that the Fed will
raise rates to help the dollar, there is little doubt that the currency's
weakness makes it extremely difficult for the Fed to ease monetary policy
again.
The fear that the Fed may be done with interest rate cuts for the present
economic cycle was also behind the selling in equity markets. But investors
in stocks were equally, if not more, troubled by the rise in bond yields.
Just over a week ago, the yield on the benchmark 30-year bond, which has
remained stubbornly high all year despite the poor state of the economy,
looked as if it might drop below 7.3 per cent.
The dollar put paid to those hopes and, by the middle of this week, it was
approaching 7.45 per cent, putting an upward pressure on the all-important
mortgage rate for home-buyers.
The dollar was not the only story in financial markets this week, and the
devastating effect of Hurricane Andrew produced a typically hard-eyed,
although nonetheless logical, reaction from Wall Street.
The stocks of those insurance companies with the greatest exposure in
southern Florida, the area hit worst by the hurricane, all took a tumble.
But the relatively modest losses in Geico, Travelers and Progressive
suggested that the market believed the insurers were reserved or reinsured
adequately enough to cover hurricane-related claims.
The flip side of the hurricane's coin was a strong showing from the stocks
of home construction companies expected to benefit from demand for
rebuilding damaged or destroyed homes. Since there are an estimated 250,000
people left homeless by the storm, there is a lot of work to be done.
The biggest gains among construction stocks this week were posted by Lennar,
Oakwood Homes, Engle Homes and Fleetwood, the largest maker of
pre-manufactured homes in the US.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page II
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5590</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Markets: A case of defending the indefensible - London
Markets
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER MARTIN, Financial Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
It was a week for agonising dilemmas. Take the one faced by the retired bank
manager who taped what was alleged to be a conversation between Princess
Diana and a male admirer. He was a staunch royalist, he said, and had to
decide whether to send the tape to Buckingham Palace or the Sun newspaper.
It was one of those finely-balanced moral issues. Norman Lamont, though not
a bank manager and not yet retired, must have sympathised, as he wrestled
with a problem of similar complexity on Tuesay night.
The pound was sliding inside the ERM; short-term interest rates were rising;
the gilts auction was going badly; the stock market had given up the ghost;
the Bundesbank was wondering aloud why everyone didn't devalue their
currencies against the D-Mark.
The chancellor had to choose between putting up interest rates, starting to
plan for a sterling devaluation, or appearing on television. For a
politician, the choice was obvious.
At 8.20 on Wednesday morning, he addressed the cameras outside the treasury.
'There are going to be no devaluations, no leaving the ERM,' he said. 'We
are absolutely committed to the ERM. That is our policy. That is the centre
of our policy. We are going to maintain sterling's parity and we will do
whatever is necessary.'
With that statement, and a lot of expensive intervention in the currency
market by the Bank of England, sterling just about scraped through the week,
though it was close to the bottom of its permitted ERM band for most of the
time. By Friday, sterling was still the weakest currency in the ERM, though
much of the market's attention seemed to be switching to the lira.
Doubtless the chancellor can continue to scrape by, though at considerable
cost in terms of foreign exchange reserves and - perhaps - of higher
interest rates in the weeks to come.
Scraping by leaves the stock market unimpressed, however. As the chart
shows, since the end of the Gulf War sterling weakness in the ERM has been
by and large associated with a declining stock market. This week, as the
pound dropped another pfennig, the FT-SE 100 index closed down 53.1 points
at 2312.6, though it had dropped as low as 2260.6 on Tuesday afternoon.
One top fund manager argued on Friday that the government is simply muddling
through, hoping to be bailed out of its problems by the outcome of the
French referendum on Maastricht or a recovery in the dollar (which would
take some of the pressure off the pound). The government's policy, he said,
is 'mostly a matter of keeping its fingers crossed'.
Meanwhile, investors have faced their own set of dilemmas, and have been
crossing their fingers just as ardently. When times are hard, they
traditionally fall back on 'defensive' stocks, shares in the sort of company
that do well come rain or shine. After all, they tell themselves, everyone's
got to eat.
Not any more. Food processors are doing just as badly as anyone else. Shares
in Hillsdown, one of the biggest UK-oriented food companies, have halved
since early May, though they closed on Friday at 99p, up 2p on the week. My
colleague Maggie Urry revealed in the FT this week that even baked beans,
perhaps the ultimate defensive commodity, are sticking to the shelf.
Other traditional defensive stocks were also offering investors little
reassurance. Grand Metropolitan, which now owns food brands, burger bars and
pubs, gave a formal profits warning on Tuesday. Its shares ended the week at
388p, down 32p. On Thursday, the brewer Scottish &amp; Newcastle reported a
further deterioration in trading conditions, with signs that the hardy
beer-drinkers of the north were at last following their southern cousins
into recession-induced sobriety. Its announcement sent several other beer
stocks down, and S&amp;N closed the week at 383p, down 49p.
One analyst said the bad news 'shows that the drinks sector 'is not the
defensive division it has been painted'. But what is? Dividends are under
threat across the market, as finance directors, emboldened by BP's example,
reach for a weapon they have hitherto been too scared to employ. Companies
as varied as Slough Estates, Guardian Royal Exchange and Bridon announced
interim dividend cuts this week; the practice is becoming routine.
There are only two truly defensive sectors left: the water and electricity
utilities, which have outperformed the market by 15-20 per cent since the
slide started four months ago.
Utilities are classic defensive stocks, propped up even in bad times by
their high yields. But part of the impetus behind the water stocks, at
least, lies in what the market interprets as favourable rulings by the
industry's regulator. Today, his rulings help the sector; tomorrow they may
hurt it. In this still formative phase of UK utility regulation, there is a
greater element of chance in the shares' performance than the truly
defensive investor would find comforting.
British Gas - illustrating the point perfectly by its dispute with its
regulator - announced half-year results this week. On a current cost basis,
it lost money in the second quarter. This is traditionally one of its weaker
periods, since the weather is warmer and central heating boilers are turned
down. However, utilities are not supposed to lose money whatever the
weather. The shares closed on Friday at 241 1/2 p, down 2 1/2 p.
Perhaps the most apposite quotation of the week came from Lord Weir,
chairman of the Scottish engineering group that bears his name. Announcing,
to general acclaim, higher interim profits and an increased dividend, he
said people should not think this achievement was effortless: 'Although we
are doing better, it is bloody difficult'. Difficult indeed.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page II
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5591</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Markets: What should we tell Sid now? - The Bottom Line
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NEIL BUCKLEY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SID, the unseen star of British Gas's advertising campaign before
privatisation in 1986, may be wondering whether he was right to hold on to
his shares.
He has seen the company plunged into a year of uncertainty by the Monopolies
and Mergers Commission review of the UK gas market, and this week reporting
a one-third fall in profits for the first half-year.
But BG shares have their advantages. They offer the security of a utility,
and are yielding 8 per cent - matched by few other stocks in the market.
Philip Rogerson, finance director, has also reiterated the company's
commitment to increasing its dividend in real terms.
Moreover, while some analysts predicted the share price would begin to slide
after the MMC inquiry was announced, it has held its value. Paul Spedding,
analyst with Kleinwort Benson, says it could even rise if investors continue
their dash for safety into the utilities sector.
He adds that this week's fall in half-year profits to Pounds 778m from
Pounds 1,156m on a current cost basis, was disappointing, but well above the
more pessimistic forecasts.
The most important question is whether the security factor is undermined by
the regulatory pressures on earnings and, ultimately, whether these
pressures will be eased by the MMC inquiry.
British Gas presently finds itself between a rock and a hard place.
On one hand, it must abide by the tough formula it agreed with Ofgas, the
industry regulator, limiting price rises to five percentage points below the
rate of inflation. This has already brought price cuts totalling 5 per cent
to domestic customers - lopping Pounds 300m off sales values over a full
year.
On the other, an agreement with the Office of Fair Trading means BG must
watch its share of the industrial market progressively eroded. Competing
marketers now supply more than 30 per cent of the firm contract market.
Meanwhile, scope for cost-cutting to protect margins has been severely
limited by the MMC inquiry. Cedric Brown, chief executive, said this week BG
was not prepared to undertake radical measures when the whole regulatory
framework could change in a year's time.
'Sid bought the shares for their core utility earnings,' says Simon Flowers,
analyst at County NatWest in Edinburgh. 'But those earnings are being
gradually eaten away by the edicts of the regulators.'
He adds that while BG aims to replace lost profits by enlarging its
exploration and production and global gas businesses - with a target of
increasing their combined contribution to group earnings from around 20 per
cent to 60 per cent - this will take some years.
In the short-term, only a colder-than-usual second half year is likely to
allow full-year year earnings to reach last year's level. Most analysts see
after-tax income of around Pounds 1bn to Pounds 1.1bn, compared with last
year's Pounds 1,164m.
They believe the interim dividend of 6.4p points to a yearly pay-out of
14.2p, up just under 6 per cent from last year's 13.4p. As BG's business
begins to tilt towards exploration and production, however, there may be
less scope for dividend growth. Exploration and production businesses cannot
afford to pay out such a high proportion of their earnings in dividends as
utilities, due to their greater investment needs.
Looming large over all these considerations is the MMC inquiry. This could
rewrite any of the agreements on prices and market share, but what BG wants
most is to be allowed a fair rate of return on its pipeline and storage
business.
Analysts suggest that the MMC may agree, recognising that adequate returns
on investment not just for BG but for its competitors are needed to
safeguard the growth of the industry.
It could, of course, go further and recommend the break-up of BG. Analysts
are divided on whether this could unlock shareholder value.
Spedding says the real decision for small investors is not whether to move
out of British Gas and into other stocks, but whether to switch from
equities into bonds or cash.
'I view British Gas almost as a kind of index-linked gilt,' he says, 'but at
a yield of 8 per cent, I'm getting a lot better return than I would from a
gilt.'
Don't forget to tell Sid.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page II
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5592</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / International Company News: Hudson's Bay dips 29% to
CDollars 7.3m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT GIBBENS
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MONTREAL
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
HUDSON'S BAY, Canada's leading department store group, continues to feel the
retailing recession. Second-quarter profit dipped 29 per cent to CDollars
7.3m (USDollars 6.13m), or 14 cents a share, from CDollars 10.3m, or 20
cents, a year earlier, writes Robert Gibbens in Montreal.
Revenues fell 3 per cent to Dollars 1.14bn.
The company has been cutting prices aggressively to gain market share.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5593</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / International Company News: Nissan predicts first loss since
1946
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By GORDON CRAMB
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
NISSAN MOTOR, Japan's second largest car maker, this year expects to incur
its first loss since 1946. In an unprecedented move it is omitting its
interim dividend.
Nissan yesterday issued revised projections showing a Y15bn (Dollars 119m)
pre-tax loss for the parent company in the year to next March. Previously
Nissan had forecast Y40bn in profits, which would have been less than half
the Y87.8bn last year.
Nissan's interim dividend, previously Y7 per share, is being passed, leaving
the total payout for the year halved from Y14. It will have to draw nearly
Y18bn from reserves to make that distribution.
The losses at Nissan are all being taken in the six months to September,
with break-even expected for the second half. Nissan made net profits last
year of Y54.2bn. The company said the losses included Y5bn in securities
write-downs, implying an operating deficit of about Y10bn.
After investments in production facilities, it is labouring under a heavy
depreciation burden which should reach Y150bn this year.
Nissan is cutting capital investment from Y240bn to below Y200bn.
The car group's announcement was one of the starkest indications of the
difficulties being suffered by Japanese manufacturers in the economic
slowdown. It said a quick recovery in automotive demand was unlikely, and
sales for the year would be down 4 per cent at Y4,100bn.
As the government yesterday unveiled its emergency package of stimulatory
measures, companies in other sectors revised their earnings expectations
downward.
NEC, the electronics group, said its 1992 pre-tax profits would fall some 40
per cent on a consolidated basis to Y35bn. An earlier projection had
suggested growth this year and profits of Y62bn.
Its rival Toshiba said it expected parent pre-tax profits of Y60bn for its
March year. Three months ago, the company had projected a modest improvement
to Y75bn from the Y70.7bn it earned in 1991-1992.
Both expected a rise of just under 2 per cent in overall revenues: to
Y3,840bn at the NEC group and Y3,250bn at the Toshiba parent company. They
blamed poor demand for semiconductors and computers. Toshiba added that it
was being hit by price competition in the personal computer markets in the
US and Europe.
Komatsu, the construction machinery group, cut as much as Y40bn from its
forecast for annual sales, saying they were likely to reach only Y560bn,
down 5.3 per cent on the year. It expected profits of Y27bn before tax, down
from the Y32bn it had projected in May and from the Y30.1bn it made last
year.
Mitsukoshi, a leading department store chain, forecast it would earn just
Y1.8bn in the year to February, against Y10.9bn last year and earlier
expectations of Y10bn this time. It aimed to meet its original sales
forecast of Y927bn, up 5.7 per cent, in the face of weak consumer demand,
but has been hit by costly refinancing following convertible bond
redemptions.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5594</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / International Company News: GM seeks buyer for bearing unit
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By AP-DJ
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
GENERAL Motors of the US is seeking a buyer for its worldwide bearing
business with facilities in Sandusky, Ohio, Bristol, Connecticut, and Cadiz,
Spain. AP-DJ reports.
The three facilities are part of GM's Delco Chassis Division based in
Dayton, Ohio.
The Sandusky, Cadiz and Bristol operations make bearings for brake and
traction-control systems and for the automotive and aerospace industries.
The operations employ 3,000 employees.
'This action is consistent with the priorities GM has set to focus its
capital resources on improving its overall competitive position,' said Mr
George Johnston, general manager of Delco Chassis Division.
GM said the proposed sale of the Bristol facility, when included in this
package offering, would round out the bearing business portfolio for a
prospective buyer.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5595</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / International Company News: Hafnia moves to bolster solvency
of insurance arm
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD LAPPER and ROBERT TAYLOR
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   LONDON, STOCKHOLM
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
HAFNIA, the Danish insurance and banking group, which sought protection from
its creditors earlier this month, yesterday moved to strengthen the solvency
of its insurance operations.
The newly-created holding company, Hafnia Holding 1992, is to transfer
DKr1bn (Dollars 177m) of assets to its operating subsidiaries.
The move follows a fall in the value of the group's equity investments in
the past 10 days and a particularly sharp drop in the value of sizeable
investments in two other large Scandinavian insurers, Sweden's Skandia and
Denmark's Baltica.
Uncertainty in the region's insurance industry was underlined yesterday by
news of an operating loss at Skandia. Skandia's reported a SKr344m (Dollars
64.6m) operating loss for the first half of 1992, compared with a SKr7m
profit for the same period last year. Its share price dropped back by SKr3
to SKr72.
Hafnia suspended payments to creditors last week and transferred DKr5.9bn of
assets to a new company Hafnia Holding 1992. Yesterday, however, the company
said group assets had been depleted by DKr900m.
The group said yesterday its subsidiaries now exceeded minimum capital
requirements by a broad margin.
The original holding company owes DKr6bn to more than 100 creditors.
Three Danish banks - Den Danske Bank (with DKr1.2bn), Sparekassen Bikuben
(DKr600m) and Unidanmark (DKr450m) - are the group's largest creditors.
Barclays Bank was yesterday reported to be on a list of creditors, which
also includes SE Banken of Sweden, Commerzbank of Germany and ABN Amro of
the Netherlands.
Copenhagen County authorities are also owed DKr280m by Hafnia.
Hafnia owns 14.8 per cent of Skandia's share capital and about 34 per cent
of Baltica, Denmark's biggest insurer. Uni Storebrand, Norway's largest
insurer, which owns 28 per cent of Skandia, has also been severely hit by
the fall in the region's equity markets and was placed into public
administration earlier this week.
The two companies combined to launch an unsuccessful takeover bid late last
year.
Skandia blamed its half-year loss on a decline in the value of its real
estate holdings. The company, however, made an operating profit of SKr195m
in its insurance activities, a marked improvement on the SKr175m deficit it
sustained in the first half of last year.
Skandia's premium income went up by 15 per cent to SKr17.33bn from
SKr15.09bn. Its net asset value per share totalled SKr174, a fall of SKr15
from the same period last year, while the solvency margin was 69 per cent, a
decrease of 9 per cent since December 31 last year.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5596</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / International Company News: Audi profits hit by weak dollar
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BONN
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
PROFITS at Audi, the quality car division of Volkswagen, fell 13 per cent in
the first half of this year, in spite of a 20 per cent increase in sales.
Margins were hit by the weakening US dollar and the concentration of demand
on the cheaper new Audi 80 series rather than the costlier 100 range.
As a result, pre-tax profits fell to DM315m (Dollars 225m) from DM364m on
sales of DM8.6bn, compared with DM7.1bn, the company said yesterday.
The overall car market was declining: Japanese demand fell for the first
time in seven years, and the US business was improving only slowly.
However, rising sales in Europe, excluding Germany, more than compensated
for falling domestic deliveries, the group added. The proportion of
deliveries to foreign customers increased to 50.4 per cent from 47 per cent.
In spite of the difficulties Audi expected record production, delivery and
sales figures, and a satisfactory result for the year as a whole.
The VW parent, which earlier this week reported a 17 per cent fall in
half-way pre-tax earnings, increased unit sales 6 per cent.
First-half production rose almost 9 per cent, and extra shifts had to be
employed in the Ingoldstadt factory to keep waiting times for new Audi 80s
within reasonable limits.
The company's two German works produced 254,530 vehicles, compared with
234,000 with a workforce unchanged at 38,000.
Audi also produced 3.7 per cent more engines.
Planned investment for the full year will fall below last year's DM1.1bn, a
figure inflated by new model introductions.
Capital spending in the first half was DM327m, compared with DM512m.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5597</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / International Company News: Ford-Werke sees decline
continuing
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
FORD-WERKE, the US vehicle maker's German subsidiary, yesterday forecast a
continuing decline in the German car market.
It expected no fundamental improvement in the export trade, which in the
first half of this year accounted for 64 per cent of its DM12.9bn (Dollars
9.2bn) sales.
Ford-Werke reported pre-tax profits of DM525m in the first half, compared
with DM517m, from sales up almost 8 per cent.
The company claimed its 'product offensive' had paid off. Volume output rose
11,000 vehicles to 539,000. The Escort performed especially well, and
accounted for about one-third of all sales. Scorpio production rose 26 per
cent, the company said.
Deliveries in Germany fell by 64,000 units in the period and reduced market
share to 9.6 per cent from 10.5 per cent while exports rose 75,000.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5598</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / World Commodities Prices: Spices
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
SPICES After a long period of continuously declining prices we can now
report a more bullish trend at least for white pepper writes Man-Producten.
White pepper prices hit a level of some usd 1100/mt cif a fortnight ago but
is not available today below usd 1350 cif. The firmer trend is not caused by
larger demand from consumption markets but is only due to sudden demand in
the origin market. It may be too optimistic to expect that prices will
maintain or go higher from now on. As to black pepper, prices also stopped
declining further but here we have not seen any further improvement. Black
pepper faq is offered at usd 900 cif.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5599</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / International Company News: German diesel group remains deep
in red
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
KLOCKNER-Humboldt-Deutz, the German diesel engine, tractor and engineering
group, remained deep in the red in the first half of this year. Net losses
of DM29m (Dollars 20.7m) were the same as last time, the company said
yesterday.
Sales fell 7 per cent to DM1.6bn, and the group started the second half with
firm orders 2 per cent lower than at the same time last year.
International business developments had been 'more restrained than
expected', and no improvement was likely in the second half. The most
optimistic projections suggested some upswing at the end of the current
quarter.
The one bright spot in an interim report littered with minuses was an
improvement in incoming orders. Up overall by 6 per cent, the figures were
bolstered by a 20 per cent rise in demand for plant, but undermined by a 6
per cent fall in new orders for agricultural equipment.
The continuing losses were not unexpected, KHD has been hard hit by
international recession and declining demand for farm machinery in the light
of agricultural reforms in the European Community.
Following a 14 per cent fall in new tractor registrations in Europe last
year, the group expected a further 12 per cent fall in 1992, reducing demand
for tractors by 150,000 units.
Meanwhile, the company increased capital investment by 64 per cent in the
first half, to DM90m. Most of this was spent on a new diesel engine factory
which is widely seen as the key to KHD's long-term survival.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5600</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / International Company News: UBS bucks trend with optimistic
outlook
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By IAN RODGER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   ZURICH
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
UNION Bank of Switzerland, the country's largest commercial bank, said its
consolidated net profit in the first half reached SFr682m (Dollars 550m) and
the prospects for the second half were 'fundamentally positive'.
This was the first time UBS has published a consolidated interim statement,
and no comparative figure was given.
However, the group said earlier this month its profits had 'developed
positively' in the first half. In 1991, the group recorded a net profit of
SFr1.22bn.
UBS's optimism contrasts with warnings from the two other large Swiss banks,
Swiss Bank Corporation and Credit Suisse, of a deteriorating economic
climate and a likely need for higher than expected loan loss provisions.
The bank said trading and service activities were likely to pick up,
although the outlook for loan business appeared less favourable.
The group said gross revenue in the first half grew 7 per cent to SFr4.1bn.
Cash flow reached SFr1.5bn, but provisions and write-offs amounted to
SFr809m. No comparative figure was given, but in the full year 1991, these
amounted to SFr1.7bn.
Total consolidated assets as at June 30 were up 3.8 per cent to SFr258.8bn.
Loans to customers rose 2.9 per cent to SFr142.5bn and customer deposits
advanced 4 per cent to SFr159.8bn.
Balances due to banks dropped 3.6 per cent to SFr51.8bn while those due from
banks rose less than 1 per cent to SFr62.2bn. The group's securities
portfolio grew 11 per cent to SFr30.5bn.
Capital and reserves stood at SFr18.1bn, which provides a tier one ratio
under the Basle international guidelines of 7 per cent.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5601</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / International Company News: Adia deficit widens
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By IAN RODGER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   ZURICH
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
ADIA, the troubled Swiss temporary employment group which yesterday sold off
its inspectorate subsidiary to a UK-financed consortium, reported a SFr60.2m
(Dollars 48.50m) net loss in the first half, compared with a SFr5.7m loss
for the same period last year.
Control of Adia, formerly part of the collapsed Omni conglomerate led by Mr
Werner K. Rey, was sold last year to the German retail group ASKO and Mr
Klaus Jacobs.
The two, who together hold 56.1 per cent of the shares, have agreed to make
a subordinated loan of SFr200m at 5 per cent to the group to improve its
overall financial position.
The group is considering a capital increase next year when the loan would be
partially or fully converted into equity. It is negotiating a SFr400m credit
facility with its bank syndicate.
Revenues from the core personnel services activities rose 3.6 per cent in
the first half to SFr1.6bn, but its net loss widened to SFr41.8m from a loss
of SFr3.7m, especially due to high restructuring costs in France.
The non-core businesses suffered a loss of SFr18.4m in the first half,
against a SFr2m loss. Thanks to disposals, net debts stood at SFr1.1bn,
compared with SFr1.3bn last year.
Adia said it did not expect to return to profit in the second half, 'but
measures taken in the difficult markets as well as the favourable
development of the other markets will produce better results'.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5602</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / International Company News: Movenpick passes annual dividend
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By IAN RODGER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MOVENPICK, the Swiss restaurants and hotels group in which Mr August von
Finck of Munich bought the controlling stake last December from the founding
Prager family, reported a 1991 loss of SFr3.6m (Dollars 2.90m) and passed
its annual dividend for the first time in its history, writes Ian Rodger.
In 1990, net profit was SFr22.5m, and a SFr110 per bearer share dividend was
paid.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5603</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / International Company News: Earnings at Dutch insurer rise
11.2%
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID BROWN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   AMSTERDAM
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
AEGON, the second biggest insurance group in the Netherlands, yesterday
posted an 11.2 per cent rise in first-half net profit to Fl 463.4m (Dollars
281.1m) from Fl 416.9m.
Revenues for the period advanced 14.7 per cent to Fl 8.02bn from Fl 6.99bn
of which Fl 4.8bn was generated by insurance premium income and the balance
from investment and other sources. The operating result was up by 12 per
cent to Fl 377m. The group realised gains of Fl 85.7m on the sale of
property and shares, against gains of Fl 80.5m during the comparable period
in 1991.
Operating income in the core life insurance operation climbed by 19 per cent
to Fl 364m through June while other insurance activities showed more modest
gains. The non-insurance business suffered a decline to Fl 49m from Fl 60m.
Quarter-on-quarter, the general insurance division fell into a loss of Fl
15m after posting a profit of Fl 12m during the first three months
Geographically, turnover and earnings in the US showed 'a strong increase',
particularly at the Western Reserve Life subsidiary. Aegon said revenues and
results in Holland showed a strong rise
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5604</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Call to plant energy crops: British Association for the
Advancement of Science
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CLIVE COOKSON, Science Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ENERGY EQUIVALENT to 10m tonnes of coal could be produced if all the land
used for over-producing food was planted with an energy crop, the British
Association meeting in Southampton heard yesterday.
A panel of agricultural scientists and economists predicted that fields of
willow - grown as fuel crops - would become as much a part of the
countryside as wheat and barley,
Dr Peter Carruthers of Reading University's Centre of Agricultural Strategy
said such crops were unlikely to be viable without a subsidy. With grants
under the Woodland Grant Scheme and annual set-aside payments - subsidies
for non-food use of farmland - they should, however, 'be viable in at least
some farm business circumstances'.
The trees would be grown in a system known as arable coppice or
short-rotation coppice, where cuttings are planted at very high densities -
about 10,000 per hectare - and the first year's growth is cut back nearly to
ground level.
The multiple stems which grow from the stump would be harvested by machine
every three to five years. The wood would then be dried and burned as fuel
or fed into gasification plants.
Energy crops are becoming established in some other European countries and
the UK government is spending Pounds 850,000 a year on research into arable
coppicing.
Dr Paul Maryan of the Energy and Technology Supply Unit at Harwell,
Oxfordshire, who is co-ordinating the government programme, said researchers
were testing varieties of willow and poplar under different conditions.
Commercial demonstrations were under way on five farms.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5605</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAB9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Latest forecast of economic growth
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE LATEST forecast of economic growth from the Confederation of British
Industry indicates that gross domestic product will fall for a second
consecutive year and recover only feebly in 1993.
The projected fall in GDP of 1 per cent for this year is more gloomy than
the most recent consensus from City and academic economists, which forecasts
output to fall by 0.5 per cent.
Government borrowing is expected to reach Pounds 32bn this financial year
and Pounds 38bn in 1993-94. The rate of growth of imports is forecast to
remain strong but to slow next year. Improved export performance, however,
should mean the trade deficit does not worsen significantly next year.
The outlook for manufacturing is unpromising, with the CBI projecting a mild
contraction in the second half of this year.
According to the CBI the fourth quarter is likely to mark the trough in
output.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5606</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAB8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Building materials sales fall 2.7%
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
SALES OF building materials last month were 2.7 per cent lower than at the
same time last year, the Builders Merchants Federation said yesterday. This
compared with an increase of 0.2 per cent in June.
Sales in July were 21 per cent lower than in December last year, when the
federation, which represents companies with annual sales of between Pounds
5bn and Pounds 6bn, started to compile its monthly sales index.
The publication of the figures sent shares of building material suppliers
lower.
London stocks, Page 13
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5607</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAB7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Debts of Pounds 50.2m found at AWD
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN DONE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
UNSECURED creditors of AWD, the truckmaker that went into receivership two
months ago, are unlikely to receive any payment, the administrative
receivers said yesterday, Kevin Done writes.
Mr Tony Thompson, of KPMG Peat Marwick, said the AWD group of companies had
estimated total debt of Pounds 50.2m, of which Pounds 19.6m was owed to
secured creditors, Pounds 5.1m to preferential creditors and Pounds 25.5m to
trade and other creditors, including employees.
Discussions were continuing to find a buyer for the business as a going
concern. An order for trucks from Libya, that was under negotiation when AWD
went into receivership, was still being pursued.
About 500 employees have been made redundant since AWD went into
receivership, leaving a workforce of 190.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5608</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAB6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Chronic fatigue identified: British Association for the
Advancement of Science
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CLIVE COOKSON and JENNIE LYNCH
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   CHRONIC fatigue syndrome
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
sometimes known as post-viral fatigue or ME  - has real physical causes and
is not an ill-defined psychological condition, medical researchers said.
The meeting heard that the nature of the causes remained uncertain, however.
Dr Stuart Butler of the Burden Neurological Institute, Bristol, said brain
scans of chronic fatigue patients showed a prominent signal called
post-imperative negative variation (PINV).
He added: 'The fact that the PINV occurs in a number of different disorders
means that we still do not have a specific diagnostic marker for chronic
fatigue syndrome.
'However we do have a clear indication that the physiology of the cerebral
cortex is disturbed in a manner that may have something in common with
certain neurological illnesses and psychiatric disorders which have an
organic cause.'
Ms Clare Francis, a leading ME campaigner, estimates on the basis of GPs'
reports that there are 120,000 to 150,000 sufferers in the UK at any time.
Lung experts called for a complete ban on tobacco advertising and attacked
the government for failing to take action, Jennie Lynch writes.
Five scientists, led by Professor John Moxham of London University's King's
College School of Medicine, criticised the failure of the government to act
against tobacco advertising in spite of having described smoking as the main
cause of preventive disease in its recent white paper on health.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5609</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAB5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Currency traders face down central banks: As dealers shun
the dollar, James Blitz explores the role of fund managers in foreign
exchange deals
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JAMES BLITZ
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
WHEN Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, underlined the government's
determination not to devalue the pound against the D-Mark this week, his
words were directed at one group of people, the currency traders in the
world's foreign exchanges.
Financial officials in western governments have been waging a battle to win
the hearts and minds of dealers in a market that has become increasingly
volatile in recent weeks.
Central banks have tried to turn the markets by heavy intervention and by
giving a boost to their currencies with prepared statements. They have
encountered deep scepticism about the value of both sterling and the US
dollar.
The dealers' scepticism about the pound has partly been the product of the
UK's intrinsic economic weakness and the refusal of the UK authorities to
raise interest rates - a move that would raise returns for those investing
in sterling. A fundamental problem for sterling is the weakening of the
dollar against the D-Mark, and the way in which large operators in the
foreign exchange market have changed their view of the US currency in recent
months.
The institutions pushing the dollar down are commercial banks, such as
Citibank, UBS Phillips and Drew and Chemical Bank, which are trading their
own books and speculating on the dollar's moves.
Investment institutions such as pension funds and fund managers have also
played an increasingly important role in this market in recent years because
of the huge international assets they hold. Some believe it is the fund
managers who are responsible for pushing the dollar down through its
all-time low against the D-Mark this week.
According to Mr Paul Chertkow, head of global currency research at UBS
Phillips and Drew in London, the dealers in the inter-bank market initially
triggered the dollar's fall in the spring. 'The further easing of monetary
policy in the US and the growing belief that Germany would not cut interest
rates made it expensive to carry dollars for a long period of time,' he
said.
Obsessed by a 6.75 percentage point differential in interest rates in favour
of Germany, they started to push the dollar down from its highs at about
DM1.60 in April.
The dollar has not descended from that point in a straight line, however.
The US currency has rebounded at times through central bank intervention,
short-term profit taking and the existence of a hard core of investors who
felt that the US economic upturn was around the corner. This volatile
trading has made it difficult for bank dealers to make profits by buying
large blocks of single currencies and selling them a short time later.
A big factor behind the dollar's fall was action not by bank dealers but by
fund managers and pension funds, which hold very large currency portfolios.
It appears they sold the dollar down to the new low when they saw central
bank intervention had failed to sustain the US currency.
These institutions are not active speculators in the market. Normally they
take a long-term view. Their potential role is huge, however.
Acurrency dealer at a bank normally has at his disposal about Dollars 20m
(Pounds 10m) of funds to invest on a daily basis. A pension fund manager is,
in theory, able to switch funds into different currencies using a pool of
billions of dollars.
According to Mr David Cocker, a currency economist at Chemical Bank in
London, fund managers have been increasingly keen to invest in currencies
because of uncertainty in world stock markets. 'Right now, cash is king and
the investment funds have gone for where the higher yields are, namely the
D-Mark,' he said. But as the dollar has declined, they have also hedged
their underlying dollar-denominated assets by purchasing D-Marks.
Although individual fund managers dislike discussing their operations, a
market observer claimed that one fund radically altered its currency
portfolio last week. 'When the dollar was at DM1.46, all their funds were in
dollars,' he said. 'At DM1.44, it was 50 per cent exposed. At DM1.40, it was
25 per cent exposed.'
For the last three days, the dollar has held its ground at DM1.40. The
market has even managed to push the currency up to DM1.4170, without any
prompting from central banks.
But, according to Mr Chertkow, if the dollar is pushed below DM1.40, that
could trigger more aggressive dollar selling by the big investment funds.
'You could see wholesale liquidation of assets such as we saw in the dollar
crisis of the 1970s,' he said.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5610</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAB4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Jaguar and Iveco to cut 800 jobs
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN DONE, Motor Industry Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
JAGUAR and Iveco Ford, the loss-making vehicle makers and Ford subsidiaries,
are starting another round of job cuts as motor industry leaders warned
yesterday that there was little sign the market for new cars would recover
before mid-1993.
Ford and Vauxhall, the UK new-car market leaders, announced price cuts of up
to Pounds 1,150 on some models to clear old stocks, in response to
disappointing sales in August.
Jaguar, the luxury car maker which suffered a Pounds 226m loss last year, is
cutting a further 700 jobs in the face of declining sales in many overseas
markets, while Iveco Ford, the truck maker, is reducing its workforce by 8
per cent with the loss of another 100 jobs.
The prolonged recession and the absence of any recovery in demand in August,
the most important sales month of the year, has forced both Ford and
Vauxhall to lower their forecasts for new car sales in 1992 to only 1.55m, a
further 2.5 per cent fall from last year.
Sales of new cars in the first seven months of the year were 36 per cent
lower than in the peak year of 1989.
Mr Ian McAllister, chairman of Ford of Britain, warned that he did not
foresee 'any increase in the market in the first six months next year,
unless there is a change of tack by the government'.
The latest job cuts by Jaguar will reduce its workforce to fewer than 7,300.
The company warned that some compulsory redundancies appeared inevitable.
The workforce has been cut by 40 per cent since the end of 1990.
Jaguar is to cut its planned production for this year to 23,000 - unchanged
from last year - compared with the 27,000 forecast earlier. Sales in the
first seven months of the year at 13,237 were 10.7 per cent lower than a
year ago. While sales in the US rose 1.8 per cent, sales in Japan fell 38.2
per cent to 914. Demand also fell sharply in the UK.
Iveco Ford, which lost Pounds 38.6m last year, is cutting 100 hourly paid
jobs from its truck assembly plant at Langley, west London. Since the
beginning of the recession it has cut its workforce by 34 per cent from
1,796 at the end of 1990 to 1,183.
Truck output at Langley is expected to total 8,000 this year compared with
5,750 last year, when the company was forced to cut 90 production days.
The UK truck industry has suffered the steepest decline in the post-war
period. New truck registrations last year were at the lowest level since
1954. Sales in the first seven months of 1992 fell 8.8 per cent. In the last
three years they have fallen 59.5 per cent.
Ford said yesterday it was cutting the prices of most of its remaining 1992
models by up to Pounds 1,000 in addition to any discount or trade-in value
agreed by a dealer. Vauxhall said it was cutting the prices of its
non-catalytic converter-equipped Nova and Cavalier models by up to Pounds
1,150.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5611</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAB3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Swan Hunter to shed 1,400 workers
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL CASSELL, Business Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SWAN HUNTER, the Tyneside shipbuilder, is to make more than 1,400 workers
redundant because of a lack of orders.
The decision by the last shipyard on the Tyne cuts the Swan Hunter workforce
by nearly half and will deal a severe blow to employment in the north-east.
The redundancies follow the company's failure to find contracts to replace
those now being completed, in spite of a worldwide search for business.
Although Swan Hunter is building three frigates for the Royal Navy it did
not win any of the last batch of frigate orders placed by the Ministry of
Defence.
The company is, however, about to challenge VSEL, the Barrow-in-Furness
shipyard, for the Pounds 150m contract to build a helicopter ship for the
MoD.
A total of 725 full-time workers and 700 on short-term contracts, which are
due to expire in a few months, will lose their jobs. The move will leave
2,200 people on the payroll. It was greeted with dismay, although not
surprise, by the workforce.
Dr Roger Vaughan, Swan Hunter's joint chief executive, said the lack of
orders meant a workforce which had been expanded to undertake existing
contracts now had to be slimmed down. He added: 'We very much regret having
to take this action but shipbuilding is a cyclical business.'
Dr Vaughan said that Swan Hunter, which was privatised in a management
buy-out six years ago, was confident about prospects for orders for the
Royal Navy's amphibious fleet and for export business, but it was necessary
to cut the workforce in the short-term.
He added: 'Our order book runs through to the end of 1994. However, we must
ensure our employment level is in line with that work until new orders are
won.
'In an increasingly unsettled world we are well placed to meet a wide range
of maritime defence requirements for the UK Ministry of Defence and overseas
governments. We are also maintaining our capability to win merchant ship
design and construction work when market conditions improve.'
Mr John Edmonds, general secretary of the GMB general union, said he
believed the decision would have a 'domino' effect on jobs in the region. He
added: 'Many displaced yard workers have for the last 10 years been able to
find employment in the offshore construction business but that no longer
offers any opportunities.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5612</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAB2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / London's tourists led to scaffold
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
A 'NIGHTMARE' is how Mr Ian Faris, marketing manager with London Coaches,
describes his predicament. 'You go to point out what was a beautiful statue
and all that's there is scaffolding.'
Mr Faris, who conducts parties of tourists around the capital in an open-top
bus, is surprised by the lack of complaints. 'We just describe what's
underneath and everyone seems happy at that.'
Outside a tarpaulin-bedecked Buckingham Palace visitors were not so muted.
'I think it's terrible,' said Mr Stuart Gifford, a day-tripper from Speke,
Merseyside. 'We wanted to take some photos to show to our friends of our day
in London.'
Dozens of the capital's most famous buildings are under cover for
maintenance. The list includes Horse Guards Parade, Downing Street, St James
Palace, Admiralty Arch, the Albert Memorial and the Mansion House.
At the House of Lords Mrs Gloria Allen, visiting London for the first time
from Denver, Colorado, surveyed the scaffolding. 'I suppose it's got some
charm, but I'd prefer it if it was how it looks in the guidebook.'
Ms Isabel Coy at the British Tourist Board said: 'It's obviously as
disappointing for us to have people visiting the capital and not enjoying
themselves.'
She said works were undertaken in the summer because many of the public
buildings were not in use in that period.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5613</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAB1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Ballet orchestra votes for strike
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
LONDON City Ballet's orchestra has voted by more than three-to-one in favour
of strike action over the dismissal of three members.
The Musicians' Union has instructed the 19-strong orchestra not to report
for rehearsals for the new season which is due to start on September 14.
London City Ballet said the season would start as planned. It would use
another orchestra or taped music if necessary.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5614</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAB0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Opren claimants lose court battle
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
MOST OF the remaining alleged victims of the now banned arthritis drug Opren
who are claiming compensation had their actions dismissed in the Court of
Appeal yesterday.
In a test-case ruling, three judges decided that 13 of 16 representative
claimants were barred from seeking damages against Eli Lilly, the
pharmaceuticals company, because their actions started too late.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5615</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Business expects fall in production
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By EMMA TUCKER, Economics Staff
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A FURTHER fall in manufacturing output in the next four months is expected
to prolong the recession - already the longest since the 1940s - into the
second half of this year.
Output expectations among manufacturers are at their weakest for more than a
year as flat consumer demand has allowed stocks to build up.
The latest industrial trends survey from the Confederation of British
Industry shows that order books have weakened significantly in the past
three months. Sixty one per cent of manufacturers reported orders below
normal when they were questioned earlier this month.
The only encouraging element in an otherwise gloomy assessment of the
economy was that expectations of price rises were at their lowest since
October 1966, suggesting that inflation will continue to fall rapidly.
The CBI's findings indicate that manufacturers had increased their stocks
since the early summer in expectation of higher consumer demand that has not
emerged. This is likely to hinder the growth of output in the second half of
the year. Only 3 per cent of manufacturers reported that their current
stocks of finished goods were less than adequate, while 25 per cent reported
that they were more than adequate.
The survey of 1,300 companies in 50 industries showed that although export
orders improved slightly in early August, they were weaker than in May and
June.
The main points of the survey were:
Output - 15 per cent of respondents expect output to increase in the next
four months, against 27 per cent that expect it to fall. These were the
weakest expectations since May last year. Orders - order books have weakened
a little since July and only 9 per cent of companies reported them above
normal.
Exports - total order books have improved since July although only 14 per
cent reported their export orders above normal against 47 per cent that
reported them below.
Prices - only 10 per cent of respondents expect to raise the prices of goods
as they leave factories against 16 per cent that expect to cut them. These
were the weakest price expectations since August 1966.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5616</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Lloyd's agency acquires rival
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
COX GROUP, the Lloyd's agency, yesterday said it is to acquire a rival
Lloyd's group, CW Rome (Underwriting Agency).
Mr Christopher Rome, the underwriter of CW Rome's main syndicate, is one of
the most prominent marine insurers at the insurance market. His syndicate
specialises in energy, marine liability and war-risks business.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5617</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Warning of anti-science threat: British Association for the
Advancement of Science
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CLIVE COOKSON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
GROWING anti-science feelings and even 'bio-angst' are threatening
government support for science in the UK, Sir David Weatherall, incoming
association president, warned, Clive Cookson writes.
Sir David, honorary director of the Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford,
said: 'In the medical sciences, it's partly a feeling that we're meddling
with the real basics of life. But it's broader than that, a more general
disillusion with high technology.'
Scientists were responsible for some of the disenchantment, because they had
promoted a 'breakthrough-a-week' mentality. 'The broader effects are harmful
because they feed back to government.'
He agreed with evidence produced at the meeting that British science was in
decline. In the case of clinical medicine, 'university departments in the UK
are too small to be able to use all the advantages of modern science'.
Private View, Weekend XVIII
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5618</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Property: Buyers flock to Dublin's fair city
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REBECCA STEPHENS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
DUBLIN'S run-down, tatty days - when property was cheap, goods dear, and
fashionable people shopped in London - are over. High street names are
commonplace now, lining main streets and cobbled alleys; shops are
spruced-up and paintwork fresh.
Residential trends are changing, too. 'In the past 12 months, there has been
a marked shift in demand,' said Ken MacDonald of estate agent Hook &amp;
MacDonald. 'Young, first-time buyers and investors are buying in the city
centre, for convenience.'
He cited New Row Square off Patrick Street: this entire modern development
of 96 one- and two-bed flats sold within three days of its February launch.
Other developments are taking place along the quays either side of the River
Liffey, south around Dublin Castle and the cathedral, and north around Mount
Joy Square - about 400 acres in all.
Recognising the strong demand for residential housing in the city centre -
and anxious to clean up and refurbish the remaining shabby inner-city
neighbourhoods, as well as generating new construction - the government has
introduced an urban renewal programme with favourable tax breaks for those
buying properties there.
Nowhere are these breaks more favourable than in Temple Bar, a small pocket
of narrow, cobbled alleyways and fringe theatres, pubs, clubs and muralled
walls tucked away between the the city's financial headquarters on Dame
Street and the river.
Traditionally, it was a centre for craftsmen such as printers, publishers,
clock-makers, bookbinders and cutlers. But mass production in the 1950s
killed the crafts. The national bus company, CIE, then chose Temple Bar as
the ideal site for its central terminus. But its plans floundered and, in
the 1980s, it leased the properties at low rates to traders. Theatres and
galleries were established along with bistros, pubs and shops.
Temple Bar's tax breaks work in two ways. They favour the refurbishment of
existing buildings over the construction of new ones - and they are generous
to a fault. For example, until April 5 1996, those who buy properties are
entitled to a 100 per cent write-off against tax on the refurbishment costs.
Live in the property and, subject to certain conditions, you can get an
additional 100 per cent write-off on the developer's cost of acquiring the
building (net of site value) or its market value on January 1 1991 (again,
net of site value), whichever is the lower. New buildings are eligible for a
50 per cent write-off on capital investment. The government aim is to create
a cultural and recreational quarter, rather like London's Covent Garden, in
which people can live as well as play.
Temple Bar's first residential project, the Royal Exchange, was launched at
the end of June. Once a hotel, built in 1766, the completed exchange will
have 15 one and two bed flats over shops. Priced between IPounds 56,000 and
IPounds 75,000, all were sold off-plan in the first weekend of the launch.
Similarly, 5-6 Temple Lane South, a new block of fairly compact residential
units over commercial, sold as soon as word was out. But there are more on
stream, one a joint venture between Temple Bar Properties (the government
company set up to develop the area) and Temple Bar veteran Patrick Oman.
Oman, who runs an international removal company, was active in Temple Bar
when there was dereliction all around and the bus terminal threat remained.
He developed his warehouses in Crown Alley into shops selling Doc Martens
and recycled clothes plus a boutique, a music store and a rock music venue
known as the Rock Garden. Crown Alley became the main street in Temple Bar.
Now, Oman is developing a Victorian block facing Dame Street next to the
Central Bank. Foggy Block, he calls it, after the Foggy Dew pub (which he
describes as 'a cheap, scruffy pub serving the best pint of Guinness in
Dublin'). The pub will stay but there will be a couple of licensed
restaurants, a dance gym and 40 flats priced between IPounds 55,000 and
IPounds 85,000.
Since they will qualify for the maximum tax concessions, all are likely to
have been sold by the spring.
Further details from Hook MacDonald, 52 Merrion Square, Dublin 2; Temple Bar
Properties, 20 East Essex Street, Dublin 2; and the Irish Mortgage
Corporation, 46 St Stephen's Green, Dublin 2.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5619</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Property: On the Scottish estates, rich buyers are no longer
biting - James Buxton finds that the Scottish property market is lean and
mean
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JAMES BUXTON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE PHRASE that best describes the way the Scottish residential property
market differs from that of England is: 'leaner and meaner.'
The Scottish market is leaner because it carries a much less prominent belly
of unsold properties - with the obvious exception of the amply proportioned
sporting estate sector and, to a lesser extent, country houses.
It is meaner in that values are generally lower than in England, the scale
of borrowing is less and Scots are enjoying the advantages of being more
prudent.
The housing market has come to life since the general election. The easiest
way to measure this is to visit what amounts to the trading floor of the
Edinburgh housing market, the Edinburgh Solicitors' Property Centre.
In Scotland, solicitors rather than estate agents handle the bulk of housing
transactions. Probably nowhere is their grip stronger than in Edinburgh
where they have 80 per cent of the market. They display the thousands of
properties on their books in one large shop in the centre of the city.
Whereas the Halifax house price index for the year to March 1992 showed
prices falling by up to 8 per cent in parts of England and Wales, for
Scotland it registered a rise of almost 4 per cent, nearly keeping pace with
inflation.
However, the Halifax figure, reflecting the whole of Scotland, may paint a
picture that some people living in the central belt of Scotland would not
recognise. Colvil Johnston, of the estate agents Slater Hogg &amp; Howison, says
that house prices in the central belt fell by between 12 and 15 per cent
after the market peaked in 1989 (a year later than in England), though rose
again last year by 5 to 6 per cent.
The Scottish average was kept up by the performance of the Aberdeen and
Dundee areas. In Aberdeen prices have risen by 11.7 per cent over the past
12 months because of the strength of the local economy which is driven by
North Sea oil.
Scottish houses never suffered boom and slump to the same extent as the
southern half of England. Price were pushed up in the period to 1989 partly
by people moving up from England, such as returning Scottish expatriates and
recruits to the financial services sector.
The shake-out that followed was smaller than in England because the boom had
been so much less excessive. As Johnston explains, Scots generally borrow a
much smaller proportion of their salary than English people to finance house
purchases and their salaries tend to be a little lower.
However, two sectors of the market have suffered badly: the market for
larger houses and for estates, both of which are affected by factors in the
south of England. The flow of money for house purchases from the south has
dried up in the last 18 months as people there found it almost impossible to
sell their houses.
According to Robert Balfour, of Bidwells in Perth, prices for country houses
with land have fallen by between 10 per cent and 40 per cent in the last
year, and most houses priced at over Pounds 200,000 were unsold at the end
of last year. Although the general election removed uncertainty, he says
this part of the market is still in recession.
Bidwells is offering Feddinch, a seven bedroom country house two miles from
St Andrews in Fife. It is surrounded by a 243 acre estate and is on the
market at a guide price of Pounds 800,000, though it is available either as
a whole or in seven lots, including the walled garden, cottages and arable
farmland.
Knight Frank &amp; Rutley in Edinburgh has a small number of important
properties on sale, although Colin Strang Steel says the market is only now
coming to life, not least because the miserable spring made it difficult to
take appealing photographs of houses.
It is asking for offers over Pounds 450,000 for Ratho Hall at Ratho,
Midlothian, just to the west of Edinburgh and only two miles from the
airport. Ratho Hall is a pretty Georgian house surrounded by 22 acres of
garden, woodland and fields. Typically of tightly-held houses in the
Edinburgh area, it is coming on the market for only the second time in more
than 40 years.
In the Borders, the Scots baronial mansion of Dawyck (pronounced Doick) is
on the market for Pounds 550,000. Dawyck is at Stobo, in Peeblesshire, in a
specially pretty part of the Tweed valley and stands next to an arboretum
run by the Royal Botanic Garden of Edinburgh. Dawyck is being sold jointly
by Knight Frank &amp; Rutley and Sotheby's International Realty with 61 acres,
three cottages, a lake and gardens.
The biggest overhang in the Scottish property market is in sporting estates,
demand for which reached its peak as late as 1990, but has now evaporated.
Demand is weak because, as Andrew Smith of Strutt &amp; Parker in Edinburgh
says, 'a sporting estate is a luxury item and the people who were buying
them before are often those worst hit by recession.' Supply is strong
because some of the same sort of people need to realise assets.
There are about 20 estates still on the market from last year covering about
250,000 acres of hill, bog and river. They include the 77,000 acre Mar Lodge
estate near Balmoral on Deeside, which US multi-millionaire John Kluge has
been trying to sell for a year. Conservation organisations are trying to
assemble a financial package to which the government would contribute to buy
Mar Lodge 'for the nation.'
Into this unpromising market has come an island, the kind of property that
usually generates enormous interest. Gigha, off south-west Scotland, is
being sold through Savills in Edinburgh. The vendor is Interallianz Bank of
Switzerland which took possession of it as creditor of Tanap Investments, a
property company run by Macolm Potier, a businessman who bought it in 1898.
Gigha is six square miles and has a mansion, a hotel, fish farm and superb
gardens which flourish in the moist air of the Gulf Stream. No asking price
has been set.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5620</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / World Stock Markets (Asia Pacific): Nikkei rises on economic
package
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By EMIKO TERAZONO
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Nikkei average gained 2.4 per cent, rising briefly above the 18,000 level,
in anticipation of the government's economic stimulus package, writes Emiko
Terazono in Tokyo.
The 225-issue average closed up 415.79 at 17,970.79, a rise of 9.7 per cent
on the week. In the morning session, the resignation of Mr Shin Kanemaru,
vice-president of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party pushed the Nikkei to
the day's low of 17,241.77. However, reports that the LDP would propose a
economic stimulus package of over Y10,000bn, boosted buying, and the index
hit the day's high of 18,168.81.
Volume surged from 620m to 850m shares, the highest level since September
1991, with most of the activity coming after the LDP's proposals were
unveiled.
Gainers outnumbered losers by 977 to 98, with 49 issues remaining unchanged.
The Topix index of all first section stocks rose 39.52 to 1,379.97 and in
London, the ISE/Nikkei 50 index fell 14.49 to 1,104.23.
Investors were also encouraged by reports that the government's economic
support measures would include expanding the amount of investment permitted
in the stock market. Hopes that new money totalling some Y1,000bn could be
used for equity investments added to the positive sentiment.
Dealers traded heavily in speculative, theme-related stocks. Green Cross,
the most active issue of the day, surged Y190 to Y1,580, and Ube Industries
added Y2 to Y445.
Real estate companies were also firm with Mitsui Fudosan up Y60 to Y1,110
and Mitsubishi Estate gaining Y30 to Y1,030.
Brokers were strong on hopes that the recent rise in activity would help an
earnings recovery. Nomura Securities advanced Y60 to Y1,550 and Daiwa
Securities gained Y77 to Y932.
Some blue chips which had risen on short-covering and bargain-hunting, lost
ground, with Sony falling Y90 to Y4,200 and Nippon Telegraph and Telephone
down Y2,000 to Y626,000.
In Osaka, the OSE average gained 683.71 to 19,829.05 in volume of 39.3m
shares.
Roundup
MANILA's negative performance stood out in an otherwise strong region
yesterday.
HONG KONG finished sharply higher on a technical rebound which sent the Hang
Seng Index up 167.88 or 3.1 per cent to 5,628.60, for a rise of 2.2 per cent
on the week. Turnover rose to HKDollars 2.72bn from HKDollars 2.36bn.
Rumours that Hongkong Macau (Holdings) would sell Nine Queen's Road Central,
a luxury retail block, lifted the share by 50 cents to HKDollars 11.50.
TAIWAN reversed early falls to close higher on bargain-hunting, triggered
partly by an unexpected rise in China Steel. The weighted index ended 51.48
or 1.4 per cent higher at the day's high of 3,852.45, down 0.4 per cent on
the week. Turnover was thin at TDollars 18.63bn after TDollars 19.38bn.
China Steel closed limit up at TDollars 17.70 on active buying: August 29 is
the first date on which foreigners can redeem the company's GDRs.
AUSTRALIA was helped by a strong performance from News Corp which put on 90
cents to ADollars 23.90. The All Ordinaries index gained 10.6 to 1553.9, in
turnover of ADollars 324m, but was marginally lower on the week.
MANILA's fall continued on worries over the strength of the local currency
against the dollar. The composite index shed 39.54 to 1,386.77, giving a
drop of almost 6 per cent on the week. Combined turnover fell to 275m from
370m. Among actives, PNB fell 2.50 pesos to 270 pesos.
NEW ZEALAND's NZSE-40 index advanced 2.22 to 1,480.56, steady on the week.
Carter Holt Harvey rose 5 cents to NZDollars 2.60 on news that a
government-backed joint venture of Maori interests would bid for CHH's
fishing business. Fletcher Challenge lost 8 cents to NZDollars 2.36.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5621</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABTFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / World Stock Markets: South Africa
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
JOHANNESBURG ended mixed in cautious, pre-weekend trading. The overall index
rose 2 to 3,135, but down 1.3 per cent on the week. Industrials fell 4 to
4,058 while the gold index rose 2 to 935.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5622</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABSFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / World Stock Markets (Europe): Continent ends mostly steady
after volatile week
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By Our Markets Staff
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BOURSES closed mostly steady after a volatile week, writes Our Markets
Staff.
FRANKFURT managed to erase early losses by the close but trading remained
nervous with some analysts noting that the market seemed to be testing the
1,500 support level on the DAX.
After a fall of 15 points in the DAX during the first 30 minutes of trading,
some confidence returned and the blue-chip index closed the day 3.05 higher
at 1,515.47, barely changed on the week. The FAZ index was 2.37 lower at
593.85 by midsession. Turnover fell to DM4.7bn from DM5.7bn.
Early activity focused on BASF as Thursday's interim results were subjected
to closer scrutiny. Worries that the chemical group may have to cut its
dividend prompted heavy selling, and the shares closed down DM2.90 or 1.3
per cent at DM208.50, but off an intraday year's low of DM201.20.
Other chemical stocks were better off, with Bayer up DM1 at DM265.80 and
Hoechst 60 pfg better at DM238.50.
Elsewhere, Asko leapt DM24 or 3.7 per cent to DM660 although there was no
news to prompt the rise while Daimler gained DM3.20 to DM614, still buoyed
up by its interim results earlier in the week.
MILAN retained some of its early gains by the end of the session. The Comit
index rose 0.31 to 393.60, down 3.1 per cent on the week, in turnover
estimated at less than Thursday's L49bn.
But then renewed rumours about Mediobanca's honorary chairman Mr Enrico
Cuccia pulled Mediobanca's shares down by L95 to L10,535, unsettling the
market.
Italcementi and its holding company Italmobiliare were out of favour after a
newspaper report suggested that Italcementi may have to pay more for Ciments
Francais because the latter's rights issue had been heavily
under-subscribed. Italcementi fell L350 to L9,250, while Italmobiliare lost
L800 to L38,600.
AMSTERDAM remained quiet ahead of the weekend with the CBS Tendency index
unchanged at 110.1, but 1.2 per cent lower on the week.
One of the highlights of the day was a 10 per cent rise in shares of
Internatio Muller, advancing Fl 6 to Fl 61.50 on good interim results
released after the close on Thursday.
DAF weakened as speculation that Daimler-Benz might be interested taking a
stake in the group waned. Its shares closed down Fl 1.20 or 6.4 per cent at
Fl 17.60.
VNU was another gainer, up Fl 3.30 to Fl 76.80 as its first half earnings
improved over 5.6 per cent while Aegon's interim figures helped its shares
to put on 40 cents to Fl 61.80.
ZURICH advanced moderately with the SMI index up 5.1 to 1,745.7 but down
1.27 per cent on the week.
Among active issues Brown Boveri bearers were up SFr90 to SFr3,650 and
Nestle bearers gained SFr70 to SFr9,100.
Banks and insurers were mixed with UBS bearers up SFr5 at SFr680 and Zurich
Insurance bearers SFr55 firmer at SFr1,820. Adia bearers rose SFr16 to
SFr203 after the employment group reported better half-year figures.
BRUSSELS improved although Petrofina again went against the trend, falling
BFr120 to BFr8,640 on fears that it may have to cut its dividend following a
sharp fall in earnings. The Bel-20 index advanced 3.09 to 1,062.13, but was
4.6 per cent lower on the week. Banks were generaly stronger, with Generale
de Banque up BFr110 at BFr6,560.
STOCKHOLM declined in moderate trading after two days of strong gains. The
Affarsvarlden General Index fell 6.9 to 780.0, steady on the week, as
turnover slipped to SKr532m from SKr815m.
HELSINKI closed higher as investors continued to buy shares after the heavy
losses earlier in the week. The HEX index closed 0.72 per cent up at 571.8,
down 6.3 per cent on the week.
OSLO dipped in nervous trading after Thursday's gains. The all-share index
fell 2.44 to 333.0, but was 2.7 per cent higher on the week, in turnover of
NKr997m. MADRID's general index closed down 0.15 at 205.61 for a fall of 2.2
per cent on the week.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                    FT-SE EUROTRACK 100 - AUG 28
                           Hourly changes
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
 Open     10.30am   11 am    12 pm    1 pm     2 pm     3 pm    close
1007.64  1007.42  1008.06  1010.79  1012.39  1013.68  1012.47  1013.54
                Day's High  1014.20    Day's Low  1007.02
        Aug 27     Aug 26     Aug 25      Aug 24      Aug 21
       1017.14     997.98     993.01     1010.52     1039.54
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Base value 1000 (26/10/90).
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5623</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / World Stock Markets: Referendum keeps Paris bourse on its
toes - Stockbrokers would rather not predict the trend between now and
September 20
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALICE RAWSTHORN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Only a few weeks ago when Paris stockbrokers were winding down for the start
of the long French holidays, they were talking in terms of a sleepy summer
on the stock market with the CAC-40 index hovering around 2,000 before
rallying after the autumn rentree.
Instead, the summer has been anything but sleepy. The Paris stock market has
been hit by a series of shocks ranging from the prospect of a 'No' vote in
next month's Maastricht referendum, to this week's turmoil on the currency
markets and the threat of another war against Iraq.
The CAC-40 index has slid during the summer. Last Monday, it fell to a new
low for the year by breaking below 1,700 to close at 1,689.71. The index
fell to 1,667.72 on Tuesday, when news broke of the first opinion poll
showing that a majority of the French would vote against ratifying the
Maastricht treaty in the September 20 referendum. The index has also been
weighed down by the decline in the dollar.
The stock market stabilised on Wednesday and rallied on Thursday when Mr
Michel Sapin, the finance minister, ruled out a realignment of the Exchange
Rate Mechanism (ERM). The CAC-40 index ended the week 3.2 per cent lower at
1,687.53.
'We've seen a very slippery slide this summer,' says Mr Simon Hopkins, a
broker with James Capel in Paris. 'For the next few weeks the stock market
will continue to be dominated by the referendum and the value of the dollar.
It's very difficult to predict what will happen between now and September
20.'
The consensus among analysts is that, if the referendum result is 'Yes', the
bourse will almost certainly rally. James Capel estimates that the CAC-40
index could rise as high as 1,850, providing there is no bad news on
currencies or interest rates. If the result is 'No', the fate of the French
market, and other European markets, would, as one Paris analyst puts it, 'be
too ghastly to contemplate'.
In the meantime, the CAC-40 index will fluctuate with the polls, although
there is some evidence that it is becoming more resilient to them. The
market fell sharply on Tuesday when the first poll showing a majority for
the anti-Maastricht lobby was released. But news on Wednesday of a second
poll indicating a negative outcome had little impact.
The other main influence will be exchange rates. Mr Sapin was emphatic on
Thursday that France would resist an ERM realignment and that it was
sticking to its franc fort policy. If the franc did move, said Mr Sapin, it
would be up, not down.
In the past the French government has raised interest rates to support the
franc, as it did last autumn after attempting unsuccessfully to hold French
rates below those of Germany. It would be reluctant to raise interest rates
again, given that the high cost of borrowing - with bank base rates of 9.85
per cent and an annual inflation rate of 3 per cent - is one of the main
causes of sluggish corporate and consumer expenditure.
Most analysts suspect that, barring a negative referendum result, France
ought to be able to avoid a realignment or a rise in interest rates. 'It
really is too soon to start talking in crisis terms,' says Mr Bernard
Godement, economist at the Nomura Research Institute in Paris. 'At the
moment we don't envisage any major changes for the franc, or for interest
rates.'
If Mr Godement is right, and France can avoid realignment, the dollar's
decline could still indirectly affect the economy by putting pressure on
French exports which have been compensating for the dull domestic market.
This could pose problems for some sectors, notably drinks, cosmetics and
luxury goods, which have already been hit by the slowdown in the Japanese
market.
Mr Sapin said on Thursday that France was still on course to surpass its
original growth target of 2 per cent this year. But the threat of a fall in
exports, combined with the lacklustre series of first-half figures released
by French companies in recent weeks, has contributed to the gloomy mood of
the market.
A number of France's biggest industrial groups - Lafarge Coppee and Bouygues
in construction, Peugeot in cars, Thomson-CSF in electronics and L'Air
Liquide in gases - have announced flat or falling sales in real terms for
the first half.
Some companies' shares have been hit hard. Euro Disney has plunged over the
summer on speculation about low attendance figures and continuing losses at
its theme park outside Paris. Total has also fallen, as brokers downgraded
their profit forecasts for the oil group.
However, the French economy is still sound on fundamentals, in 'excellent
shape', as a recent report from the Morgan Grenfell economics team in London
concluded. It is already fulfilling 'all conditions to take part in European
Monetary Union, while most other EC countries would be more than happy to
meet these conditions by 1996'.
Without the referendum most analysts had expected the underlying strength of
France's economy - and its slow, if steady recovery - to boost the stock
market this autumn. Instead, the course of the CAC-40 index over the next
month or so will be dictated by politics rather than economics.
After the referendum, or so they hope, the economic agenda will be in the
ascendant for the few months before politics resurface ahead of next
spring's National Assembly elections.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5624</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / World Stock Markets (America): Dow closes slightly firmer in
light trading
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PATRICK HARVERSON
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Wall Street
US share prices moved in a narrow, slightly firmer range in light trading
yesterday as the latest economic figures and lower bond prices had little
impact on investors, writes Patrick Harverson in New York.
At the close the Dow Jones Industrial Average was up 12.97 at 3,267.61, the
index having spent all day hovering a few points above Thursday's close.
The more broadly based Standard &amp; Poor's 500 was also a touch firmer, up
1.30 at 414.83, while the Amex composite was 0.18 firmer at 381.18 and the
Nasdaq composite 0.33 higher at 563.60. Turnover on the NYSE was only 153m
shares, and rises outpaced declines by 925 to 748.
The day's economic news had little impact on market sentiment. Government
officials reported that personal income rose 0.2 per cent while personal
spending was up by 0.3 per cent in July. The figures were in line with
expectations, and again illustrated the sluggish nature of the economic
recovery.
Investors also shrugged off a modest drop in bond prices, which was prompted
by slight weakness in the dollar. Overall, stock market sentiment was flat,
and with many participants taking off early for the weekend, trading
activity was light.
Among individual stocks, Dow Chemical jumped Dollars 2 to Dollars 56 1/2
after the company was named 'Long-View Number One Stock of the Week' by the
broking house Merrill Lynch, which set a 12-month to 18-month price target
of Dollars 85 for the stock.
General Motors fell Dollars  1/4 to Dollars 33 1/2 after the company
announced that it is seeking a buyer for its worldwide bearing business
which is spread over three sites in the US and Spain, and which employs
about 3,000 workers.
GM stock was also suffering a reaction to recent gains on hopes of better
car sales. Among other car stocks, Ford lost Dollars  5/8 at Dollars 39 3/4
, and Chrysler was Dollars  3/8 lower at Dollars 19 1/8 .
RJR Nabisco fell early on but ended unchanged at Dollars 8 5/8 after Ms
Diana Temple, sector analyst at Salomon Brothers, reduced her 1992 earnings
estimate for RJR from 62 cents a share to 57 cents a share, and for 1993
from Dollars 1 a share to 80 cents a share. Ms Temple is the third analyst
in the last two weeks to lower earnings estimates for RJR.
Hopes that Hurricane Andrew will prompt a turn in the depressed insurance
pricing cycle lifted insurance broking stocks, among them Marsh &amp; Mclennan,
up Dollars 3 1/8 at Dollars 82 7/8 .
Canada
TORONTO stocks closed slightly higher in light trading activity, as the TSE
300 Composite Index gained 10.34 points, or 0.30 per cent to close at
3402.94.
On the week, the index was up about 13 points. Advances led declines 305 to
201.
Gold stocks were up for the second consecutive day, rising 2.15% on index.
In that group, American Barrick jumped CDollars 1 1/4 to CDollars 36 1/2 .
In all, eight of the 14 stock groups closed higher. Banking and energy were
up moderately, and mining, industrial products and consumer products were
all little changed.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5625</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / London Stock Exchange: Equity futures and options trading
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TERRY BYLAND
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
DERIVATIVES markets recorded a very uneventful session as London traders
turned their attention away from currencies and concentrated on squaring
positions ahead of the extended weakened break in the UK financial markets,
writes Terry Byland.
The investment fund managers stayed on the sidelines, and it was left to the
local traders to provide what impetus there was. The Footsie September
contract opened lower but was then squeezed higher despite the weaker trend
in the pound which became more emphasised towards the end of the session.
Final quotations showed the contract at a very modest premium against the
underlying cash market.
In traded options, overall turnover slipped to 21,828 from Thursday's 24,801
contracts, with calls totalling 9,619 yesterday. Among individual shares,
British Steel topped the actives list with 2,508 contracts, as the market
continued to react to selling pressures earlier in the week. It was followed
by HBSC with 2,000, but business then died away, with TSB, next on the list,
recording only 1,002 contracts.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5626</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / London Stock Exchange: Equity traders on the defensive tack
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
TRADERS in the UK stock market achieved their purpose yesterday, which was
to leave buy/sell commitments evenly balanced ahead of what could prove a
difficult weekend for sterling. 'Flat' positions had been ordered at morning
meetings at most leading securities firms and 'flat' positions had been
largely achieved by the close of business.
In order to achieve this happy, or at least non-threatening, state of
affairs, the stock market had to close its eyes to less satisfactory
developments. Sterling slipped again to close within one pfennig of its ERM
floor and the latest Maastricht opinion poll from France showed a 53 per
cent 'no' majority.
Share prices drifted lower at first, reflecting the general lack of genuine
investment interest but rallied when the Footsie dipped briefly below 2,300.
The gentle recovery continued and the close the Index was unchanged from
overnight. The final calculation showed the FT-SE at 2,312.6, a net one
point up on the day. Strategists remained apprehensive, believing that the
stock market is still vulnerable to interest rate worries.
Seaq volume slipped to 339.5m shares from the 474.1m of the previous
session. Fund managers remained on the sidelines yesterday, and retail
business was believed to be no better than the Pounds 878.6m recorded on
Thursday. However, Sharelink, Britain's largest execution-only broker, said
that its largely private client business has been weighted heavily on the
buy side again this week.
The stock market, pre-occupied with its own internal factors, paid little
heed to currencies for most of the session, although it grew nervous at the
close when sterling eased and the D-Mark headed the ERM range. However,
equity trading had closed in London before the EC's monetary committee ruled
out a realignment of the EMS currencies. UK share traders went home for the
three day Bank Holiday weekend in the UK, wondering if the currency picture
will have changed by the time they return to work on Tuesday.
Interest-related stocks, including the stores, moved narrowly around
overnight levels and the brewery and leisure sectors found little support as
the market continued to digest the previous day's trading statement from
Scottish &amp; Newcastle. However, buyers came in for pharmaceuticals, safe
havens at a time of global economic recession.
Retail business remains very poor, even by the standards of a holiday
period. Business levels are barely profitable for securities firms.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5627</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / London Stock Exchange: Builders hard hit again
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER JOHN and STEVE THOMPSON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ANOTHER set of dire statistics from the influential Builders Merchants
Federation (BMF), hard on the heels of equally serious warnings of impending
dividend cuts throughout the sector, left building shares in disarray
yesterday.
Builders merchants bore the brunt of determined and often heavy selling
pressure as specialists focussed on the latest bad news from the BMF.
Figures released by the Federation showed July sales 2.7 per cent lower than
in the corresponding month last year, compared with a 0.2 per cent increase
in June against the corresponding month.
Earlier this week, building shares fell sharply after County NatWest issued
a blanket sell recommendation on the contracting and building materials
sectors.
Next week sees the start of the autumn reporting season for these sectors.
Mr Robin Hardy, building analyst at Panmure Gordon, warned of 'horror
stories that will surely emerge during the next month, with poor results and
dividend cuts, or warnings at the very least least, likely to be the order
of the day.'
Panmure expects that, by the end of the year, close to 60 per cent of the
contractors and 40 per cent of the materials companies will have cut their
dividends.
Worst hit by news of the BMF sales figures were Meyer International, the
timber specialists, which slumped 31 to 204p, Heywood Williams, glass and
aluminium products, 20 lower at 139p. Hepworth, the building materials
supplier, dropped 16 to 264p.
Lucas slide
Automotive and aerospace group Lucas Industries was one of the worst hit
stocks in the London market yesterday with selling coming from the US. Also,
worries over the safety of the dividend are growing amid bad news from many
areas of the motor industry. The shares fell 7 to 83p - the lowest for at
least five years - on turnover of 2.3m.
The shares began to slide in early trading as a block of stock failed to
find a home. Then, computer-operated pension fund BatteryMarch was said to
have turned seller. Dealers added that the market believes Lucas's historic
7p dividend is unsustainable this year and has been making its point by
marking down the share price. At 83p Lucas is on a gross yield of 11.2 per
cent which is seen as far too high compared with the sector average of
around 8.27 per cent.
Sentiment was further affected by news of layoffs at Jaguar and warnings
from several big European car manufacturers of grim conditions in the second
half of this year.
The flow of bad news from the brewing, hotels and leisures industries
continued to cast a shadow over shares in these sectors.
Grim warnings on Thursday from Scottish &amp; Newcastle, the brewing and leisure
group as well as Greene King, the brewer, followed a similar announcement
from Grand Metropolitan on Monday and a series of profits downgrades on Bass
and Whitbread.
Scottish &amp; Newcastle, down 19 on Thursday, dropped 7 more to 383p yesterday
while Bass retreated a further 13 to 475p.
Rank Organisation, heavily involved in the UK leisure industry, via its
film, video, hotel, holidays and bingo hall businesses, came under increased
pressure yesterday, retreating 15 to 504p. Analysts at many of the big
broking houses were looking hard at their Rank estimates after the warning
from Scottish &amp; Newcastle. The current range of estimates is from around
Pounds 230m to Pounds 260m with many at the top end beginning to chop their
numbers closer to the Pounds 230m mark.
The market continued to focus on Glaxo as a number of UK fund managers who
are underweight in the stock were said to be concentrating on a number of
positive factors. The need to adjust holdings prompted the shares to rise 12
to 722p yesterday on turnover of 4.7m.
Observers are looking towards a meeting of the US Food and Drug
Administration advisory committee on Thursday to discuss wider use of
Glaxo's chemotherapy drug Zofran. Then, on September 8, the group will
address a symposium on its anti-migraine medication Imigran. It is hoped
this will hasten US approval for injectable Imigran.
Finally, investors are awaiting full-year results on September 10. Glaxo is
expected to announce profits of between Pounds 1.42bn and Pounds 1.46bn and
an increase in the dividend, possibly by as much as 40 per cent.
Pharmaceuticals group Wellcome had a slow start but gathered pace during the
day turning an early fall of 2 into a gain of 17 at 817p. There was interest
at the disclosure, earlier than expected, of a meeting by US authorities to
review an AIDS-related drug. Then, in New York, Salomon Brothers joined the
general enthusiasm of UK securities houses by initiating coverage of
Wellcome with a buy rating. Wellcome is also still affected by technical
factors as dealers seek to find a level for the share price following the
recent share issue by Wellcome Trust.
British Bio-Tech jumped 20 to 452p in response to its inclusion in the FT
Actuaries list.
NatWest substantially underperformed the rest of the big banks after hints
that one of the big broking houses was preparing a profits downgrade. No
confirmation of such a move was forthcoming but NatWest shares remained
weak, closing 7 off at 294p.
Insurance broker Sedgwick kept up its recent strong performance, stimnulated
by the latest rise in the dollar and optimism over US insurance rates.
Television production and services group Carlton Communications recovered 12
to 559p with SG Warburg Securities repeating its buy recommendation. The
house admires the company's balance sheet, likes its exposure to US recovery
and, although it maintains its full-year profit estimate of Pounds 102.5m,
feels the forecast might be conservative.
Information and electronic systems group Reuters jumped 22 to 1049p with a
number of analysts focusing on prospects for the group's new dealing
systems. Mr Brian Newman of Henderson Crosthwaite said the derivative
products dealing system Globex was now seeing more than 5000 contracts
traded every day and Dealing 2000-2, the foreign exchange product was now
used at around 85 sites. However, another analyst said Reuters was still not
happy with the progress of 2000-2.
Isle Of Man Steam Packet retreated 12 to 167p after the steep fall in
half-year profits. BAA closed 13 off at 632p, hit by worries about profits
downgrades and potential damage to the group's business by another outbreak
of conflict in Iraq. British Airways eased 5 to 224p for the same reason.
Slough Estates, the UK's fourth-biggest property company, continued to make
progress after Thurday's dividend reduction which had been expected. Dealers
said yesterday's rise, which put a further 9 on the shares to 104p,
following a gain of 6 on Thursday, was a reflection of the attractive yield
and recovery prospects.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1992
NEW HIGHS (8).
ENGINEERING GENERAL (1) Plasmec, HEALTH &amp; HOUSEHOLD (1) Brit.
Bio-Technology, MEDIA (3) CIA, TVS Ent., Do 7.4pc Pf, PACKAGING PAPER &amp;
PRINTING (3) Boxmore, Continuous Stationery, Serif.
NEW LOWS (143).
BRITISH FUNDS (7) Tr 9pc '12 A, Tr 8 3/4 pc '17, Do A, Tr 2 1/2 pc IL '01,
Tr 2 1/2 pc IL '03, Tr 2pc IL '06, Tr 4 1/8 pc IL '30, AMERICANS (1)
Whirlpool, CANADIANS (2) Derlan, Hawker Siddeley Can, BANKS (1) Royal Bank
Scot, BREWERS &amp; DISTILLERS (3) Bass, Greene King, Scot &amp; Newcastle, BUILDING
MATERIALS (6) Blue Circle, Hepworth, Heywood Williams, Do Cv Pf, Meyer,
Russell (A), BUSINESS SERVICES (4) Hogg Robison, Holmes Proctn., Johnson
Cleaners, Proudfoot, CHEMICALS (4) Caird, Cambridge Isotope, Hickson,
Schering, CONGLOMERATES (3) Bibby, Cannon St., Scot Heritable, CONTRACTING &amp;
CONSTRUCTION (9) Amco, Bryant, CALA, Edmond, McAlpine, Persimmon, Prowting,
Vibroplant, Ward Hldgs., ELECTRICALS (1) Oxford Insts., ELECTRICITY (1)
Bedford, ELECTRONICS (3) Computer People, P &amp; P, Unitech, ENGINEERING
AEROSPACE (2) FR, ML, ENGINEERING GENERAL (8) Babcock, Black &amp; Decker,
Carclo, Fife Indmar, Haden MacLellan, Hopkinsons, Victaulic, Vortex, FOOD
MANUFACTURING (5) Matthews (B), Northern, RHM, Unigate, Utd. Biscuits, FOOD
RETAILING (2) Ashley 8 1/4 pc Pf, Nurdin &amp; Peacock, HEALTH &amp; HOUSEHOLD (4)
Community Hosp., Lilly (E), Reckitt &amp; Colman, Do 9 1/2 pc Cv Bd., HOTELS &amp;
LEISURE (8) Airtours, Chrysalis, Friendly, Owners Abroad, Do 9 3/4 pc Pf,
Rank Org., Resort, Thorn EMI, INSURANCE COMPOSITE (2) Domestic &amp; Gen.,
Topdanmark, INVESTMENT TRUSTS (13) City of Oxford Zero Pf, Contra-Cyclical
Cap., General Cons. Cap., Jos, Kleinwort Smllr. Co's, Lloyds Smllr. Co's
Pckg. Uts., M &amp; G Inc. Grd. Uts., M &amp; G Recovery Pckg. Uts., New Throg.
Inc., River &amp; Merc. Smllr. Wts., River &amp; Merc. Tst. Wts., SPRAIT, St. Davids
Inc., MEDIA (4) Goodhead, Holmes Marchant, Novo, Shandwick, METAL &amp; METAL
FORMING (1) Richards, MISCELLANEOUS (5) McLeod Russel, Ricardo, Rothmans,
Strong &amp; Fisher, UDO, MOTORS (4) European, Evans Halshaw, Lucas, Do Wts.,
OILS &amp; GAS (1) Petrofina, OTHER FINANCIAL (2) FNFC 6.3pc Cv Pf, Mercury
Assets Mngemt., OTHER INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS (4) Norcros, Watts Blake,
Williams, Do 5 5/8 pc Pf, PACKAGING, PAPER &amp; PRINTING (2) St. Ives,
Stat-Plus, PROPERTY (9) Grainger, Greycoat, Gt. Portland 9 1/2 pc '02, Lend
Lease, Olives, Palmerston, Regalian, Southend Prop. Wts., Wates City of
Lon., STORES (3) Goldsmiths, Lloyds Chems., Mallett, TEXTILES (8) Allied
Text., Baird, Campari, Courtaulds, Lamont, Pepe, Tomkinsons, Wensum,
TRANSPORT (4) Assoc. Brit. Ports, IoM Steam, Mayne Nickless, Vard, MINES (7)
Anglo Amer. Coal, Caledonia, Elandsrand, Melinga, Placer Res., Renison,
Venterpost.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5628</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Commodities and Agriculture (Week in the Markets): Gold
price rally runs out of steam
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD MOONEY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE GOLD market's cautious recovery following its sudden plunge a fortnight
ago ran out of steam this week.
Buyers were keen on Monday, as dollar weakness made the yellow metal
relatively cheap in terms of other currencies, and the price climbed Dollars
4.75 to Dollars 342.20 a troy ounce, although gains were limited by reports
of producer selling.
At that point traders were suggesting that a rise to Dollars 342.80 an ounce
might trigger short-covering by the US investment funds whose sell-off had
been largely responsible for the preceding fall. But the thesis was never
tested. In spite of the dollar's continuing slide gold met strong upside
resistance on Tuesday amid concern about Australian selling encouraged by
the fact that the Australian dollar was even weaker than the US currency.
The gold price slid to Dollars 338.20 an ounce before fresh support emerged
on Thursday, in spite of a upturn in the fortunes of the dollar. The support
was underpinned by buying in strong currency areas, notably Germany, where
it was estimated that demand for gold was running at about four times the
1991 level. By last night's close the price had recovered to Dollars 340 an
ounce, up Dollars 2.55 on the week.
The silver market, which got off fairly lightly when gold plummeted two
week's ago, continued to lose ground this week, the cash price touching an
18-month low of 364.75 cents an ounce on Wednesday. Traders said silvers'
apparent independence of the gold price trend underlined its new status as
an industrial, rather than a precious, metal and attributed its fall to
gloomy economic conditions. Cash silver closed at 371.5 cents an ounce, down
4.5 cents on the week.
At the London Metal Exchange activity tended to be discouraged by the
volatility of the foreign exchange markets. 'Investors won't commit
themselves while there is the danger a sudden currency move will wipe out a
profit or trigger a stop-loss order within seconds,' explained one trader.
The biggest move was in the copper market, where the cash price fell Pounds
61.50 on the week to Pounds 1,257 a tonne as holders liquidated long
positions. But the fall was heavily influenced by the dollar factor, which
accounted for about Pounds 22 of the price movement.
Another firm LME market was zinc. A threatened strike at Peru's Centromin
metals group and a world stocks reduction in July, reported by the European
Zinc Institute, encouraged the rise, which left the cash position Dollars 51
up on the week at Dollars 1,415 a tonne. But the main factor was developing
fourth quarter supply tightness, which was reflected in a further widening
in the cash premium over three months metal from Dollars 29.25 to Dollars
38.50 a tonne.
A similar situation developing in the lead market resulted this week in a
sharp narrowing in the cash discount against metals for delivery three
months delivery. With the cash price rising Pounds 17.50 to Pounds 337.50 a
tonne - in spite of the downward pressure of sterling's rise against the
dollar - and the three months position falling slightly the cash discount
shrank from Pounds 20.25 to Pounds 4 a tonne.
Cocoa prices continued on their downward path as the only bullish factor in
a heavily oversupplied market - dry weather in west African growing areas -
was weakened by reports of thunder storms in the Ivory Coast, the biggest
producer. The December position at the London Futures and Options Exchange
ended at Pounds 628 a tonne, down Pounds 13 on the week.
In contrast, coffee futures made modest extensions to last week's gains,
with the November position closing yesterday at Dollars 760 a tonne, up
Dollars 8 on the week. Dealers could offer no clear reason for the coffee
market's recent steadiness beyond the fact that modest purchases by
manufacturers had been roughly balancing light producer selling.
Potential sellers may have been discouraged by the prospect, however faint,
of real progress being made on a new International Coffee Agreement with
price-stabilisation clauses at the International Coffee Organisation meeting
beginning in London on September 21.
Brazil, Colombia and Coast Rica presented a united front after three days of
preparatory talks in Bogota this week. They insisted that 'decisive
progress' must be made at the September meeting and deplored the fact that
producers were so far not showing willingness to share responsibility for
ensuring that coffee import controls would be observed.
 ---------------------------------------
         LME WAREHOUSE STOCKS
       (As at Thursday's close)
 ---------------------------------------
tonnes
Aluminium  +12,100 to 1,350,600
Copper      +5,575 to   268,550
Lead        +1,500 to   154,825
Nickel        +342 to    43,302
Zinc        +1,550 to   349,225
Tin           +110 to    14,695
 ---------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5629</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Foreign Exchanges: Lira trades below ERM floor
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JAMES BLITZ
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE ITALIAN lira fell below its permitted limit against the D-Mark in the
European exchange rate mechanism yesterday, as the German currency moved to
the top of the ERM grid for the first time since October 1989, writes James
Blitz.
Several factors pushed the lira below its lower band limit of L765.40 to the
D-Mark yesterday. Mr Johann Wilhelm Gaddum, a member of the Bundesbank
council, said that current economic data did not justify a cut in leading
German interest rates. An opinion poll on the likely outcome of France's
referendum on Maastricht next month showed a majority 'No' vote is in
prospect, underlining fears of a realignment.
The lira closed in London at L765.70, below its floor, despite intervention
from the German, Italian and Belgian central banks. According to Mr Mark
Austin, chief economist at HongKong and Shanghai Banking Corporation in
London, the Italian currency was sold by major corporate investors inside
Italy as well as the usual punters. 'This has been a serious sell-off,' he
said, 'which will not easily be turned around.'
The lira's problems are at the heart of what are now the biggest strains
inside the ERM since the realignment of 1987.
In normal times, the D-Mark, which is the hardest currency in Europe, should
be at the centre of the grid so that the monetary policies and exchange
rates of other countries can be adjusted around it. Yesterday, it was at the
top of the grid, showing the strongest positive divergence of any currency
against its central ecu rate.
That means it is straining against all currencies, pushing three of them -
the lira, sterling and the French franc - towards their bilateral ERM floors
against the D-Mark. Sterling managed to hold on yesterday, closing down a
1/4 pfennig at DM2.7875. But the Dutch central bank, which traditionally
shadows the D-Mark closely, raised its special advances rate to 9.70 per
cent from 9.60 per cent to keep in line with developments.
Yesterday, EC governments ruled out an EMS realignment in a statement by the
EC's Monetary Committee, firming the Italian currency in late American
trading.
A joint statement like this suggests that there will be co-ordinated EC
intervention to support currencies. But will mutual intervention work ? With
the D-Mark at the top of the grid, the onus is on the Bundesbank to push
D-Marks into the financial system, upsetting its M3 Monetary supply targets.
The burden is all the greater since Italy said yesterday that its foreign
exchange reserves had dropped by a third in the month to June.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 11
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5630</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Money Markets: Sterling stable
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Both the sterling cash and futures markets had another quiet day as the
pound continued to hover around DM2.7900 on the foreign exchanges.
For the second day running, sterling futures stabilised a little above the
89.00 level, although they continued to price in a rise in UK base rates in
the immediate future. The September short sterling contract dipped down to
89.15 from its previous close of 89.18 as the pound softened against the
D-Mark. But it later finished at 89.18. The December contract closed 4 basis
points down on the day at 89.14.
Cash rates in the sterling money market closed unchanged, although there was
some selling in the 1-month and 3-month periods towards the close by dealers
who did not want to leave their positions exposed over the long weekend.
Three-month money, a key indicator of where the market thinks base rates are
moving, again closed at 10 5/8 per cent on the offered side. One month money
again closed at 10 1/4 per cent on the offered side and the 1 year rate at
10 7/8 per cent. The 'overnight' hit 10 1/2 per cent before the finish.
The Bank of England forecast a shortage of Pounds 1.25bn at the start of the
day which was completely removed in the early round. Once again, the Bank
was accommodating, buying the longer dated Bands 3 and 4.
As usual, dealers will have wanted to push the short dates down as far as
possible before a 3-day weekend. But the Bank was clearly concerned to
sustain the mildly improved mood of the last day or two after the trials and
tribulations of the early part of the week.
No Treasury bills were allotted at the regular Friday Treasury bill tender.
After the rise in trading rates this week, offers for the bills would have
been at rates that were too high to be accepted by the Bank of England,
given the government's adherence to 10 per cent base rate.
The Bank purchased Pounds 100m of Band 3 Treasury bills at 9 3/4 per cent,
Pounds 732m of Band 3 bank bills at 9 3/4 per cent, Pounds 100m of BAnd 4
Treasury bills at 9 per cent and Pounds 344m of Band 4 bank bills at 9 per
cent.
The forecast was later revised to Pounds 1.35bn and the Bank purchased
Pounds 1m of Band 4 bank bills at 9 per cent. The forecast was later revised
to Pounds 1.4bn and the Bank did not operate in the afternoon.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 11
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5631</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Economic Diary
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
TOMORROW: Foreign ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement due to meet in
Jakarta ahead of meeting of heads of state. Mrs Margaret Thatcher, former
British prime minister, will make her first visit to Taiwan. Second round of
elections in Lebanon.
MONDAY: US home sales (July).
TUESDAY: Bank of England publishes figures for London sterling certificates
of deposit (July); monetary statistics (including bank and building society
balance sheets) (July); bill turnover statistics (July); sterling commercial
paper (July) and money market statistics (July). US leading indicators
(July); NAPM (August). Summit meeting of the heads of state of the
Non-Aligned Movement is scheduled to take place in Jakarta (until September
6). Mr Kevin Maxwell and Mr Ian Maxwell, accused of fraud offences, at City
of London magistrates court.
WEDNESDAY: Central statistical office announces figures for overseas travel
and tourism (June). UK official reserves figures for August from the
Treasury. Department of Trade and Industry issues advance energy statistics
for July. US factory orders (July). Ulster talks expected to resume in
Belfast. Start of two-day Financial Times conference 'World Aerospace and
Air Transport' at the Hotel Inter-Continental in London. Launch of Classic
FM, the UK's first national commercial radio station.
THURSDAY: Central Statistical Office gives figures for cyclical indicators
for the UK economy (July - second estimate). The Department of Employment
publishes details of employment, unemployment, earnings prices and other
indicators. US revised second quarter productivity, costs. Bundesbank
council meeting. Interim results from Ladbroke Group, Reckitt &amp; Colman,
Rolls-Royce, T&amp;N, Cookson Group and Pearson.
FRIDAY: European Community finance ministers are expected to meet in Bath
(until Sunday).
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 9
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5632</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Letter: A Lament on the Wreck of the Britannia
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr MICHAEL FOREMAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, Mr P B Swain's discovery of 'Lamont' among the 'new lows' listed in
your newspaper (Letters, August 26) reminds me of Longfellow's 'The Wreck of
the Hesperus'. The last two lines of the poem read:
Christ save us all from a death like this
On the reef of Norman's Woe]
Michael Foreman,
6 The Glade,
Sevenoaks,
Kent TN13 3HD
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5633</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Letter: Testing time for traders at the TSO
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr BRIAN CRACK
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, Having just received a visit from a Customs and Excise officer in
connection with the new Intrastat requirements from January 1 next year, I
was intrigued by Alan Cane's article on new VAT rules (''Heads buried in the
sand' over VAT rules', August 24). The officer was extremely helpful though
somewhat embarrassed in that, as you report, final details of the
legislation have yet to be settled.
In contrast, the Trade Statistics Office is taking an extremely unhelpful
attitude. I am informed that the commodity code booklet, which gives all the
commodity codes we are likely to need as traders, is only available for
sale, at Pounds 10. Consequently, British business is being asked to pay to
find out the numbers they must include on their returns.
Moreover, I understand that the TSO is refusing to send directly to traders
the forms necessary to enable the TSO to maintain a register of traders. It
will send them only to the relevant Customs and Excise offices. The result
is traders are being asked to complete forms which they will have to find
ways of ensuring they receive.
My company has already spent much time and effort trying to ensure it
complies with the regulations - so far as they are known. We also understand
the need to provide information. But I do feel the attitude of the TSO
should become more user-friendly - as has recently happened with Customs and
Excise, and the Inland Revenue.
Brian Crack,
managing director,
SICO Space
Management Systems,
Henwood Industrial Estate,
Ashford,
Kent TN24 8DH
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5634</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Mozart for the masses: Antony Thorncroft tunes in to Classic
FM's launch
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANTONY THORNCROFT
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Anyone running through the wavelengths of their radio in recent months will
have been startled to come across a channel, at around the 100 spot on FM,
which seems to broadcast nothing but bird-song.
From 6am on September 7, the birds disappear but the songs remain,
supplemented by symphonies, concertos and string quartets. Classic FM, which
claims to be the largest commercial radio station in the world, will take to
the airwaves.
It is certainly the first land-based commercial station to cover the UK, or
rather 80 per cent of the country initially.
Next year it will be joined by a national pop channel, but in the meantime
it has the opportunity to attract Britain's growing band of classical music
listeners. The arias and melodies used in television commercials have
captured the imagination of a substantial segment of the population.
Puccini's aria 'Nessun dorma', the signature tune of the 1990 World Cup,
topped the record charts.
John Spearman, the former chairman of CDP, the advertising agency, who is
chief executive of Classic FM, expects to tempt 7 per cent of the population
to listen to the new channel for up to six hours a week. He has already
persuaded advertisers like W H Smith and Time magazine (both of which have
never used the medium before) to buy spots.
Despite the deep recession in the advertising industry, Spearman is
surprised to be above budget targets and expects perhaps Pounds 4m in
advertising revenues in the first year. For clients, the attraction is the
audience of affluent spenders which is expected to be drawn to the station.
But perhaps an even bigger surprise is that Classic FM is taking to the
airwaves at all. When the Radio Authority sought bids for the licence last
September, Classic FM's offer of Pounds 6m was beaten by Sir Peter Parker's
Show Time station, with a format of middle-of-the-road music. But then Show
Time fell victim to economic pessimism and withdrew. Classic FM, funded
mainly by Sir Peter Michael, chairman of Cray Electronics, and Time-Warner,
which share 70 per cent of the equity, won the day.
A frantic start-up operation then ensued. It produced studios in an
underground boiler-room at Camden Lock; a library of 6,000 CDs; and a team
of announcers better known for their broadcasting experience than their love
of classical music. The main morning slot is taken by Irishman Henry Kelly,
familiar as a TV host, while the equally important drive-home programme will
be in the care of Margaret Howard, whose removal from BBC Radio 4's 'Pick of
the Week' caused a middle-class uproar.
Classic FM will not stretch the listeners' mental powers too much. The
morning wake-up programme will play short - seven-minute or so - selections
of favourite tunes, with the musical pieces getting longer throughout the
day. Many programmes will be sponsored, including the weather and traffic
reports, and live broadcasts will be limited to the occasional recital,
although members of the LSO have been contracted to perform regularly
throughout the first year.
Although advertising revenue is higher than forecast, Classic FM still faces
a tough financial future. It must recoup the Pounds 5m cost of installing
its transmitters; it must pay the Radio Authority an annual licence fee of
Pounds 650,000, plus a small percentage of its revenue; and it has yet to
conclude negotiations over royalty payments to record companies and artists.
But Spearman is optimistic that in four years income will be Pounds 16m-plus
and the station will be profitable.
Whatever its long-term achievements, Classic FM can claim at least one
short-term victory. It has lit a fuse under the BBC's classical music
channel, Radio 3.
For years, Radio 3 hummed along, capturing only 5 per cent of BBC Radio's
declining audience, at a cost of Pounds 50m a year. But its unrivalled
reputation as an artistic force, funding four orchestras and commissioning
dozens of new works every year, protected it from criticism.
In the intensive review of all the BBC's activities, initiated by Mr David
Mellor, the national heritage secretary, the performance of Radio 3 has come
under the spotlight. The result has been surprisingly encouraging. Radio 3's
commitment to cultural innovation has ensured it an important role in the
BBC of the future, but at a price.
There was a feeling within the BBC itself that Radio 3 was not attracting
its full potential audience. Many who bought Pavarotti's Greatest Hits would
never infiltrate deeper into classical music; but many more, given a helping
hand, might. The advent of Classic FM strengthens the hands of those in the
BBC arguing for change.
According to this group, Radio 3 needed to sound less stuffy. A young
controller, Nicholas Kenyon, was brought in to try a broaden the station's
appeal. The imminence of Classic FM's launch speeded up some of his changes,
which were introduced last month to a predictable outcry.
Kenyon attempted to make the wake-up programme 'On Air', which attracts
Radio 3's largest audience, more accessible, with shorter items of popular
music and more frequent news bulletins. He added talk and reviews to 'In
Tune', the drive-home programme.
Radio 3 has an articulate audience and it has made its voice felt in the
press and through letters to the BBC. Most of the reaction has been
negative.
Kenyon is unrepentant. Every change to BBC programming produces a similar
outcry, he says, adding that the decision to move 'Women's Hour' from the
afternoon to the morning produced a much more vociferous reaction. Kenyon
has moved to placate his critics, extending the musical items in 'On Air' to
20 minutes or more and bunching the news reports so that they are less
obtrusive.
But he retains his aim of making Radio 3 accessible and of alternating music
with talk and drama. More changes such as the introduction of an arts review
programme will be announced on September 13.
It is too soon to judge whether the audience for Radio 3 is growing but
Kenyon seems confident. The station will still play much more Stockhausen
and Boulez than Classic FM could ever imagine. It will also play more Mozart
and Vivaldi than it did in the past. Its commitment to drama, and to funding
the arts, is intact.
The US supports 50 classical music stations. The undoubted growth of
interest in classical music in the UK should enable two stations to thrive,
especially as they do not clash head-on, in spirit or in ambition. Classic
FM could even become the conduit which will eventually expand the audience
for Radio 3.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5635</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Letter: A new broad curriculum exam needed
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr PETER WOOD
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, Might I yet again suggest that the opponents and the supporters of the
A-level examination are advancing arguments which are perfectly capable of
practical reconciliation.
Your Leader ('Exam results', August 20) points out that the only real
function of A-levels is to select 'a small minority' of university entrants.
It is vital, as the government argues, to maintain this 'gold standard'.
What is absurd, however, is to maintain that here is a hoop through which
all our young people must go, whatever their leanings.
More absurd is the uniquely snobbish, but uneducated, insistence on the
lower value of vocational qualifications - as though such disparate areas of
talent, activity and assessment could be meaningfully compared.
The absurdity derives from the egalitarian post-Robbins belief that everyone
must have a university education and those who do not, or who cannot get
one, are of lesser value.
One in five A-level entries results in a fail grade, as your editorial
points out. Supporters of the A-level should, thus, surely be quite happy to
concede that we stop forcing pupils with other than high academic talents
and interests into this channel.
What problem would arise if the A-level examination remained an option for
those suited to it, while a broader curriculum examination on the lines you
advocate is introduced for the majority?
Many schools, in any event, provide a broad range of options at fifth and
sixth form levels. These options could be made generally available; and they
would fail only if they ceased to be options and became obligatory.
Artists will take to calculation if it is introduced sympathetically and
with feeling]
Peter Wood,
Newbold Farm,
Duntisbourne Abbots,
Cirencester,
Gloucestershire
GL7 7JN
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5636</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Letter: Dividend cuts and dubious performers
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr PATRICK BARR
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, Adoption of a long-term dividend policy appropriate to investors and
compatible with a company's cash needs is sensible. But Prof Paul Marsh
argues (Personal View, August 12) for adherence to 'conventional ground
rules'.
Companies smooth dividends to balance cash needs and investor requirements.
When the outlook improves, inevitably this is painless; with a downturn it
is not. But a dividend reduction may well be consistent with achieving the
new balance required and should not be ruled out. Thus bad news exists for
the company whether the dividend is cut or not. But his article implies that
the very fact that there is a dividend cut creates abnormal returns. This
cannot be right. The cut is probably inevitable; but declaring it does not
in itself put it into the 'club of dubious performers'.
Dividend announcements are important and do have an impact on investor
returns by affecting stock price. But Prof Marsh's conclusion is too simple.
He does not clearly prove asymmetry (marginal returns in an increase not
equal to returns on a similar reduction) because he does not seem to compare
same-size dividend increases and reductions.
His graphs show abnormal changes in returns before the dividend announcement
 -revealing dividend announcements are not the only way a company can inform
investors.
I wonder how many of the dividend announcements used in the research were
made at the same time as other announcements or annual results.
For a company unable to fund its dividend in the short term it is a
financing problem; but, longer term, not to the point where a company should
consistently borrow to finance the dividend and the profitable investments
he endorses. Apart from the cost of debt rising, as lenders see the
uncovered dividend and rising gearing, investors can probably borrow on
their own account as easily. Anyway, most investors are advised to spread
their risk by investing in a portfolio.
Finally, in his opening example, if no dividends had been paid by shares in
the portfolio, then presumably there would have been a marginal increase in
the share price, compensating the investor for the dividend forgone. Patrick
Barr,
11 The Avenue,
Claygate,
Surrey KT10 0RX
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5637</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / A framework, but no fine print: The gloom over Yugoslavia
has lifted slightly
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JUDY DEMPSEY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
There was a widespread feeling among participants and observers that this
week's London conference on the former Yugoslavia would not achieve much.
The negotiations opened against a background of increased fighting in the
besieged Bosnian capital of Sarajevo. Refugees continued to pour out of
Bosnia, and Serbian president Slobodan Milosevic - the main protagonist in
the conflict - threatened to boycott the conference jointly organised by the
United Nations and the European Community.
There were misgivings about whether the UN and the EC could persuade all
sides to agree a framework for negotiating a constitutional settlement for
Bosnia, and deciding the status of the ethnic minorities in the former
Yugoslav federation. After all, countless ceasefires and promises had been
broken in the past.
Yet after two days of intense negotiations, Mr John Major, the British prime
minister, acting as President of the EC, and Mr Cyrus Vance, the UN's
special envoy to Yugoslavia, produced agreement on four documents which, in
the long term, provide a basis for bringing peace to the Balkans. This is an
important achievement but, as Mr Major himself acknowledges, it is just a
small step in the process towards a lasting settlement. The most important
question is whether the aims stated in the documents can be implemented; and
whether the fighting, which has already claimed the lives of at least 25,000
people, and has made more than 2m people homeless, will now end.
To achieve this goal the UN and the EC have, through the documents,
established a system of inter-locking mechanisms. For instance, the document
on Bosnia states that the international community will not tolerate the
division of Bosnia and that land seized, particularly by the Bosnian Serbs,
led Mr Radovan Karadzic, will never be recognised.
On its own this means little. But it will be backed up by initiatives
outlined in the document on humanitarian issues. Over the next few days, the
UN Security Council will amend its mandate so as to allow UN personnel to
use force to protect towns and cities under siege in Bosnia. The UN forces
will also be strengthened by armoured personnel carriers and about 6,000
extra troops.
The conference received agreement from Mr Karadzic that he will open all
detention camps, and allow detainees to return to their homes. Neither Mr
Vance nor Mr Major doubt the enormity of this problem. Thousands of villages
have been destroyed.
To overcome some of these problems, the International Red Cross and the
United Nations High Commission on Refugees will attempt to provide shelter
for the homeless in the short term. But Mr Lawrence Eagleburger, the acting
US secretary of state, said Bosnia would require a large economic
reconstruction and aid programme. 'We do not want these people to be living
in camps for the next 20 years. They have a right to go back to their
homes,' he said.
But there is a big obstacle. How can people return while the fighting
continues?. And how can the fighting stop while the Serb forces possess the
heavy weapons and artillery which they have used to besiege the cities of
Sarajevo, Gorazde, and Bihac?
A third document called Confidence, Security Building and Verification,
attempts to address this issue. It states that once these weapons have been
located, they must be placed under international supervision within 96
hours. Yesterday, diplomats said that the timing of this process would be
discussed at the Geneva talks, a follow-up to the London conference, which
opens next Thursday.
This document, however, is flawed. It does not take into account the
unreliability of Mr Karadzic, or General Ratko Mladic, his military
commander in Bosnia. Nor does it resolve the problem that the fighting in
Bosnia is being waged by irregular, and often undisciplined units.
'I agree that we have to deal with all sorts of paramilitary groups' a UK
official said. 'But we will introduce short-notice on-site inspection, and
will do this until we have placed these weapons under international
control.'
The monitors will be backed by international observers who will be posted on
Bosnia's borders with Serbia, Montenegro and Croatia and will attempt to
stem the flow of weapons into Bosnia. Military use of aircraft or
helicopters by the Serbs will be banned.
Again, a degree of scepticism is warranted. Why should the international
community believe that Mr Karadzic, Mr Milosevic, or Mr Milan Panic, the
prime minister of the unrecognised Yugoslav state (of Serbia and Montenegro)
will co-operate? The Serbs may rally behind Mr Milosevic and Mr Karadzic and
defy the weight of international pressure. The west may therefore pin their
hopes on Mr Panic.
Mr Major stated the options in the form of a stark choice. 'You sign up, and
eventually you will be welcomed back into the international community. If
not, you face isolation.'
Already, Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN secretary-general is recommending
that the scope of the sanctions currently imposed on Serbia be increased.
Monitors will be placed along Serbia's borders with Hungary, Romania and
Bulgaria. 'We are serious this time,' said Mr Eagleburger.
As a means of maintaining the momentum of the London Conference, six
committees, co-chaired by Mr Vance and Lord Owen, a former British foreign
secretary, will go into permanent session in Geneva. They will discuss the
future constitutional status of Bosnia as well as the status of all the
ethnic minorities in the region.
The Geneva conference, as Mr Major warned, will be a long process. 'It will
not be easy. It will not stop the fighting immediately.'
Belatedly, a framework has been established, the first substantial
achievement in bringing peace to the Balkans. The task now facing the
diplomats is to dilute the fear, revenge and hatred which have scarred the
people of Bosnia - but which finally galvanised the international community
into action.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5638</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Letter: Grand Metropolitan's share price slips on ice
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From LESLEY SMITH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, I note that Grand Met's share value closed down 33p on Tuesday. Lex
(August 26) attributes this to poor predicted pre-tax profits, the
difficulties of Green Giant, and the failure of British beer drinkers to
keep up their consumption.
But we in North London - with its huge density of share owners and city
analysts - know the truth. It is due to the decision to cease production of
Haagen-Daz's Swiss almond vanilla ice cream. This was truly the
connoisseur's ice cream - its loss could only lead to a plunge in confidence
in Grand Met and to Tuesday's bad news. Let us hope Sir Allan Sheppard
learns his lesson.
Lesley Smith,
52 Etherley Road,
London N15 3AJ
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5639</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Escape from the black hole / A look at the options facing
unemployed UK executives
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID GOODHART
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
The consultants and counsellors who advise the growing reserve army of
unemployed executives in the UK often compare losing a top job to divorce or
the death of a close relative.
The unemployed executive may be more comfortably off than the average
worker, but unemployment can be a greater psychological blow. 'If you have
really invested yourself in your career, and neglected your family in the
process, unemployment can be felt as a terrible rejection, the opening up of
a black hole,' says Mr Bill Robbins, a counsellor with the DBM consultancy.
Until recently, this sort of language might have been dismissed as the
hyperbole of a fast-growing, and profitable, industry. But the mental health
of depressed executives can now make front-page news, as it did last week
when Mr David Elton, the oil executive who lost his job when Ultramar was
taken over by Lasmo, killed his wife and then himself.
Middle and senior managers in the UK have traditionally enjoyed greater
security of tenure than blue- and white-collar workers. They have also been
more secure than their US counterparts who have long been used to a more
vigorous hire-and-fire tradition. 'The ordinary British worker could always
blame someone else if he lost his job; an executive felt he could only blame
himself,' says Mr Robbins.
Those days are gone now that executive unemployment - as defined by the
Department of Employment's list of professional and managerial occupations -
rises to the 350,000 mark, and advertisements for general managers routinely
attract 500 replies. Thanks to corporate restructuring many of the lost jobs
will never return; a recent survey by Reed Personnel Services found that
managers will be in least demand as the recession ends.
As executive unemployment has become more routine so the stigma has
diminished. Recruiting agency Jamieson Scott illustrates the point by
reference to a client living in an exclusive cul-de-sac in Surrey. When he
lost his job two years ago, he initially hid the fact from his golf-partner
neighbours. He is now much happier as all but one of the seven breadwinners
in the cul-de-sac are also unemployed.
Some senior executives do well out of redundancy. Mr Ian Bell of
outplacement agency Sanders &amp; Sidney says the average executive has a
severance package equivalent to 11 months' pay but gets a new job within
five months, half at a higher salary. Other London-based outplacement
agencies, which run courses and provide assistance to get executives back
into the job market, quote similar figures.
Many specialists in executive unemployment are sceptical of such optimistic
figures, however. And in any case, only about 20 per cent of unemployed
executives enjoy the service of an outplacement agency.
Those who do are usually doubly privileged, as it tends to be the larger,
enlightened employers which provide outplacement as part of a redundancy
package. Those same employers often provide pay-offs of Pounds 70,000 to
Pounds 100,000 for departing executives or bring forward a pension of
two-thirds of final salary for executives in their mid-50s.
The worst-off are those who work for companies that go bankrupt. They
eventually receive the UK minimum for redundancy which, even for those with
long service, totals no more than about Pounds 2,500.
If the executives are not self-employed and have been in work for more than
two years, they can also claim Pounds 43 a week in unemployment benefit,
which is not means-tested, and income support, including the payment of some
mortgage interest, which is means-tested.
For people who have been used to earning Pounds 40,000 a year or more, this
crash in their standard of living combined with the undermining of
self-esteem can be devastating. The transition was illustrated last week by
businessman Mr Stephen Ensor and his family, who spent the night in a
council hostel for the homeless after being evicted from their Pounds
350,000 home.
Most unemployed executives fall between the extremes of a handsome pay-off
and penury. Money is tight but a small severance payment plus savings or a
spouse's earnings keep things steady for a few months at least. Mr Nigel
D'Auvergne, who runs the Executive Self-Help Group in St Albans, says the
average pay-off among his 50 members, mainly middle-managers, has been
Pounds 20,000 to Pounds 30,000.
One of Mr D'Auvergne's first steps on losing his job was to visit the local
Citizens Advice Bureau: 'A lot of executives feel a bit squeamish about that
but they should find out what they are entitled to.'
To many executives dismissal comes out of the blue. 'The personnel directors
always say 'he knew it was coming', but the executives usually say it was a
complete shock and often feel very bitter, especially if they have been with
the same company for 20 years,' says Mrs Donna Fidler of DBM.
How do executives behave once the initial shock has passed? A small minority
lose their identity when they lose their jobs and teeter close to, or fall
into, the 'black hole'. But most, according to Mr D'Auvergne, feel a mixture
of elation and anxiety.
Mrs Jennifer Bowden of HS Solutions says the key is to stay calm and find
the right 'mind-set': be neither complacent nor over-anxious; remember you
remain the same person with the same skills the day after you lose your job.
According to Mr Roger Shipton of KPMG Career Consultancy Services, most
executives are not particularly entrepreneurial or dynamic, especially if
they have been in one company most of their lives; even people in marketing
may have forgotten the basics of how to sell themselves.
For that reason, the experts encourage unemployed executives to take
advantage of any help available in applying for a job. The Department of
Employment's 105 executive job clubs are criticised by some job consultants
but a third of the 12,000 executives who passed through their doors last
year found jobs. Executive self-help groups, such as that in St Albans,
provide better support for the depressed and usually try to include
executives' spouses. Training and Enterprise Councils are also taking a
closer look at executives and some have set up programmes which employ
qualified executives as consultants to small businesses.
Discipline and careful planning are essential, but the experts warn against
the scatter-gun method of firing off 500 curriculum vitae. Mr John Baker, a
former salesman unceremoniously let go by Shell Gas last May, also warns to
expect virtually no replies from written inquiries or even job applications.
Networking: Ian Bell of Sanders &amp; Sidney says that responding to
advertisements, being placed by a headhunter and cold-calling together
account for only about 25 per cent of jobs for unemployed executives. The
other 75 per cent of jobs come from networking - which means using past
business contacts. Mr Bell says you can expand your network by asking for
two more names every time you leave a meeting with a contact.
Self-employment/consultancy: Mr Chris Humphries, chief executive of
Hertfordshire TEC, says that self-employment is the first thought for most
executives, but only a few see it through. Consultancy is a more realistic
option, as many companies will offer to hire back redundant executives as
consultants. It helps to have a specialist executive skill like Mr John
Pickering, a 55-year-old former BT executive who is an expert in wayleaves -
obtaining permission to lay cables - and is in demand from telecoms
companies.
Mr Tim Hugh-Garland who runs First Partnership, specialising in setting
people up as consultants, says about a quarter of his clients succeed. But
consultancy is increasingly competitive and requires a subtle mixture of
personal and technical skills. Mr Jim Potts, 51, who lost his job when
chemical company Laport was sold to Solvay, tried consultancy but, like
others, found it too lonely. He is now chief executive of Greater Nottingham
TEC and setting up a self-help group for unemployed executives.
Flexibility: Many executive jobs will never return. Mr Shipton of KPMG and
others stress that executives must be ready to retrain for another industry
if their skills are too specific, or consider a 'portfolio' of part-time,
perhaps consultancy-related, posts.
But how ready should executives be to take cuts in pay and/or status? Few
will go as far as Mr James Guest, 39, a former Pounds 60,000-a-year City
stockbroker who now drives a London bus for Pounds 15,000 a year - exactly
the sum he received when he landed his first job as a metal broker in the
City in 1981. He bought a company dealing in property for restaurants and
hotels in 1987 but after two good years had to sell out in 1989.
'Driving a bus can be quite physically demanding but it is fun going through
the City and seeing my old mates,' says Mr Guest, an Australian. He plans to
get back into business as soon as possible, but adds that, for those who
need to work, what he is doing is better than nothing. A degree of downward
flexibility on pay can only help, though headhunters such as Mr David Juster
of Selector Europe warn that aiming too low could backfire, as employers do
not like taking on people they believe over-qualified.
One idea for executives with capital or particularly generous pay-offs is to
take a stake in a small business looking for an outside investor. But
something that is generally frowned upon by the consultants is trying to
turn a hobby into a business. Mr John Sutton, who lost his job when National
Power closed its laboratory at Leatherhead, tried to turn his interest in
carpentry into a small garden-furniture business. Holmwood Garden Seats did
not take off, however, and with six of his eight children from two marriages
still needing varying degrees of support he has successfully switched to
consultancy, winning a Pounds 25,000 contract. 'I've been lucky but many
people coming out of former nationalised industries have no idea where to
begin,' he says.
Others who can find it especially tough are people in their mid-to late-50s
and those coming out of the armed forces. Most unemployed executives have
valuable skills and in a few years, with the projected decline in the
population, will be badly needed by industry. 'The trick is,' says Mr Roger
Young of the British Institute of Management, 'to keep their skills from
wasting away before they are wanted again.'
CHECK-LIST FOR UNEMPLOYED EXECUTIVES
1.  Don't panic, discuss your situation openly with family and friends.
There is no stigma attached to executive unemployment, and your chances of
returning to the labour market in some form are considerably better than
less qualified people.
2.  Prepare a family budget with income and outgoings over the next 12
months.  It will often reassure, and at least clarify.
3.  Make initial contact with the department of employment, the department
of social security and the local Training and Enterprise Council to find out
what job-hunting support and financial benefits are available
4.  Draw-up your CV, or have it done professionally, dwelling on your key
skills and best attributes.
5.  Start networking.  Networking fills more than 70 per cent of all
executive posts.  Every time you leave a meeting ask for the name of two
people who might be able to help.
6.  Prepare thoroughly for all meetings and interviews.  Monitor and
follow-up all contacts.
7.  Do not rule out alternatives to ordinary salaried employment such as
consultancy, or, if you have the capital, taking an equity stake in a
growing company.
8.  Think about doing things which make you more employable ie learning a
foreign language or doing that MA.
9.  Whatever you do, be disciplined, accept that the search for a new career
will be a full-time one.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5640</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTABAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / No retreat for inflation buster
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID MARSH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
At the end of a normal day at the Bundesbank, Helmut Schlesinger generally
departs from his 12th-floor office well after the rest of the bank's
seven-strong directorate.
As the president's armour-plated Mercedes purrs through the bank's gates en
route to his modest home in the hills around Frankfurt, he leaves behind a
thick crop of news agency reports listing the impact of the Bundesbank's
tough and increasingly controversial monetary policies on the financial
markets.
It has become a cliche to say that, the more unpopular the effect of the
Bundesbank's stern interest rate action, the better Mr Schlesinger is doing
his DM600,000 (Pounds 215,000) a year job. The president, however, knows
that life is more complicated. The Bundesbank is statutorily obliged to
maintain a low German inflation rate, preferably between zero and 2 per
cent, compared with the underlying level of 4 per cent caused by the demand
pressures of German reunification.
But, in using its celebrated independence to fulfil that aim, Mr Schlesinger
knows that even Europe's dominant central bank faces political limits. As
the feeling grows among politicians - both in Germany and abroad - that the
Bundesbank may be growing too powerful, Mr Schlesinger's task is to remain
true to his anti-inflationary brief - without too obviously overstepping
those political constraints.
The angular Mr Schlesinger has been following this week's unrest on the
foreign exchanges from his holiday retreat in Greece. After 3 1/2 weeks in
the sun, he will be back in the office next week, ready to celebrate his
68th birthday on Friday. He knows, though, that the pressures of his job are
mounting.
The president has three particular problems. The central bank remains highly
sceptical about the European Community's efforts to achieve economic and
monetary union by the end of the decade. But it cannot risk taking any
action which appears to be a direct attempt to sabotage that goal.
The Bundesbank has been worried for some time about the lack of flexibility
of exchange rates in the European Monetary System (EMS), where the last
full-scale realignment took place in January 1987. The Bundesbank believes
that some currencies - above all the lira, and perhaps sterling - are
overvalued. Again, for political reasons, it cannot afford to be seen to be
touting the idea of realignment.
Most importantly, the Bundesbank believes that its anti-inflation policies
are being stymied by excessive German public sector budget deficits.
Central to the Bundesbank's predicament is its relationship with Bonn. In
several policy questions during the past two years over German unification,
the Bundesbank's advice was either ignored, or not sufficiently heeded, by
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's administration.
The Bundesbank's  3/4 point increase last month in its discount rate to 8
3/4 per cent was therefore not simply a bid to flex monetary muscles. It was
also an attempt to strengthen its own flagging policy-making credibility.
Mr Schlesinger did his best to keep the impact of last month's rise within
bounds by prevailing on the Bundesbank's policy-making council not to
increase the internationally more important Lombard rate, currently at 9 3/4
per cent. The belief on the foreign exchange markets that an increase in the
Lombard rate may simply be a matter of time, together with qualms about the
French referendum on the Maastricht treaty on September 20, have contributed
to this week's fresh rise in the D-Mark.
As the German economy enters a period of stagnation, complaints about the
Bundesbank's policies are also rising at home. Mr Theo Waigel, the finance
minister, has been voicing his belief that the Bundesbank's concern about
overshooting this year's money supply target is overdone.
The central bank up to now has managed to brush aside a call by Mr Franz
Steinkuhler, the head of the IG Metall metalworkers' union, for the
Bundesbank to be made more 'democratically accountable'. But if the economic
slowdown continues - and especially if export-dependent industry is hit
harder by the fall in the dollar - Mr Steinkuhler's arguments may strike a
wider chord.
In responding to criticism from home and abroad, Mr Schlesinger habitually
replies that there is no alternative to combating inflation in the country
which is Europe's monetary lynchpin.
He also says that countries, such as Britain, which have pegged their
currencies against the D-Mark within the EMS are free to take action to
change their exchange rate if they find the constraint too great. As he put
it cryptically last month: 'We are not in a (European) monetary union.' Mr
Schlesinger is too polite - and cautious - to spell out his feelings
directly. But his fundamental message to the UK government is it has two
choices: either to take all necessary action (including raising interest
rates) to defend sterling's parity, or to carry out a devaluation.
In the war of nerves over the EMS, there is perhaps a third option. Mr
Schlesinger's Achilles' heel is his fear of exposure to disruptive currency
inflows from abroad. He admitted earlier this month that if weak currencies
fell to their floors against the D-Mark within the system, 'a critical
situation' would arise. This is because the Bundesbank would be forced to
intervene in theoretically unlimited amounts to defend weaker currencies -
action which could add large amounts of liquidity to the banking system.
When obligatory large-scale intervention was last necessary - to boost the
French franc - in January 1987, Mr Schlesinger quickly prevailed upon Mr
Kohl to accept a D-Mark revaluation.
Depending on what happens to the lira and sterling, the German government
may yet be pushed into accepting the need for a D-Mark revaluation. However,
with the EC yesterday ruling out an EMS currency realignment, it is apparent
that governments and central banks will strain every sinew to make sure that
no action is taken before the French referendum on September 20.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5641</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAA9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Leading Article: Crashing the money gears
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE DESIGNERS of Europe's monetary engine insist that everything is working
as usual. It is not. The links to the rest of the world are changing
chaotically; the ride is uncomfortable; and ambitious plans for the future
are apparently being questioned by the French passengers. Change may be on
the way.
Exchange rates convert nominal values in one currency into their equivalents
in another. A fixed exchange rate is like a fixed gear. Economies that are
credibly linked via a fixed exchange rate must share a single rate of
monetary acceleration or deceleration. When an exchange rate floats, the
gear constantly changes. Economies linked by a floating exchange rate can
have independent monetary policy, as the US and Germany show today.
For 20 years exchange rates among the three largest market economies - the
US, Japan and Germany - have floated. At times the float has been almost
completely free. At times it has been managed. But there has been nothing
similar to the fixed rate regime established at Bretton Woods or, more
recently, by the European Monetary System.
Floating exchange rates have allowed a US obsessed with the need for
recovery, unconcerned about inflation and weighed down by debt to co-exist
with a Germany in the turmoil of unification and suffering from serious
conflicts between the government and the Bundesbank. A 3 per cent discount
rate in the US can co-exist with a 9 3/4 per cent Lombard rate in Germany.
Disappointment that the US economy is not growing fast enough can co-exist
with German disappointment that inflation is not falling quickly enough. But
something must adjust. The something has been the exchange rate, down to a
low of DM 1.40 this week.
Since the US and Germany will not agree to the same monetary policy,
currency adjustment is inevitable. For both sides, that adjustment has even
been desirable: expansionary for the US and disinflationary for the Germans.
But this does not mean that they have both shifted back to the benign
neglect of the Reagan years. In the last resort, intervention will be backed
up by willingness to modify monetary policy. When that becomes obvious,
intervention is likely to be successful.
Co-operation unlikely
Nevertheless, it is most unlikely that either the US or the Germans will be
willing to return to the close co-ordination seen between 1985 and 1987, at
least in the near future. The plight of what is fundamentally the world's
strongest economy, Japan, shows how right they are to be cautious.
In the second half of the 1980s Japan subordinated its monetary policy to
exchange rate stability more completely than either the US or Germany. The
severity of the subsequent domestic destabilisation is revealed by the rise
in the stock market to its peak of 38,916 in January 1990 and subsequent
fall to a low of 14,309 last week. The latest and the most significant
official response has been this week's emergency plan. Investors are
encouraged, with the index jumping back to 17,971 by yesterday's close.
The divergence between the US and Germany has put other European currencies
under severe pressure, notably the Italian lira and the pound sterling, the
former at its floor yesterday and the latter less than one pfennig above it.
Lack of credibility
European countries have fixed their monetary gears. True, the ERM bands
provide a small amount of flexibility. More important in creating policy
divergence has been the lack of credibility of the ERM linkage. But weak
credibility is not helpful. It means that monetary policy must be even
tighter than Germany's.
With its discount rate already at 13 1/4 per cent, the Italians know the
problem well. The Swedes, forced to raise interest rates by 3 percentage
points this week, have learned the same thing, even though they are merely
shadowing the D-Mark while still outside the ERM. The UK may also be forced
to raise interest rates above the German level.
A currency linked to the D-Mark must have the same monetary policy as the
Bundesbank. One way out is to break the link. But for Mr Lamont and his
European colleagues, this remains unthinkable. Another is for the G7 to
co-ordinate monetary policies more closely, but neither the US nor the
Germans are in a hugely co-operative mood. Yet another is for the markets to
change their minds, something markets are prone to do. Last but not least,
as weak currencies reach their limits, ERM rules could force the Bundesbank
to intervene too. But this would also undermine German monetary policy.
The question is whether the German government would back the Bundesbank in
its preference for a realignment or other European governments in their
desire for a laxer German monetary policy. Either way, there could be an
almighty row. With the French referendum looking more likely to be
unfavourable to European union, Europe's monetary machine is under stress,
perhaps to breaking point.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5642</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAA8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Inventors offer oven-ready nappies
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALISON SMITH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A NAPPY designed to be put in a microwave oven before use and new ways of
dimpling the surface of golf balls are two of the areas where the spirit of
invention is thriving, according to the annual report of the Patent Office,
published yesterday.
The report says that 1990 and last year saw an overall decline in the number
of trademarks applied for, which it attributes to the decline in economic
activity. In the 15 months from January last year to March this year there
were 44,216 applications - 8.5 per cent down on the corresponding period to
March 1991.
The report highlights trends in inventions that reflect some of the concerns
of British society, such as the demand for cleaner air and greater road
safety.
It says the growth of the leisure industry has been responsible not only for
the ever-increasing sophistication of keep-fit machines, such as exercise
bikes, but also for the 'considerable activity in devising board games' in
spite of the popularity of video games.
Inventors in search of the ultimate nappy are still aiming for 'reduced bulk
and protection against leakage', the report notes. The central feature of
the microwavable nappy is a compressed pad which can be bulked up inside the
microwave before being used, so increasing its absorbency.
Continuing strong interest in inventions relating to garment hangers would
appear to underline the UK's reputation as a nation of shopkeepers, the
report notes. There is particular emphasis on hangers fitted with security
devices to deter shoplifting.
Innovatory precautions against theft feature heavily in other areas too,
including defence against the rise in so-called 'joyriding', devices to
protect empty properties and the development of a container to prevent
bundles of newspapers being taken from shop doorways in the early mornings.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5643</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAA7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Rail failure to affect roads
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD TOMKINS, Transport Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ABOUT 27,000 extra truck movements a year will take place on Britain's roads
following the collapse late on Thursday night of Charterail, one of
Britain's biggest private-sector freight operators.
This figure, based on Department of Transport and industry estimates,
emerged yesterday as Cork Gully, the insolvency arm of accountants Coopers &amp;
Lybrand, moved to secure Charterail's assets pending a meeting of
shareholders early next week to put the company into liquidation.
Charterail's collapse is embarrassing to the government. Three successive
transport secretaries and Mr John Major, the prime minister, each visited
the company to support its aims.
The company had set out to reverse the decline in rail freight by
introducing a pioneering road-rail system which enabled truck-trailers to be
switched on to rail wagons.
It failed with debts estimated at between Pounds 1.5m and Pounds 2m because
it ran out of money before it could move into profit. It accused British
Rail of charging excessive rates for haulage - the supply of locomotives and
crew to haul Charterail's trains over BR's tracks.
Yesterday the government was attempting to distance itself from Charterail's
collapse. There were no ministerial comments and the Department of Transport
said it was 'very much a commercial matter between British Rail and
Charterail'.
Charterail has previously been held up as an example of how the private
sector could start operating trains on BR's tracks in advance of legislation
to privatise the railways.
Mr Richard Branson's Virgin Group said it still hoped to press ahead with
the introduction of experimental passenger services in October next year,
but the success of its plans rested on the outcome of commercial
negotiations with BR due to take place next month.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5644</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAA6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Russia warns it cannot repay debt
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOHN THORNHILL and DMITRY VOLKOV
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MOSCOW
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
RUSSIA can repay 'no more than Dollars 2bn' of its foreign debt this year,
Mr Yegor Gaidar, acting prime minister, said yesterday, indicating the
extent of the government's budgetary squeeze.
His comments came as a Russian delegation in Paris continued to press
representatives of the Group of Seven industrialised countries (G7) for a
rapid rescheduling of the estimated Dollars 70bn debt chalked up by the
former Soviet Union.
Yesterday's meeting followed discussions in Munich last month between Mr
Boris Yeltsin, president of Russia, and the G7 heads of state, when they
agreed to his request for a moratorium on the debt issue.
The deputy finance ministers met to work out a mechanism for the
rescheduling of the Dollars 70bn of debt before next month's Paris Club
meeting of the former Soviet Union's principal creditors.
Earlier in the week, Mr Alexander Shokhin, the vice-prime minister
responsible for foreign economic relations, said Russia's hard currency
revenues were severely limited and the government was running Dollars 4bn
behind on debt payments.
Russia would have to postpone payments by the end of the year in the absence
of a debt rescheduling, he warned. Russia's debt and interest payments have
continued to be deferred but the country was aiming to make repayments of
Dollars 10bn in 1992.
Russia is the only country in the Commonwealth of Independent States
attempting to service the former Soviet Union's debt.
More encouraging news on Russia's economy came yesterday from Mr Dmitry
Vasiliev, a leading reformer and deputy chairman of the committee on
managing state property. He predicted that production levels would begin to
pick up sharply from next year after experiencing a severe slump in 1992.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5645</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAA5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Scots Civil Service jobs set for tender
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOHN WILLMAN, Public Policy Editor
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   THE JOBS of 1,000 civil ser-vants at the Scottish Office
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
8 per cent of the total - are to be put out to tender in the next year as
part of the government's plans to improve efficiency in the Civil Service.
The proposals were announced yesterday by Mr Ian Lang, Scottish secretary.
Tendering is expected to be completed by September next year, with the new
contracts operating in 1994.
The plans indicate the breadth of activities which will be put out to tender
as part of the government's drive to expose government service to
competition from the private sector. In addition to catering and cleaning
work, which are already contracted out, the list includes recruitment,
training, audit and legal services, and the administration of pay, leave and
pensions.
Specialised functions to be put out to tender include telecommunications
maintenance, the collection and processing of statistical data for the
Scottish Office's environment department and its industry department's
materials-testing station.
Staff will be encouraged to bid for the contracts, with help from Capita
Management Consultancy. If an in-house team is successful, it will be
required to agree standards of service, how the work will be charged for,
how the service will be monitored and how the agreement will be enforced.
Where the contract goes to outside bidders or to a combined management and
staff team, staff who decide to work for the contractor will have to resign
from the Civil Service. Those who remain will either be redeployed or
offered the normal redundancy terms.
Early leaks suggesting that as many as 3,000 jobs would be put out to tender
led to a one-day strike in July by members of two Civil Service unions
representing Scottish Office staff.
Mr Lang yesterday attempted to assuage staff fears that all activities would
be contracted out. 'I can assure staff that they will have substantial help
and support available to them, and they will be able to compete for the work
with the private sector in fair and open competition.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5646</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAA4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Paymaster-General's Office to be agency
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOHN WILLMAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE Paymaster-General's Office, which provides the Treasury with various
financial services, is to become an executive agency on April 1. The change
will mean greater autonomy for the organisation, but it will also face tough
financial and service-quality targets.
The office employs the equivalent of 850 full-time staff to:
Administer and pay public-service pensions.
Provide public-sector banking services.
Supply the Treasury and the Central Statistical Office with information on
public expenditure.
The post of chief executive will retain the title of assistant
paymaster-general. The title of paymaster-general is a ministerial one, held
by Sir John Cope, Treasury minister.
The office was at one time responsible for handling civil servants' pay.
This is now the responsibility of individual departments and agencies, many
of which use the Treasury's Chessington computer centre in south London,
which is also being prepared to become an agency.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5647</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAA3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / US bank denies Indian claims
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By SHIRAZ SIDHVA
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BOMBAY
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
BANK of America, the US bank, yesterday denied that it had issued or
accepted fraudulent Bankers' Receipts, or that it had violated the Reserve
Bank of India's guidelines, as suggested in an official report released on
Tuesday.
In the face of detailed allegations about its Indian operations, the US bank
blamed 'the very real difficulties within the Indian financial system', and
its 'manual processing methods' for implicating the foreign bank in the
Bombay financial scandal.
The Janakiraman report, the third in a series inquiring into the Rs35bn
(Pounds 627m) securities scandal, alleges that the Bank of America's Indian
operations 'not only avoided the discipline' of the central bank's
guidelines on portfolio management schemes, but 'also violated the Reserve
Bank's directives on rates of interest on deposits', and entered into 'dummy
deals', which were 'squared off in their books'.
The bank has denied these charges, and points out that the report's
discussion of 'off the books' transactions 'is generally derived from Bank
of America's official books'.
The report alleges that the bank used customers' short-term funds for
lending in the call money market, contravening Reserve Bank guidelines. It
also claims the US bank had links with brokers involved in the scandal. The
bank has denied this, saying it has not extended credit lines to any
stockbroker in the Indian market.
The report alleges the bank allowed 'credits of substantial amounts' to Mr
Harshad Mehta, the key broker in the scandal.
Yesterday a Bombay court rejected a bail petition from Mr Mehta and remanded
him in custody for 12 days.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5648</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAA2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Warning on HK
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   HONG KONG
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
A senior Chinese official, Lu Ping, has said Beijing will dissolve Hong
Kong's legislature when the colony returns to Chinese rule unless Britain
sticks to the constitution planned for the territory after 1997, Reuter
reports from Hong Kong. Britain and Mr Chris Patten, the new Hong Kong
governor, have upset China by vowing to raise the issue of speeding the pace
of Hong Kong's democracy.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5649</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAA1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Kuwait poll date
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
The Kuwaiti cabinet has set October 5 as the date for the emirate's first
general elections in seven years, Reuter reports. The 60-seat parliament, a
consultative body without legislative powers, was dissolved in 1986.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5650</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAA0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Lebanon protest
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BEIRUT
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Lebanon's Christians yesterday started a second three-day strike in protest
against the country's elections, while results from the north showed a big
win for pro-Syrian and Moslem fundamentalists, Reuter reports from Beirut.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5651</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAAZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Somali attack on UN observers
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL LITTLEJOHNS and REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
TWO United Nations military observers were wounded yesterday, one seriously,
when an armed Somali gang attacked their unarmed vehicle in Mogadishu,
Reuter reports.
Witnesses said several jeeps converged on the UN vehicle and opened fire,
injuring an Egyptian colonel and another UN observer.
The attack coincided with the unanimous agreement by the UN Security
Council, last night, to deploy up to 3,500 UN troops in Somalia, writes
Michael Littlejohns from New York.
At present, there are only 50 UN military observers in Somalia, with a
further 500-strong Pakistani battalion due there shortly. The cost of the
expanded UN operation is estimated at Dollars 129.2m (Pounds 64.9m) for an
initial six months.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5652</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAAYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Pennies from heaven for the Met Office: Michael Cassell
predicts a period of increased expansion for the organisation
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL CASSELL
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
WITH the start of the August bank holiday the armchair weather experts are
studying the swallows and watching their warts to see what lies in store for
the last long weekend of summer.
Everyone fancies their chances when it comes to predicting the weather. But,
unlike the 2,500 men and women from the Meteorological Office, not
everyone's livelihood depends on getting it right.
While the Met Office may have failed to spot the odd hurricane in the past
140 years and will never to be allowed to forget it, it says new investment
is producing improved levels of forecasting accuracy. It claims that more
than 80 per cent of forecasts for the general public are now deemed to be
correct. Commercial customers report a 90 per cent-plus satisfaction rate.
Mr Bernard Herdan, Met Office director of commercial services, said: 'We are
not in the business of selling certainties. But our three-day forecasts are
now more accurate than a one-day forecast 15 years ago.'
Reputation is important for an organisation intent on converting its
expertise into hard cash by offering an expanding range of services to a
private sector increasingly using weather intelligence as a business tool.
Traditionally a servant of the state, the Met Office is now setting out to
exploit the commercial freedom handed to it when it became a government
executive agency in 1990.
Mr Herdan has a pivotal role in coaxing the organisation into the
marketplace and out from the shadow of the Ministry of Defence, which
remains both its boss and its largest customer. It still employs most of its
resources in serving the armed forces and the Civil Aviation Authority and
in providing weather information for dissemination via newspapers and
television.
But it is now also as likely to be selling its information to farmers,
oil-rig operators and builders. Supermarket chains pay for advance notice of
good weather so they can stock up with salads and barbecue coals.
Conversely, the prospect of prematurely arctic conditions will enable garage
chains to order the anti-freeze early.
Landfill site operators can be told when to expect exceptional methane
discharges activated by low atmospheric pressure, and the Channel tunnel
operators may decide to ask the Met Office to advise them if pressure
differences at each end ever threaten howling gales in the middle.
The list of less prosaic services for commercial customers, backed up by a
network of reporting stations and two powerful Cray computers - 'the Cray
twins' - at the organisation's base in Bracknell, Berkshire, is lengthening.
Private fliers and mariners can get weather information by fax and, as a
result of collaboration with British Aerospace, Met Office information will
soon be available via computer to private-sector customers worldwide.
On the domestic forecasting front, while regional forecasts now extend to
five days, there is fresh emphasis on the provision of very short-term
weather information.
Within a year or so private subscribers will be able to establish what is
going to happen in their town in the next couple of hours.
Speech-recognition technology might soon enable a computer to give a
detailed response to individual telephone inquiries.
Much of the effort to win new domestic customers will be focused on
developing, in co-operation with partners, services which underpin the Met
Office's ambition to become the primary environmental agency in the UK.
Joint ventures with a range of partners are planned so that its
meteorological expertise can be twinned with the technical knowledge
required to relay information.
The Met Office also wants to build a bigger presence in continental Europe
and is participating in proposals to create with other comparable
organisations a commercial operation offering meteorological services on a
European scale.
It sees significant income flowing from offering consultancy services to
other national weather organisations and from the sale of intellectual
property.
Mr Herdan said: 'At present we have about 8.5 per cent of the world
weather-information business and want to get to 10 per cent within the next
five years.'
The Met Office's most recent results suggest the process of
commercialisation is well under way. Revenue from business customers rose to
nearly Pounds 14m in the year to March, compared with Pounds 8m before
agency status. The figure, which is believed to be higher than that achieved
by any equivalent operation overseas, is planned to reach Pounds 20m in the
next five years.
Even so, the organisation still cost the taxpayer Pounds 71m last year, a
figure which the government wants to see steadily reducing. Nobody is yet
prepared to chance their arm by publicly forecasting when the Met Office
will be profitable.
Weather, Page 22
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5653</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAAWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / A Russian Ilyushin IL-76 burns outside Kabul
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
A Russian Ilyushin IL-76 military transport aircraft burns outside Kabul
yesterday, after rebels ignored a temporary ceasefire and fired a salvo of
rockets into the airport. The aircraft had been sent to evacuate Russian
diplomats and their families from the besieged capital. Four Russian
commandos who were aboard the aircraft were injured escaping from the blaze.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5654</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAAVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / US threatens Iraq with punitive action: Aircraft drop
leaflets
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROGER MATTHEWS
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   WASHINGTON
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
US military aircraft began dropping leaflets on Iraqi bases and military
installations yesterday, threatening punitive action if there was any
challenge to the air exclusion zone imposed on Thursday.
The US, Britain and France have instructed the Iraqi government not to fly
fixed-wing aircraft or helicopters south of the 32nd parallel.
The aim is to protect the Shia population of the south from further
persecution, although the Pentagon says Baghdad already has more than 60,000
troops together with tanks and artillery in the area.
The warning in the leaflets was aimed at Iraqi pilots and ground radar
controllers. The radar operators were told that they faced attack from the
air if they locked on to allied aircraft, another indication that the US is
prepared to engage targets on the ground.
The US has also moved additional Awacs radar and control aircraft to Saudi
Arabia to monitor southern Iraq.
Flights by Iraqi fighter aircraft have continued north of the 32nd parallel
but none has come close to the line set by the allies.
The Awacs would also play a critical role in tracking any allied pilots who
might be forced to eject over Iraqi territory.
The US has lost two aircraft over Kuwait this month during continuing
manoeuvres with local troops.
A further test of Iraq's determination to challenge UN resolutions may come
next week when weapons inspectors are scheduled to return to Baghdad. The UN
teams, looking for evidence of Iraqi weapons of mass destruction, have been
told by Iraq that they will not be permitted to enter government ministries.
The US has warned that this would be a serious breach of UN resolutions and
President Bush has made his determination to ensure full Iraqi compliance a
much-repeated part of his electoral platform.
But he denied reports in the New York Times that he was deliberately seeking
a confrontation with Saddam Hussein to improve his election chances.
The media in Baghdad and neighbouring Tehran both agreed yesterday with the
New York Times assessment. 'The no-fly zone seeks to offset the decline in
Bush's popularity on American streets,' claimed Tehran radio.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5655</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAAUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Rostock violence promptsstate to set up inquiry
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW FISHER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   ROSTOCK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE STATE government of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern yesterday set up a special
committee to look into the causes of the attacks on foreign asylum seekers
in Rostock.
However, at the same time the state parliament voted in support of the
interior minister, Mr Lothar Kupfer, who had been strongly criticised by the
Social Democrats and left wing opposition over his handling of the crisis.
It voted to keep Mr Kupfer in office after Mr Berndt Seite, the state prime
minister of the east German state, had refused opposition demands that he
should be sacked.
Although the Rostock suburb of Lichtenhagen, where the attacks occurred
among rows of grim modern apartment blocks, was quiet last night, police and
officials have braced themselves for fresh outbreaks of protest and possible
violence this weekend.
Around 2,000 police are ready to stave off any clashes between right wing
demonstrators and the up to 10,000 left wingers expected to descend on the
Rostock suburb, some way out of the town centre, to express revulsion at the
riots.
Organisers of the anti-right wing demonstration - under the slogan 'Stop the
Pogrom' - said they wanted no incidents. Those joining the march will
include trade unionists, members of the Berlin Social Democrats (SPD) and
other left wingers.
Apart from a few skinheads and youths lounging round the scene of this
week's violence, Lichtenhagen was quiet last night. The walls of the
apartment block section which had housed asylum seekers are blackened from
Molotov Cocktails, windows are broken and burnt grass patches show where
police cars were set on fire.
Last night, around 1,500 police waited in side-streets in case of violence.
Someone had spray-painted the words 'Against Racism' on the wall of the
building from where asylum seekers were evacuated a few days ago.
Showing that attacks on foreigners are not confined to east Germany, where
social and economic pressures are acute, two asylum hostels in the west
German state of Lower Saxony were stormed on Thursday night. In one, a
fire-bomb was thrown and put out by the inhabitants.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5656</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAATFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Hurricane may cost insurers over Dollars 8bn
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NIKKI TAIT
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
A LEADING US insurance company yesterday estimated that the industry could
face losses of around Dollars 8bn to Dollars 10bn as a result of Hurricane
Andrew, which left a five-day trail of destruction in Florida and Louisiana.
The estimate, made by Minnesota-based St Paul Companies - which acquired
Minet Holdings in the UK four years ago - came as criticism of the Bush
administration's handling of the crisis in the southern states intensified.
Some of those affected by the disaster claim that relief efforts have been
disorganised, and that much-needed supplies have been slow to arrive.
Television stations in the US have shown pictures of fights breaking out for
ice, for example, and long lines waiting for food shipments.
Yesterday, however, the Pentagon said that 4,500 troops - mainly from North
Carolina - were now in the stricken regions, and that food supplies were
capable of feeding around 72,000 people every 24 hours.
On the insurance front, estimates of the industry's losses have varied in
recent days, but a consensus seems to be forming around the Dollars 10bn
figure.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5657</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAASFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Economy in France slows further
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALICE RAWSTHORN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   PARIS
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE French economy slowed down in the second quarter of this year, mustering
growth of just 0.1 per cent, according to INSEE, the state statistics
institute, against 0.9 per cent in the first quarter.
INSEE has now revised its growth estimate for the full year from 2.5 per
cent to between 2.2 per cent and 2.3 per cent. Originally the institute had
been expecting growth of 0.4 per cent in the second quarter.
However the new INSEE forecast means that the French government is still on
course to reach its own targets for the year, given that its budget is based
on projected growth of 2.2 per cent.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5658</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAARFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Rome spells out will to defend lira
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HAIG SIMONIAN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   ROME
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE Italian government yesterday emphasised its determination to defend the
lira following a bruising day for the currency on the foreign exchanges.
Mr Piero Barucci, the treasury minister, said: 'The government will adopt
any measures that may become necessary towards maintaining the current
central rate of the lira within the European Monetary System.'
The government statement was seen as a last option before having to raise
interest rates to defend the currency, which earlier in the day hit its
floor against the D-Mark in the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) and brushed
against its minimum permitted level against the Belgian franc.
The lira has come under renewed pressure because of fears that a negative
vote in next month's French referendum on the Maastricht treaty will derail
plans for closer economic and monetary links between European countries'
currencies. The commitment to such union is seen as one of the main factors
obliging the Rome government to take firm action on reducing Italy's huge
budget deficit.
'Realignment now makes no sense, as it would just require another one after
a possible French no-vote. But interest rates will probably have to rise,
probably after next week's bond issues', said one economist.
Conflicting reports on the absence of support for the lira by the Bundesbank
triggered uncertainty over whether the German authorities had deliberately
decided to stay on the sidelines. A Bank of Italy spokesman stressed that
support buying was part of every's central bank's commitment under the
exchange rate mechanism (ERM).
The renewed weakness of the Italian currency, which regained some ground
against the D-Mark earlier this week, sparked off renewed rumours of a rise
in interest rates.
On Thursday, Italy's President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro paid an unexpected visit
to the central bank, where he discussed the lira's problems with its
governor, Mr Carlo Azeglio Ciampi. Mr Scalfaro's visit was widely
interpreted as a sign of support for the bank's current policies.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5659</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAAQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / French doubts on Maastricht grow
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALICE RAWSTHORN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   PARIS
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
OPPOSITION to the Maastricht treaty on European union is continuing to grow
in France despite the government's campaign efforts.
The latest opinion poll shows that 53 per cent of those polled plan to vote
against ratifying the treaty in next month's referendum.
The poll, compiled by CSA for Le Parisien newspaper, is the third this week
indicating a majority may vote No in the September 20 referendum.
Two previous polls showed majorities of 51 per cent and 52 per cent against
Maastricht. Three other polls published this week suggested small majorities
in favour of the treaty.
Support for Maastricht has been falling since President Francois Mitterrand
announced the referendum in June, fuelling fears throughout the EC that the
French will reject it. This depressed Europe's stock markets throughout the
week.
The leaders of one of the two main right-wing opposition parties, Mr Jacques
Chirac of the RPR, has since joined his rival, Mr Valery Giscard d'Estaing
of the UDF, in the pro-Maastricht lobby. He was previously reluctant to do
so because of concern about splits in his own party on Europe.
The RPR, which has a 75 per cent majority against Maastricht, yesterday
announced it would be dividing its allocation of broadcast airtime between
the Yes and No factions when the official pre-referendum campaign starts on
September 7.
The only consolation for the pro-Maastricht campaigners from yesterday's
poll was that a high proportion of the CSA sample - 40 per cent - had still
not decided which way to vote in the referendum, or whether to vote at all.
Bourse on its toes, page 19
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5660</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAAPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / EC Statement on foreign exchange markets
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Following consultations between EC finance ministers and central banks, the
chancellor of the exchequer, Rt Hon Norman Lamont MP, in his capacity as
president of the European Council of Economic and Finance Ministers, has
today asked the chairman of the Monetary Committee to issue the following
statement on behalf of EC finance ministers:
'The member states of the EC are committed to economic and monetary
stability in the EMS, which is an important element in European prosperity.
The governments of member states agree that a change in the present
structure of central rates would not be the appropriate response to the
current tensions in the EMS.
They welcome the activation of the Basle-Nyborg agreement on intramarginal
intervention and the respective co-operation among the European central
banks.
The authorities of Community member countries are actively pursuing economic
policy co-operation and stand ready to enforce their co-operation to ensure
an appropriate functioning of the EMS.'
Commenting on the statement Mr Lamont said: 'I welcome this clear and
unequivocal statement by EC finance ministers. It demonstrates the
willingness of our European partners to co-operate intensively to maintain
stability in the financial markets.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5661</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAAOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / World looks to shouting Panic: The Serbian leader must now
deliver
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JUDY DEMPSEY and LAURA SILBER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MR Milan Panic did a lot of shouting at the London conference on the former
Yugoslavia this week. He shouted at the participants, he shouted at the
press, and he shouted at Mr Slobodan Milosevic, the president of Serbia.
But those who know him say this stems from his frustration about what is
happening to Serbia, his place of birth.
As prime minister of the unrecognised Yugoslavia, which consists of Serbia
and Montenegro, Mr Panic, a millionaire who emigrated to the US three
decades ago, is desperate to bring Serbia out of its isolation. The only
obstacle is Mr Milosevic.
When he was appointed by Mr Milosevic last July, it was rumoured that the
Serbian president would use Mr Panic.
'Milosevic thought Panic would get Serbia off the hook, lift the United
Nations sanctions without doing anything substantial, and at the same time
keep Milosevic in power,' said a Serbian journalist. 'He was mistaken', he
added.
Since July, Mr Panic has chiselled away at the constitutional powers of the
Serbian president through moving them out of Mr Milosevic's influence and
enhancing the Yugoslav federal institutions. For instance, Mr Panic is now
defence minister of the Yugoslav federal forces. Last week, he replaced Mr
Mihalj Kertes, the federal deputy interior minister responsible for the
ethnic cleansing of Croats in the Serb-controlled northern province of
Vojvodina.
At the London conference, Mr Panic matched theatre with substance. When Mr
Milosevic attempted to speak, Mr Panic interrupted saying he was more
entitled to represent the Yugoslav state.
As Mr Milosevic growled throughout the conference, Mr Panic promised UN and
EC officials that he would comply with all the documents agreed at the
conference.
More than that, he said that if Mr Milosevic did not implement the
conference agreements, he would sack him: 'I expect Mr Milosevic to comply -
or else]'
The question is whether Mr Panic can deliver both at home and abroad. He has
to convince Serbs that his policies will lead to the lifting of sanctions.
To achieve this, he will need the support of the Serbian media, which is
under the control of Mr Milosevic. He will also need public opinion behind
him. But people are resentful of the international community placing all the
blame on Serbia, and none on Croatia.
The media is crucial. Mr Panic will have to use it to persuade Serbs it is
in their interests to accept the return of autonomy to the ethnic Albanians,
and dilute the prejudice and hatred fuelled by nationalism.
Earlier in the week, Mr Panic met Mr Ibrahim Rugova, president of Kosovo,
and reassured him, that, unlike Mr Milosevic, he would accept the mediation
of the London conference to negotiate the future status of ethnic Albanians.
If the UN and EC are placing some of their hopes for stability in the Balkan
peninsula in Mr Panic, in return, Mr Panic wants support from them. He wants
the Serbs, particularly in Croatia, to be granted ethnic rights and
autonomy. But what he eventually wants is the recognition of a Yugoslav
state, free of sanctions and back in the international fold.
Yesterday, a British official said no one republic could be the legal
successor to the former Yugoslavia. 'It will have to be negotiated by all
the former republics,' he said. Besides, he added, 'Panic has to deliver the
goods.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5662</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAANFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / The Japanese Economic Package: Long-term effectiveness of
government action remains to be seen
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By EMIKO TERAZONO
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
WHILE official announcements, press leaks and rumours about the government's
economic measures during the past two weeks have changed Tokyo stock-market
sentiment radically, the long-term effectiveness of the government's direct
measures to shore up share prices remains to be seen.
The Tokyo Stock Exchange and the Japan Securities Dealers' Association
welcomed the measures, but some analysts were sceptical on whether pumping
new money into stock investments would succeed.
The short-term measures aim to increase demand while suppressing extra
supply. On the demand side, the amount of public funds, such as postal
savings and postal insurance funds, that can be invested in the stock market
will be raised, with abolition of investment ceilings.
An additional Y1,120bn will be provided under the government's Fiscal
Investment and Loan Programme, thus increasing the amount of public funds
that could flow into the stock market to an estimated Y2,820bn this fiscal
year.
However, until now, fund management for Post Office savings and postal
insurance has been among the most conservative in Japan. The funds are
largely made up of household savings, and managed in such a way as to avoid
losses at all costs. Thus, although a potentially large buyer of stocks is
being created, it is questionable how much investment will actually be
forthcoming.
The government also aims to raise demand by allowing loan trusts, savings
vehicles offered by trust banks, to invest in the stock market. The
government will also allow trust banks to offer new money trusts, a product
which will offer dividend payments directly reflecting investment
performance. The investment trust industry has been strongly lobbying
against such products, which will be in direct competition with investment
trust funds.
However, trust banks may not be so eager to turn to the stock market to
invest their funds from loan trusts. 'Trust banks already face heavy losses
on securities holdings and may not want to increase their exposure to the
stock market,' said Mr Jason James, strategist at brokers James Capel in
Tokyo.
On the supply side, a temporary halt has already been laid down by the
government on financial institutions realising gains on shareholdings. The
government also postponed its sale of Nippon Telegraph and Telephone, JR
East, a railway operation of the former state-owned Japan National Railway,
and Japan Tobacco.
For share prices, the size of the economic package has positive
implications. However, given that the Nikkei index of leading 225 shares has
risen over 25 per cent in the past eight days, and that the market is
trading over 46 times its earnings, it may be unrealistic to anticipate a
further surge in share prices.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5663</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAAMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / The Japanese Economic Package: Tokyo rises at last to the
crisis of confidence
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By STEVEN BUTLER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE Japanese government has in the last 10 days rediscovered the lost art of
charming the stock market.
Starting with Finance Minister Tsutomu Hata's measures to support the
banking system announced late on August 18, a steady flow of official and
leaked reports about measures to help the economy has risen in crescendo day
after day to the delight of investors.
This week the reported size of the government's package of emergency fiscal
measures to be enacted in October has miraculously leapt from a base point
of Y6,000bn (Pounds 24.2bn) by Y1,000bn a day to an official figure
announced yesterday of Y10,700bn. That is the largest economic emergency
package in Japanese history, even as a percentage of gross national product
 -2.3 per cent.
The Nikkei stock market average has put on 25.6 per cent in just eight days
of trading to close yesterday at 17,970.79 points. Just as important,
trading volume, at 850m yesterday, has swollen to a point that securities
houses can contemplate making a profit again.
After months of dithering, and trying to sweet-talk sceptical investors that
the Japanese economy was suffering from nothing more than a lack of
confidence, the government finally accepted that Japanese financial markets,
and the economy, were slipping into the danger zone.
Capital investment and consumer spending have been plunging. Confidence in
the banking system, burdened by perhaps Y30,000bn of current non-performing
loans, was eroding quickly with each lurch downward of the stock market,
which eroded the capital base of the banks.
Dangers of a financial crisis were becoming more apparent by the day.
Yesterday the government acted, and the reaction in the markets shows
enormous confidence that it is finally doing something right. Is it?
The government's package can be divided into three areas: fiscal measures,
direct measures to help the financial system, and monetary policy.
Fiscal measures: The Y10,700bn price tag attached to the package is
eye-catching but misleading. It includes Y1,550bn to add property to the
government's land bank for public works, a component which contributes
nothing directly to the gross national product; the government hopes it will
inject sorely-needed liquidity into the property market. Likewise, the
economic impact on economic growth of Y2,000bn of increased lending for
small businesses, which may or may not be taken up, is difficult to gauge.
Direct fiscal spending measures will include Y3,900bn in central government
public works spending, Y1,800bn in local government public works. Mr Toshio
Koyano, general manager at DKB Research Institute, calculates that all the
measures could reliably add Y5,200bn to spending in the fiscal year. Adding
in the multiplier effect, he estimates a boost to GNP of 0.6 per cent this
year. Other economists put the figure slightly higher.
To fund this, the government will issue bonds - it has yet to decide on what
scale - which will take money from elsewhere in the economy, possibly
pushing up interest rates.
'It should add about 1 per cent to GNP (this fiscal year) if you believe in
Keynes, and downward from there if you don't,' says Mr Geoffrey Barker,
economist at Baring Securities.
Most private economists believe the package will not have any significant
impact beyond building confidence until the first quarter of the next
calendar year, and that economic growth this fiscal year will fall shy of 2
per cent - far short of the government's original target of 3.5 per cent.
DKB is estimating 2.9 per cent.
'The package is six to nine months too late,' says Mr Russell Jones, analyst
at UBS Phillips &amp; Drew. It was, none the less, a case of better late than
never.
Mr Robert Feldman, economist at Salomon Brothers Asia says: 'I think it will
work because they are talking about spending a large amount of money in a
short period of time.'
The point of the package is to kick-start the economy, to halt the
spiralling deterioration in demand caused by the build up of inventories and
the steady decline of capital spending. The labour market has been
softening, personal income growth is weak and consumer spending is down.
The package may be slow to be felt, and the stock market, in particular,
will be in for many more shocks such as yesterday's announcement (after the
market closed) by Nissan Motors that it would incur a pre-tax loss in the
current fiscal year, and pass its interim dividend.
Mr Koyama says: 'The package will be more than enough to push the Japanese
economy back to the normal track (of growth).'
None the less, as Mr Jones says: 'The economy is still going to grow below
its potential rate for the next two years.'
Financial system support: Hanging inside Tokyo subway cars this week was was
an advertisement for the Shukan Bunshun magazine, highlighting an article
entitled: 'Why does the Finance Ministry only help the banks?' The subtitle:
'Savers face losses.'
Bailing out the banks for imprudent lending is a politically charged issue,
and yesterday's package said only that measures would be worked out in the
coming months. The government cannot be seen to be letting banks off the
hook, and use of government money for investment or cheap finance is
controversial. But confidence is growing that something will be organised to
help banks get bad loans off their books, enabling them to support the
expected recovery in the economy.
Mr Tsuneo Wakai, chairman of Japan's banking federation and president of
Mitsubishi Bank, said this week that the banks themselves were working on a
plan to set up a corporation to purchase land currently being held as
collateral for bad loans. The banks should do this with their own capital,
and not rely on the government, he said.
While this is the politically correct attitude, it is also unrealistic,
since there is little point in banks simply shifting bad assets to a company
which they own. It only works if the government provides subsidised loans or
tax breaks. With banks taking the initiative and shouldering real losses,
however, preconditions could be set for the government to provide help.
Mr Feldman says: 'The rescue has to be organised in such a way that keeps
everyone's feet to the fire. It is a nice compromise between moral hazard,
and the fact that the financial system cannot be allowed to fail.'
There has been talk of subsidised loans from the central bank in the order
of Y10,000bn to Y15,000bn yen. However it is done, the willpower to act
looks in place, with the Finance Ministry evidently willing to contemplate
steep sacrifices in tax revenues.
Monetary Policy: To cut or not to cut is the question. Mr Kozo Watanabe,
minister of international trade and industry and guardian of the
manufacturing sector, recently dismissed the suggestion that interest rates
be cut. With the official discount rate cut in late July to 3.25 per cent, a
further reduction threatens to provoke a backlash from pensioners who have
watched their income decline.
Mr Feldman argues that interest rates are not in themselves too high to
support a recovery. Lower interest rates would help to boost bank profits
and improve liquidity in the banking system, but there are direct ways to
help the banks without a general interest rate cut. Mr Koyano also argues
that the size of the fiscal package will provide enough of a stimulus so
that the central bank can sit and watch.
However, Mr Barker argues that the fiscal package will not work unless the
central bank accommodates the spending by encouraging greater growth in the
money supply, currently at a historic low, by lowering interest rates again.
This is needed to reverse the sag in consumer spending.
'It was a monetary inflation that caused the bubble economy,' says Mr
Barker.
'It was a monetary squeeze that got us into this (recession). And it will be
a monetary relaxation that gets us out again.'
JAPAN ECONOMIC PACKAGE
MAIN POINTS
Increase in public works projects
Buying land for future public works
Encouraging housing investment
Encouraging corporate capital investment
Increasing lending to small and medium size companies
Avoiding a rise in unemployment by smoothing Labour imbalances
Enhancing services and information for the consumer
Promoting imports
Stabalising the financial system by supporting banks
Activating the stock market by allowing some Y 1,000bn of new public money
to be invested in the system - additional to the Y 10,700bn
Management of a flexible monetary policy
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5664</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAALFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / The Japanese Economic Package: The economic measures in
detail
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By EMIKO TERAZONO
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE Japanese government's economic package, announced yesterday, comprises
the following measures:
Expansion of public works spending totalling Y8,600bn. In order to stimulate
demand, the government will provide an additional Y3,400bn to general public
works, Y500bn for disaster relief, Y550bn for spending on cultural,
educational research facilities, Y550bn for advance land acquisitions by
public institutions, Y1,800bn for regional public works, Y1,000bn for local
governments' advance purchases of land for public works projects, and an
Y800bn increase in public housing loans.
Advance acquisition of land for future public works. Although in previous
economic support measures, land acquisitions were kept at minimum levels,
the current stagnation of the property market has prompted the government to
try to activate land transactions through purchases by public funds.
Of the Y8,600bn, the amount allotted to advance land purchases totals
Y1,550bn. This will include Y1,000bn for purchases by regional public
institutions, Y150bn for public corporation purchases, Y250bn for special
accounts spending and Y150bn for the treasury account.
Increasing housing investments. The sharp decline in housing purchases by
individuals has contributed to the slump in the property market. The Y800bn
increase in public housing loans, included above in the Y8,600bn, is aimed
at enhancing housing and land purchases. Housing eligible for housing loans
by the Housing Loan Corporation will be increased by 10,000 units. The plan
includes easing of terms of lending for new and used houses and parking
lots.
Encouraging corporate capital spending. The government will aim to encourage
capital spending by increasing the Japan Development Bank's lending quota
for labour saving investment by Y900bn. Although not included in the
Y8,600bn, the government hopes that additional spill-over effects of tax
breaks for the promotion of equipment investment will total Y1,000bn, and
frontloading of capital investments by Nippon Telegraph and Telephone and
other utilities such as electric power companies, will amount to Y700bn.
Revitalising small and middle sized corporations. For small and middle sized
enterprises, the government will expand lending provisions at
government-affiliated financial institutions by Y1,200bn.
The government will also promote computer investments and investments to
rationalise operations at the small-sized companies by offering tax
incentives and accelerated depreciation.
Unemployment measures. The government will avoid unemployment by smooth
collection and analysis of information in labour shifts. Job training,
transfers, and temporary suspensions will be also be implemented to sustain
employment.
Enhancing services and information for the consumer. The government will
respond to sluggish consumer demand by researching with private sector
companies to find new products, easing consumer credit, and activating
demand through promotional events.
Promotion of imports. The government will promote imports through the
development of foreign trade terminals, strengthening import promotion
capabilities of the Japan External Trade Organisation, expansion of import
financing measures, use of imported goods for government facilities, and
strengthening the Office of Trade Ombudsman.
Stabilising the financial system. The measures to support the country's
ailing banks, announced on August 18 by the ministry of finance, were
reconfirmed. In addition, the government will ask banks to compile specific
plans this year for establishing a joint entity which will buy land held as
collateral against problem loans.
The government reiterated that preferential tax treatment will be provided
to financial institutions which write off assets, and that problem assets at
the banks are to be disclosed at the end of this fiscal year. It also called
for the early restructuring of non-bank financial institutions and
housing-loan companies facing mounting problem debts.
To prevent banks from curbing corporate lending, the government will promote
additional measures which will raise the banks' capital, and cut assets.
Activating the stock market. The government aims to stimulate the stock
market by allowing additional public funds to flow into stock market. The
government will also limit the additional supply of new shares into the
market by suspending government offerings of former state owned companies.
Revitalisation of individual investor activity is also anticipated.
Limitations on stock investments of public funds such as postal savings and
postal insurance funds will be abolished. An additional Y1,120bn, will be
provided by the Fiscal Investment and Loan Programme, raising the potential
amount of public funds which could be invested in the stock market to
Y2,820bn. Loan trusts, savings vehicles offered by trust banks, will be
allowed to invest in the stock market.
Sales of shares of Nippon Telegraph and Telephone, the former state owned
telecommunications company, currently held by the government, will be
suspended for the two fiscal years to March 1994. Sales of two state owned
corporations, JR East, the railway operation, and Japan Tobacco, will also
be suspended for the current fiscal year to March 1993.
Individuals, who have failed to return to the stock market due to the sharp
decline in investor confidence, will be encouraged to invest in shares
again, through long-term investment products, lower minimum trading units of
shares, and accumulative stock investment schemes.
To activate the corporate bond market, the government will eliminate laws
limiting issuance of corporate bonds, and will abolish the system whereby
every corporate issue has to have a bank acting as the agent. Laws banning a
company's purchase of its own shares will also be reviewed.
In addition, brokers will be expected to promote stocks by abiding rules set
by the securities dealers' association, and financial institutions will be
requested to refrain from selling stocks to realise unrealised gains on
share holdings.
Authorities will review futures and options trading, which is seen as having
distorted the underlying stock market.
Implementation of a flexible monetary policy.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5665</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAAKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / The Japanese Economic Package: Dollars 5bn boost to imports
in next 18 months
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By GORDON CRAMB
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
IMPORT promotion measures in the Japanese government's economic package will
boost shipments of foreign goods to Japan by up to Dollars 5bn (Pounds
2.52bn) in the next year and a half, the Ministry of International Trade and
Industry (Miti) estimated last night.
Mr Yoshinobu Nisaka, director of Miti's import division, solemnly said the
country's swollen trade surplus meant that 'every day, day in and day out,
painful days continue' for his ministry. But yesterday's measures will do
little more than scratch the surface of a trade surplus set to exceed
Dollars 100bn this year.
The surplus has grown largely because of a fall-off in imports as Japanese
industry has cut equipment purchases and as consumer ardour for high-priced
European or US goods has cooled.
US trade officials in Tokyo said Washington had pressed for an import
component to the package, including an explicitly international procurement
policy by the Japanese government in supplying public sector needs.
This followed reports that the Bush administration had sent a diplomatic
note reminding Japan of its commitments under the bilateral Structural
Impediments Initiative, and seeking state purchases of US-made computers and
other products.
Some such provisions were included yesterday, after what was said to have
been a tussle between Miti and the Japanese Finance Ministry, which tried to
hold down the size of the package and was, anyway, more concerned about the
domestic economy.
Mr Nisaka denied their eventual inclusion was in response to US pressure,
while adding that reflation of the economy which the package aimed to
achieve would inevitably generate increased imports. 'However, we were aware
that this will take time, so we wanted to incorporate some direct measures,'
he said.
The government is allocating just Dollars 250m in additional funds to
procure foreign goods - mainly experimental, research and medical equipment.
The country's import infrastructure is to be improved through an unspecified
level of extra investment in ports and airports, and a more streamlined
bonding system for cargo.
Interest rates on state-backed trade credits and facilities investment loans
are to be eased, by a half percentage point in the case of the Japan
Development Bank.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5666</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAAJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / The Japanese Economic Package: Pump-priming welcomed on Wall
Street
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MARTIN DICKSON and PETER MARSH
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK, LONDON
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
WALL STREET economists yesterday welcomed the Japanese pump-priming package
as a strong stimulus to growth in the domestic economy which could have a
significant global knock-on effect.
'Its larger than the market expected, both in cosmetic and substantive
terms,' said Mr John Lipsky of securities house Salomon Brothers.
'I'm glad to see someone, somewhere in the world, realises that growth is
important,' said Mr Bob Brusca, an economist at Nikko Securities in New
York, who has persistently criticised the White House and US Federal Reserve
for not doing more to stimulate US economic growth.
Analysts said the move should help the world economy by boosting Japanese
demand for imports and lowering the country's huge balance of payments
current account surplus.
The yen immediately gained against the dollar. Some analysts said this
movement might peter out if scepticism grew about the package, but others
suggested the currency would continue to strengthen over the longer term.
'We expect the yen to reach new heights against the dollar and move higher
against European currencies,' said Mr Lipsky.
The Japanese move is not expected to have much immediate, direct effect on
US markets.
Analysts said it could lead some fund managers to switch the weighting of
portfolios more strongly into Japan. But they noted that US markets,
preoccupied by domestic considerations, did not suffer much fall-out during
the Tokyo stock market's long decline and were unlikely to register
significant gains from a Japanese bounce back.
Reaction in London was more muted. The measures were expected to have little
direct effect on the European economy, although it was suggested they might
boost investors' confidence.
Mr Gerald Holtham, chief economist at Lehman Brothers International, the
US-owned investment bank, said: 'The measures may diminish the impact of the
recession in Japan, but will do little to add to private investment in Japan
or pull in imports. The Japanese are basically filling in a hole, rather
than building a hill.'
Mr George Magnus, international bond economist at SG Warburg Securities, the
London investment house, said the impact of the package would not be as
great as it seemed. 'It looks like a big 'un, but in reality only about two
thirds of the package will count for new spending that will give the
Japanese economy a fiscal boost. The spillover effects to Europe will be
limited.'
Mr Brendan Brown, head of research at Mitsubishi Finance International, the
securities arm of the Japanese bank, said: 'The measures will bolster the
Japanese financial system, and that will be good news for Europe. It will
mean there is less of a risk of a large claw-back of investment by Japanese
groups from Europe, which is likely to help the markets.'
Mr Paul Chertkow, head of global currency research at UBS Phillips and Drew,
the Swiss bank, said the package would 'do very little' for Europe.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5667</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAAIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / World News in Brief: Billionaire Ludwig dies
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Daniel K Ludwig, who died at the age of 95 in New York on Thursday, was a
reclusive billionaire who made a fortune as one of the first builders of big
oil tankers.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5668</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAAHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Single-sex city day schools top the rankings
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW ADONIS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE SINGLE-SEX city day school is now the typical top-notch private school,
according to the 1992 FT-500 survey of the independent education sector,
writes Andrew Adonis. Many of the top schools are former direct-grant
schools which were effectively part of the state system until the mid-1970s.
That is the key conclusion to be drawn from this year's A-level results in
the independent sector in England and Wales. Only one of the top 50 - The
King's School, Canterbury - is co-educational throughout. Nearly
three-quarters of the top 100 are predominantly day schools, and nine-tenths
are single-sex, though some are boys' schools with girls in the sixth form.
Westminster School, London, heads the list. Many leading public schools
performed better this year than last, yet famous names still languish far
below. Rugby, Haileybury, Repton, Clifton and Lancing are all ranked below
100.
The results are based on a survey by the Independent Schools Information
Service.
Independent Schools - the FT 500, Weekend VIII-IX
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5669</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAAGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / World News In Brief: Sniper kills soldier
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
A British soldier on patrol in South Armagh was shot dead by a sniper last
night. The IRA later claimed responsibility.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5670</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAAFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Stock &amp; Currency Markets
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
 ---------------------------------------------------------
STOCK MARKET INDICES
 ---------------------------------------------------------
FT-SE 100: 2,312.6 (+1.0)
Yield 5.23
FT-SE Eurotrack 100 1,013.54 (-3.60)
FT-A All-Share 1,096.99 (-0.0%)
FT-A World Index 142.02 (+1.3%)
Nikkei  17,970.79 (+415.79)
New York
Dow Jones Ind Ave 3,267.61 (+12.97)
S&amp;P Composite 414.83 (+1.30)
 ---------------------------------------------------------
US CLOSING RATES
 ---------------------------------------------------------
Federal Funds: 3 1/4% (3 5/16%)
3-mo Treas Bills: Yld 3.219% (3.22%)
Long Bond 97 15/16 (98 1/16) Yield 7.417% (7.406%)
 ---------------------------------------------------------
LONDON MONEY
 ---------------------------------------------------------
3-mo Interbank 10 5/8% (10 5/8%)
Liffe long gilt future:  Sep 94 17/32 (Sep 94 5/8)
 ---------------------------------------------------------
NORTH SEA OIL (Argus)
 ---------------------------------------------------------
Brent 15-day (Oct) Dollars 19.675 (19.675)
 ---------------------------------------------------------
Gold
 ---------------------------------------------------------
New York Comex (Sep) Dollars 339.9 (339.2)
London Dollars 340.0 (339.4)
 ---------------------------------------------------------
STERLING
 ---------------------------------------------------------
New York:
Dollars 1.983 (1.9803)
London:
Dollars 1.982 (1.978)
DM 2.7875 (2.79)
FFr 9.5025 (9.51)
SFr 2.495 (2.5)
Y 244.25 (247.0)
Pounds Index 92.0 (92.1)
 ---------------------------------------------------------
DOLLAR
 ---------------------------------------------------------
New York:
DM 1.4095 (1.4085)
FFr 4.8 (4.8015)
SFr 1.26035 (1.261)
Y 123.05 (124.78)
London:
DM 1.407 (1.4105)
FFr 4.795 (4.808)
SFr 1.2595 (1.264)
Y 123.25 (124.85)
Dollars Index 58.6 (58.9)
Tokyo close Y 123.6
 ---------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5671</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAAEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / EC ministers rule out realignment of ERM: Italian lira
pushed through the floor against D-Mark
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER MARSH and JAMES BLITZ
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
EUROPEAN Community finance ministers last night ruled out a realignment of
the European Monetary System's exchange rate mechanism, after a tense day on
currency markets in which the EMS suffered its most severe strain in five
years.
The ministers' statement came after investors switched more funds into the
D-Mark, forcing the Italian lira through its ERM floor against the German
currency.
The stronger D-Mark also put more pressure on other weak EMS currencies such
as sterling and the French franc, and increased the likelihood of Italy, the
UK and France being forced to raise interest rates to defend the value of
their currencies.
The EC finance ministers said that 'a change in the present structure of
central rates would not be the appropriate response to the current tensions'
in the EMS's 10-currency exchange rate mechanism.
The statement was co-ordinated by Mr Norman Lamont, the UK chancellor, in
his capacity as current president of the European council of finance
ministers. He took soundings earlier yesterday from the other 11 EC
governments, and talked by telephone to Mr Michel Sapin and Mr Theo Waigel,
the finance ministers of France and Germany.
The remarks by the ministers were seen in the currency markets as an effort
to prevent further investor selling of the weak currencies in the EMS, in
favour of the D-Mark. Mr Lamont tried to amplify the statement's effects by
saying it 'demonstrates the willingness of our European partners to
co-operate intensively to maintain stability in the financial markets.
Membership of the ERM remains the cornerstone of Britain's anti-inflationary
strategy'.
Mr Sapin said the EMS 'will remain a fundamental point of stability in the
international monetary system'.
Last night the D-Mark closed in London at the top of the EMS grid for the
first time since late 1989. The last time the strong D-Mark caused such
acute pressures in the EMS was in 1987, shortly before the last broad
realignment of currencies.
Yesterday the lira slipped below its EMS floor of L765.4 to the D-Mark. That
triggered action under EMS rules by the central banks of Italy, Germany and
Belgium to buy lire for D-Marks to prevent further weakening.
Despite the intervention, the lira closed in London at L765.7 to the D-Mark,
just below the floor. This value was reached after the end of EMS trading at
4pm London time, after which EMS nations are not required to support the
system's currencies.
The pound also traded weakly, losing  1/2 pfennig against the D-Mark to
close in London at DM2.7875, about 1 pfennig above its DM2.778 floor,
although it later recovered all its lost ground in New York trading. The
French franc closed at FFr3.409 to the D-Mark, unchanged after coming under
pressure during the day. Against the dollar, the D-Mark gained less than
1/2 pfennig, closing in London at DM1.4070. In New York it closed at
DM1.4095.
The Dutch government increased money market rates by 0.1 percentage points
to strengthen the guilder against the D-Mark.
In the past two weeks, the D-Mark has risen strongly against other EMS
currencies and the dollar. That has happened partly because of high German
interest rates and also because many investors believe the move towards
economic and monetary union may collapse.
Page 3
Rome spells out will to defend lira
French economy slows Page 5
Currency traders face down central banks
Weekend, I
On a wing and a prayer Editorial Comment Page 6
Currencies Page 11
London stocks Page 11
World stocks Page 19
Lex Page 22
London Markets Weekend, II
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5672</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAADFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / CBI predicts no UK upturn until mid-1993
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By EMMA TUCKER, Economics Staff
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
OUTPUT in the UK will continue to fall for the rest of this year and there
will be no significant recovery until at least the middle of 1993, the
Confederation of British Industry predicted yesterday.
The CBI's latest pessimistic appraisal of the economic outlook coincided
with the announcement of further big job losses in two leading British
companies.
Jaguar, the luxury car maker owned by Ford, announced it was to cut 700
jobs, while Swan Hunter, the Tyneside shipbuilder, said a lack of new orders
was forcing it to make more than 1,400 workers redundant.
The sharp downwards revision to the CBI's growth forecast and the new
manufacturing job losses highlighted the weakness of the economy at a time
when the government may come under renewed pressure to raise interest rates
to protect the pound.
The CBI now expects gross domestic product to fall by 1 per cent this year
and to increase by 0.7 per cent in 1993. This compares with forecasts in May
of 0.9 per cent growth for 1992 and 2.9 per cent for 1993.
The CBI said a 1 percentage point increase in base rates this year would
mean reducing its forecast for GDP growth in 1993 by 0.2 percentage points.
Its present forecast assumes base rates will be cut by  1/2 point to 9.5 per
cent in the second quarter of 1993 as other European rates come down. The
CBI also said order books had weakened since May and that manufacturing
output was expected to fall over the next four months. The August industrial
trends survey, conducted at the beginning of the month, showed that only 9
per cent of manufacturers reported above-normal order books.
Mr Sudhir Junankar, an economist at the CBI, warned that the latest forecast
could turn out to be too optimistic if interest rates were raised to protect
sterling. The projections were also subject to the risks of a further
weakening of the housing market, which would dent consumer confidence, and
slow world growth which would harm exports.
The CBI expects the weakness of the economy to bring retail price inflation
down to just over 2 per cent by the end of next year. Unemployment is
forecast to touch 3m by the end of next year and a further 200,000 jobs are
expected to be lost in manufacturing. Swan Hunter's decision yesterday to
cut jobs will reduce its workforce by almost a half.
The Treasury said the deterioration in output expectations was 'hardly
surprising given the widespread gloom about the state of the economy in
recent weeks'.
Mr Gordon Brown, shadow chancellor, criticised the government for its
refusal to take action to help revive the economy.
Business expects fall in production; Job loss details, Page 5
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5673</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAACFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / Japan unveils rescue package for economy
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By STEVEN BUTLER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE JAPANESE government yesterday approved a Y10,700bn (Pounds 43bn)
emergency package aimed at reviving economic growth and rescuing the
nation's financial system from crisis.
The package is the largest in Japanese history, amounting to 2.3 per cent of
gross national product. Government economists estimated the measures would
add 2.4 per cent to economic growth in the 12 months from October.
The emergency measures were drawn up amid mounting concern that plunging
land and stock prices, along with weakening demand throughout the economy,
were jeopardising the stability of the financial system.
Stock market investors greeted the move enthusiastically yesterday, with the
Nikkei average rising 415.79 to 17,970.79. Prices have rebounded 25.6 per
cent in the last eight trading days, when news of the package began to leak
out.
It consists of Y8,600bn of public investment, including road and airport
construction, and a government plan to purchase land. The balance of the
total, or Y2,100bn, comprises loan provisions from the government to promote
private investment.
Economists said the package's direct contribution of new government spending
to gross national product would be about Y5,200bn. It could add 0.6 or 0.7
per cent to economic growth in the current fiscal year, although most
economists believe economic growth is likely to be closer to 2 per cent than
to the government's growth target of 3.5 per cent.
Full enactment of the measures will require a supplementary budget, expected
to be submitted to the Japanese Diet in October or November. Government
officials said they did not yet know how much in additional funds would have
to be raised by issuing government bonds.
The package offered little concrete help for Japan's troubled banking
sector, which has been hobbled by a huge burden of bad debt that analysts
believe may now total Y30,000bn. The government is nonetheless committed to
draw up measures by December to help banks remove bad debt from their books.
Billions of yen from government-managed investment portfolios are also being
made available for stock market investment, although it is unclear how much
of the funds will eventually be used to purchase shares.
The deep difficulties facing the economy were underscored yesterday when a
range of leading industrial and commercial companies revised down earnings
estimates for the current fiscal year, just after the market closed.
Tokyo rises at last to crisis of confidence Page 2
World stocks Page 19
Lex Page 22
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5674</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAABFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / NatWest to correct erroneous accounts
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT PESTON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
NATIONAL Westminster Bank last night said it had made a mistake in accounts
it had filed with the US Securities and Exchange Commission and would have
to reissue them.
The original accounts had shown that Britain's second biggest bank was
having far worse difficulties in collecting mortgage payments than any other
UK bank.
Brokers said yesterday that a fall of almost 10 per cent in the bank's share
price last week was partly the result of these apparent loan problems.
But last night, Mr Ray Cottle, NatWest's chief accountant, said the problem
loans in the accounts had been overstated by Pounds 300m, adding: 'It's an
absolute cock-up.'
He said there had been 'double-counting'. He plans to reissue the accounts,
showing that the deterioration in the mortgage book has been in fact far
less severe.
The accounts were filed with the SEC, regulator of the US securities
industry, on August 11. They indicated a dramatic rise in the number of
loans on which interest was overdue.
They showed that at June 30 the bank had Pounds 1.1bn of loans on its
balance sheet whose interest payments were more than 90 days overdue. This
compared with Pounds 513m at the end of last December.
A doubling in this category of problem loans suggested NatWest was trapped
in an appalling spiral of rising bad debts.
But the matter seemed to be even more serious, because the loans in trouble
appeared to be almost entirely mortgages. Up to now, mortgages have been the
one category of loan on which the banks have suffered relatively small
losses. In a note to the accounts, NatWest said the deterioration was
'substantially attributable to National Westminster Home Loans, reflecting
the impact of the recession on the UK economy'.
UK stockbroking analysts last week obtained copies of the accounts. After
spotting the apparent deterioration in the loan book, some of them became
alarmed that NatWest would continue to suffer from a far higher level of bad
debts than they had thought.
This pessimism was in part responsible for the fall in NatWest's share price
during the week of almost 10 per cent, from 323p to 294p. Mr Richard
Rushton, deputy managing director of NatWest Homeloans, yesterday said he
had been puzzled by the US accounts. There had been an increase of 25 per
cent in mortgages on which interest was more than 90 days overdue to around
Pounds 500m - which was worse than some of the bank's rivals - but far less
than suggested in the US accounts.
So yesterday afternoon the bank asked Mr Cottle to recalculate the numbers.
Last night he was remorseful. 'I apologise for putting out an erroneous
note.' He said that the figure for loans on which interest was overdue had
been overstated by approximately Pounds 300m. He believes the correct figure
for 30 June will turn out to be Pounds 792m.
When he is absolutely sure, he will send a correction to the SEC.
Swiss police start hunt for Lloyds Bank employee, Page 8
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5675</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTAAAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / World News In Brief: The Financial Times
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The Financial Times will not be published on Monday because of the bank
holiday.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5676</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBTACJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920829
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 AUG 92 / International Company News: DG Bank ahead
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   FRANKFURT
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
DEUTSCHE Genossen-schaftsbank, the central bank for Germany's co-operative,
said it would only break even in 1992 due to high costs of foreign branch
closures and staff cuts, and poor trading conditions in Germany, Reuter
reports from Frankfurt.
DG's partial operating profits jumped to DM69m in the first half, against
DM14m, which is half of total 1991 partial operating profits. Last year's
plunge followed outlays of DM800m for bond deals.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 10
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5677</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Jupiter aborts plans for CST reconstruction
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PHILIP COGGAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Jupiter Tyndall has withdrawn plans for the reconstruction of CST Emerging
Asia Trust.
The change of plan is the latest of several aborted proposals by Jupiter,
which has been battling to keep control of several trusts in its stable.
The plan would have attempted to eliminate the discount through the issue of
zero coupon convertible unsecured loan stock to replace the bulk of the
trust's ordinary shares.
No-one at Jupiter was available yesterday to explain why the proposals were
withdrawn.
Jupiter Tyndall has 29.9 per cent of CST Emerging Asia.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5678</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAF3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: Fairfax earnings beat forecast
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN BROWN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   SYDNEY
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
JOHN Fairfax Holdings, the Australian newspaper group controlled by Mr
Conrad Black, yesterday unveiled pre-tax profits for the year to June which
exceeded forecasts in its pre-flotation prospectus.
Profits before interest and tax increased by 9.8 per cent to ADollars 129.8m
(USDollars 93.3m), on turnover up 2.8 per cent to ADollars 729.1m. In March
the group said pre-tax profits would increase to ADollars 123m on turnover
of ADollars 723m.
Fairfax was also entitled to ADollars 650m in tax credits, up from ADollars
323m in the prospectus, which suggests the group is unlikely to pay income
tax for at least five years.
Sir Zelman Cowen, chairman, said the result was 'extremely good' in 'a very
difficult economic environment' caused by Australia's slow recovery from
recession.
Second-half earnings before tax and interest were 11 per cent higher at
ADollars 60.1m, on revenue of ADollars 357.4m, up 1.6 per cent on the
prospectus forecast. Operating costs fell 0.4 per cent to ADollars 285.8m.
Net profit was 29 per cent higher than expected at ADollars 15.5m, after net
interest expenses of ADollars 33.1m and income tax of ADollars 11.5m. No
dividend was declared.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5679</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAF2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: Lend Lease improves on good MLC
performance
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN BROWN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
LEND LEASE Corporation, the Australian property and financial services
group, yesterday announced a 6.5 per cent increase in net profit to ADollars
171m (USDollars 122.4m) for the year to June 30, largely reflecting a strong
performance by its MLC Life insurance subsidiary.
Mr Stuart Hornery, chairman, said MLC Life, Australia's third largest life
insurance company, paid a 70 per cent franked dividend of ADollars 103m,
against ADollars 82m last time.
Overall, retail financial services contributed ADollars 109m to the result,
equivalent to 55 per cent of group net profit, up from 45 per cent
previously.
Lend Lease said the contribution from property services fell to ADollars
62m, equivalent to 32 per cent of group profits, from ADollars 79m (43 per
cent) the previous year.
The group has made provisions of ADollars 40m against its commercial
property portfolio, compared with ADollars 72m the previous year. Total
provisions stand at ADollars 144m.
The result was struck after an abnormal loss of ADollars 18m, mostly
relating to property write-downs, against an abnormal gain of ADollars 12m
last time. But the impact on net profits was offset by a tax credit of
ADollars 6.65m relating to a tax audit for the four years to 1990.
Lend Lease declared a fully franked final dividend of 33 cents, against 32 a
year earlier, making a total of 73 cents against 71 cents. The shares closed
unchanged at ADollars 15.90.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5680</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAF1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: Pasminco loses ADollars 58.6m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN BROWN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
PASMINCO, the Australian lead and zinc group, blamed lower metals prices for
a net loss of ADollars 58.6m (USDollars 41.9m) for the year to the end of
June, against a loss of ADollars 47.6m the previous year.
Revenue fell from ADollars 1.5bn to ADollars 1.3bn, largely reflecting falls
of 11 per cent and 23 per cent in the average prices of zinc and lead on
world markets.
The loss was in line with the group's warning last month, which coincided
with the partial unwinding of an 80.6 per cent joint shareholding formerly
held by North Broken Hill Peko (North) and CRA, the Australian mining
groups.
Pasminco said the figure included an abnormal loss of ADollars 15.4m,
reflecting rationalisation costs and a tax charge of ADollars 12.5m
following a tax audit of 1985 to 1988 accounts. Bottom line loss rose to
ADollars 140.1m after including a net extraordinary loss of ADollars 81.5m
relating to the writedown of the Elura mine in New South Wales.
There is no dividend.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5681</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAF0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: General Cinema advances
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NIKKI TAIT
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
GENERAL Cinema, the retailing, publishing and theatre group which last year
acquired the Harcourt Brace Jovanovich publishing business, yesterday
reported third-quarter profits of Dollars 71.4m after tax, for the three
months to end-July.
This compared with Dollars 45.3m in the same period a year earlier, and
brings the total for the first nine months of the financial year to Dollars
516.2m, including an extraordinary credit of Dollars 419.6m. The first nine
months of 1990/91 saw a loss of Dollars 19.9m. General Cinema's revenues in
the third quarter were Dollars 992.1m, compared with Dollars 972.2m a year
ago.
The company acknowledged that because of the seasonal nature of educational
publishing the bulk of its operating earnings and revenues from publishing
comes in this quarter.
But the specialty retailing, insurance and theatre division also improved
third-quarter performance, while interest and administrative expenses were
reduced.
General Cinema shares rose Dollars 1 1/2 at Dollars 25 7/8 on the news.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5682</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: Toronto Dominion Bank turns in
16% decline
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT GIBBENS
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MONTREAL
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
TORONTO DOMINION Bank, Canada's fifth largest, reported a 16 per cent
decline in third-quarter profit due mainly to higher loan loss provisions,
Nine-month earnings were down 22 per cent.
The higher provisions were made on Canadian foreign corporate loans in view
of the persistent recession in leading markets, the bank said.
The fiscal 1992 loan loss estimate has been increased by CDollars 55m
(USDollars 46m) to CDollars 535m, resulting in a CDollars 148m charge to
income in the latest quarter against CDollars 120m in each of the previous
two quarters.
Final third-quarter profit was CDollars 101m, or 31 cents a share, against
CDollars 120m, or 37 cents a share, a year earlier, and in the first nine
months CDollars 295m, or 90 cents a share, against CDollars 377m, or
CDollars 1.14 a share, a year earlier.
Net non-performing loans were CDollars 1.7bn at July 31, up CDollars 215m
from October 31 1991, with international loans proportionately more affected
than domestic.
The latest quarter showed a return on equity of 8.3 per cent against 10.1
per cent a year earlier, and a return on assets of 0.58 per cent against
0.69 per cent. Non-interest expenses rose 9 per cent, partly due to spending
on premises. Total assets at July 31 were CDollars 72bn against CDollars
68bn a year earlier.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5683</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: America West finance deal
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   PHOENIX
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
AMERICA West Airlines said a US bankruptcy court granted interim approval to
expand its existing debtor-in-possession financing facility, Reuter reports
from Phoenix.
The carrier added that Ansett Worldwide Aviation agreed to lift the DIP
financing by Dollars 10m to Dollars 53m.
America West said Ansett's decision was aided by the recently announced
participation in the DIP facility of a consortium comprising Arizona
investors and Ireland's GPA Group.
A final ruling is scheduled for September 9.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5684</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: Volvo reports loss of SKr103m
for the opening six months
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT TAYLOR
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   STOCKHOLM
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
VOLVO of Sweden reported yesterday a SKr103m (Dollars 19.3m) loss after
financial items for the first half of the year. This compares with a
SKr1.16bn profit for the same period of 1991.
The company said that viewed as a whole it did not anticipate any
improvement in performance in 'the immediate future'.
Volvo's sales rose by 9 per cent in the first half to SKr41.38bn from
SKr37.94bn. Its operating loss was SKr835m compared with an operating
deficit of SKr559m for the same period of last year. In spite of this, the
cash flow was positive due a reduction in working capital.
The loss came after rationalisation measures and lower product development
costs. The deficit continued in the second quarter because of weak margins
and non-recurring costs involved in taking over the British import company's
marketing operations.
It added the loss was less than for the same period of 1991.
Car sales rose to SKr22.93bn for the first six months and Volvo sold 160,100
vehicles compared with 166,000 for the corresponding period last year.
However, Volvo lost sales and market shares in Britain and Germany while it
improved its sales in Spain by 20 per cent.
The company said its North American sales had stabilised after a 12 per cent
drop last year.
The truck division made a financial loss in the first half and it suffered a
10 per cent decline in sales over the same period to SKr7.52bn with a 15 per
cent decline in European sales of its heavy trucks over the six months.
By contrast, it improved its heavy truck sales in the US where the company's
market share improved to 13 per cent from 11 per cent. Volvo said its bus
operations developed well and achieved a profit.
Volvo said the truck group reported a loss for the first half of 1992
compared with a profit in the same period last year.
The company added that its cost-cutting programme was continuing and it had
brought a saving of SKr600m during the second quarter of the year.
So far, the measures have cut Volvo's costs by SKr4.1bn since 1990 and by
the end of the year it estimated the annual cost level would have been
reduced by about SKr5.2bn.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5685</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Reduced costs help Church to Pounds 0.24m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER PEARSE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
LOWER INTEREST charges and sharply reduced exceptional costs helped Church,
the shoe maker and retailer, lift profits in the first half of 1992.
The Northampton-based group, which has 162 shops worldwide, made Pounds
244,000 pre-tax, against Pounds 14,000 last time, on turnover down slightly
at Pounds 29.9m (Pounds 31m).
Operating profits declined to Pounds 820,000 (Pounds 902,000), because, said
Mr John Church, chairman and joint managing director, trading conditions
were still 'extremely challenging'.
This resulted in small losses at A Jones, the UK retailing company, in the
Canadian and French operations and in Hong Kong, where the company has a 25
per cent stake in a shoe retailer. The remaining group companies were
profitable, including the 17-shop US operation, previously in loss.
However, because of lower rates, interest charges shrank to Pounds 549,000
(Pounds 703,000). Exceptional items, relating to redundancy and other
rationalisation costs, fell to Pounds 27,000 (Pounds 185,000).
Mr Church said the group was 'cautious on retail expansion', though in March
it set up a Japanese joint venture with Otsuka Shoe, Church's distributor,
and Stock &amp; Zenock, a men's clothing manufacturer, to promote the Church
name on non-footwear products. Church has a majority stake. So far, two
licence agreements have been signed, the main one for menswear and the other
for socks.
Church has been exporting its shoes to Japan, its fourth largest market, for
almost 30 years, selling more than 10,000 pairs a year.
Earnings grew to 1.9p (0.4p) per share and the interim dividend is
maintained at 3p, again uncovered.
A Jones, which has 100 UK shops, reduced pre-tax losses to Pounds 26,000
(Pounds 117,000) on turnover of Pounds 13.7m (Pounds 13m). Interest payable
was Pounds 101,000 (Pounds 106,000). Exceptional costs fell to the group
level of Pounds 27,000 (Pounds 168,000). Losses per share were 0.3p (5.7p).
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5686</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Jupiter withdraws plans for CST
reconstruction
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PHILIP COGGAN, Personal Finance Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
JUPITER TYNDALL has withdrawn plans for the reconstruction of CST Emerging
Asia Trust.
The change of plan is the latest in a series of aborted proposals by
Jupiter, which has been battling to keep control of several trusts in its
stable.
The plan would have attempted to eliminate the discount through the issue of
zero coupon convertible unsecured loan stock to replace the bulk of the
trust's ordinary shares.
No-one at Jupiter was available yesterday to explain why the proposals were
withdrawn. Recently Jupiter withdrew reconstruction plans for Pacific
Horizon, another trust in its stable, which it once planned to merge with
CST Emerging Asia. The boards of Pacific Horizon and European Project
Investment Trust have now appointed new investment managers to replace
Jupiter.
Jupiter Tyndall has built up a 29.9 per cent stake in the shares of CST
Emerging Asia.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5687</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Struggle for control at Simpsons -
Dissident shareholders accuse board of hijacking meeting
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TIM BURT
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A BITTER struggle broke out yesterday for control of Simpsons of Cornhill,
owner of two of the City's most famous restaurants, following angry
exchanges at an extraordinary meeting of shareholders.
A group of dissident shareholders led by Mr Robert Klapp, former chairman of
Select Appointments, announced plans to oust the Nottingham-based management
team after the board decided a resolution calling for the appointment of two
new directors was ineligible.
Voting on a second resolution calling for the removal of Mr Alan
Crompton-Batt, an existing director who supports the rebel group, was
adjourned on a technicality.
Mr Klapp, who claims to command the support of 40 per cent of the
shareholders, said the meeting had been 'hijacked' and warned that a second
EGM would be called to remove the board.
The dispute centres on allegations that the management team led by Mr Roy
Ackerman, former deputy chairman of the Kennedy Brookes restaurant chain,
and Mr Paul Reece, former director of Midsummer Leisure, had embarked on an
over-ambitious strategy which threatened the future of the group's leading
assets - the Jamaica Inn and Simpsons.
Mr Ackerman, however, dismissed the dissidents' claims and said the EGM had
been properly conducted. An informal poll held at the meeting had shown more
than 80 per cent of the shareholders taking part opposed Mr Klapp's
resolution, he added.
The company's Pounds 2m flotation last year provided the funds to buy
Simpsons and the Jamaica Inn. It has since opened the Dell'Ugo bistro in
Soho and the Palio restaurant in west London.
Mr Reece, Simpsons managing director, said turnover had increased from
Pounds 500,000 in the first half of last year to Pounds 80,000 a week during
1992.
The rebel shareholders, meanwhile, claimed the company had spent excessively
on its new restaurants. Mr Klapp also claimed the group was looking for a
new acquisition to mask the full costs of refurbishing its West End sites
when its next set of accounts are published.
His allegations were rejected angrily by the Simpsons board. 'We are being
prudent,' said Mr Ackerman. 'We know the restaurant trade better than Klapp,
and we will buy new sites at the right price and the right time.'
Both groups are confident of victory at a second EGM.
Simpsons' shares, placed at 50p in last year's flotation, closed down 3p at
36p.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5688</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFTFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Hospital Corpn sale
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Hospital Corporation International Group has exchanged contracts to dispose
of its 42-bed West Peaks hospital in Macclesfield, Cheshire, to Macclesfield
Health in a deal worth Pounds 2.6m.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5689</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFSFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Interest costs hit Monument
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Higher interest payments and a provision for Australian taxes reduced net
interim profits from Pounds 3.65m to Pounds 1.89m at Monument Oil and Gas.
Sales of the independent UK oil and gas exploration company in the first
half of 1992 rose 28 per cent from Pounds 16.3m to Pounds 20.8m; and the
contribution from the Harriet oil field in Australia helped lift operating
profit by 38 per cent to Pounds 2.3m (Pounds 1.67m).
Interest paid was Pounds 198,000, against Pounds 1.97m received last time.
Overseas tax came to Pounds 209,000 (Pounds 3,000).
Under its strategy of disposing of oil and gas properties which are no
longer making a significant contribution, Monument is disposing of its
interest in the Buchan field to Brabant Petroleum, subject to government
approval. The consideration is Pounds 2.52m cash.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5690</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Pensions ombudsman says his scope is too limited
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE GOVERNMENT'S pensions ombudsman said yesterday he was able to resolve
only 47 of more than 2,100 complaints received by his office last year.
Nearly half were rejected for consideration because they were either out of
his jurisdiction or concerned events that happened too long ago.
Mr Michael Platt was delivering the first annual report since the office was
established early in 1991.
'I think it only right to record that my inability to act in these
circumstances has given rise to a sense of frustration among the members of
some schemes who are worried that their pension rights may be insecure,' he
said.
He added that this lack of power should be taken up by government advisers
currently reviewing pensions law.
Mr Platt said the recession had tempted some employers to use their pension
schemes in ways they should not. In some cases, this has resulted in
underfunding of the scheme or in self-investment in a parent company already
under pressure.
Some of the complaints received by his office but determined to be out of
his jurisdiction concerned the employers' use of pension scheme surpluses
for their own purposes. Mr Platt urged the government to consider clarifying
in law the question of the ownership of surpluses.
The average complaint took seven months to handle, a period which Mr Platt
said was too long to meet the requirements of the Citizen's Charter. Delays
had occurred partly through the difficulties involved in setting up the
ombudsman's office. Additional staff had been hired in recent months.
Of the 47 complaints which were resolved by his office, only 18 were upheld
in favour of the complainant and a further four decisions supported the
complainant in part. In most of the other cases, the complaint was not
upheld.
A spokesman for the National Association of Pension Funds, the trade
organisation for the industry, said the fact that fewer than half the
complaints proved justified was evidence that serious problems did not exist
in the pensions industry.
'The number of complaints upheld is quite reassuringly low,' he said, adding
that the current trust law which governs pension arrangements is probably
adequate.
Nearly half the complaints which were not resolved were sent to the
Occupational Pensions Advisory Service, a quasi-governmental body which
provides advice to pensioners, because the ombudsman's rules require
complainants to turn there for help first. Of the 922 cases referred to
Opas, determinations were achieved in only 47 cases.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5691</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Science GCSE results welcomed: British Association for the
Advancement of Science
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CLIVE COOKSON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE British Association gave an enthusiastic welcome to this week's results
of the GCSEs, the main examination for 16-year-olds in England and Wales.
The association said it was particularly pleased about the rapid increase in
entries to the broadly based science exams, which had risen from 145,000 in
1991 to 240,000 this year.
Professor Jeff Thompson, association chairman, said the switch from
individual science subjects - biology, chemistry and physics - to 'broad and
balanced' science was good news because 'it will provide a better
understanding of science as part of a general education for the majority of
students'.
He denied suggestions that the new GCSE science courses represented any
lowering of standards.
According to an association statement the science results reflected 'the
increasing familiarity of teachers with the demands of the new examination
and the hard work which has been going on over the last five years'.
Sir David Attenborough, association president, forecast that the upturn in
GCSE science results might lead to an improvement in science A-level results
in two or three years' time. Peat bogs are being destroyed by drainage and
harvesting, the meeting was told.
Conservationists said the bogs enable scientists to trace environmental and
archaeological changes over thousands of years because the acidic and
oxygen-free conditions preserve organic materials.
The meeting heard that harvesting particularly affected lowland raised bogs
 -those which grow above the mineral water table.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5692</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / New policies on energy urged
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NEIL BUCKLEY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
NEW policies to remove distortions in the energy market could cut emissions
of carbon dioxide in the UK by 40 per cent as well as putting money back
into the economy, according to a study published today by Friends of the
Earth, the environmental pressure group.
The report, by Dr Tim Jackson, an independent consultant on energy and
environment policy, says failure to take action will mean market distortions
will continue to misdirect Pounds 2bn a year on investment in uneconomic and
carbon-intensive technologies.
Friends of the Earth proposes measures including the linking of mortgage tax
relief to energy efficiency in the home; tighter energy efficiency standards
for buildings and appliances; new price regulations for electricity and gas
companies to encourage energy saving; a carbon tax of between 4 per cent and
7 per cent to provide money for grants, loans and subsidies of up to Pounds
400m a year to spend on energy efficiency; and a National Energy Bank to
distribute these grants.
The study says a series of regulatory and fiscal distortions as well as a
lack of information in the market for energy services means householders and
businesses do not see improving energy efficiency to be in their own
economic interests, in spite of its value to the economy.
Efficiency Without Tears. Friends of the Earth, 26-28 Underwood St, London
N1 7JQ. Pounds 10.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5693</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Acorn aims new range at parents
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALAN CANE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ACORN, the Cambridge-based personal computer manufacturer which dominates
the UK schools market, is attempting to break out of its educational niche
with a swathe of products aimed at the home and professionals.
Acorn says its computers are used by 90 per cent of schoolchildren. It now
hopes to persuade parents that they should use the same make of computer as
their children use at school. A television advertising campaign will suggest
the systems are equally well suited for work and play.
Acorn, in which Olivetti of Italy has a majority stake, has had some
difficult years because of the recession and changes in schools' purchasing
policies. It hopes customers will be attracted by the power of its ARM
microprocessor, a version of which is to be used by Apple Computers of the
US in a revolutionary pocket computer called Newton.
Acorn's product list includes a home computer for Pounds 499, a 'home
office' system for Pounds 999 plus VAT, and a Pounds 250 electronic notebook
which is the first product of Acorn's collaboration with Psion, the UK
portable computer manufacturer.
The notebook is essentially Psion's Series 3 pocket computer with software
modified to suit it to the computing needs of secondary-school children.
Last year Acorn recovered from a poor first half to record pre-tax profits
of Pounds 274,000, against Pounds 1.58m the year before. The company's
position in the school market seems secure but the consumer and professional
personal market is experiencing weak demand and intense price cutting.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5694</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Jobless rate 'has doubled' for young
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LISA WOOD and ALISON SMITH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
AN ESTIMATED one in six people aged between 16 and 24 are out of work, and
the age group's rate of unemployment has nearly doubled in the past two
years, according to research published yesterday.
The analysis by the Unemployment Unit, an independent research organisation
for the unemployed, and the charity Youthaid showed that 888,700 people aged
under 25 are looking for jobs or waiting for a place on a Youth Training
(YT) scheme. This represents 16.5 per cent of the workforce of that age, the
highest proportion since January 1987.
Two years ago the rate was 8.8 per cent. The Unemployment Unit said that
although this represented 511,400 people the rate had almost doubled because
now there were just over 500,000 fewer people aged under 25 in the
workforce.
The figures include what the organisations call the 'invisible unemployed',
an estimated 97,000 people aged 16 and 17 who are not on YT and do not have
jobs. Many do not receive benefits because these are dependent on them being
on training schemes.
A Labour party survey earlier this year suggested that up to 60,000 people
aged 16 and 17 were waiting for a YT place. The Department of Employment
disputed this although it provided no precise figures of its own.
Mr Donald Dewar, the shadow social security secretary, said the latest
figures showed that the government's guarantee of a training or education
place for young people was a sham. He called on ministers to reverse the
withdrawal of income support for this age group.
'It cannot be right to deprive a section of the community of all income when
the government's own 'guarantee' of a training place has simply not been
delivered,' he said.
Ministers have privately expressed embarrassment at the way in which the
training pledge for 16 and 17-year-olds has not worked as planned.
The Department of Employment is trying to spread best practice among
Training and Enterprise Councils, which deliver YT. The Department of Social
Security is looking at how information about the severe hardship allowance
can be made more readily understandable and available to those who might
qualify.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5695</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Peru pulls out of trade bloc
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By Our Foreign Staff
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
PERU has temporarily withdrawn from the Andean Pact, the five-nation trade
bloc which groups it with Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador and Venezuela, adding
further confusion to the patchwork of trading arrangements developing among
the Andean countries.
Peru will assume observer status in the pact until the end of 1993, when it
is scheduled to resume as a full member. The Peruvian government blamed its
current economic difficulties for its decision to withdraw.
The pact has been in difficulty since Venezuela broke off relations with
Peru in April over the suspension of the Peruvian constitution by President
Alberto Fujimori.
However, the other four members finalised an agreement reached last December
in Colombia on common import duties on a series of products. The duties at
four levels, from 5 to 20 per cent, will take effect on October 31. There
will be a transitional period until the end of 1993.
It also emerged that Colombia and the new government of Ecuador would try to
negotiate their own free trade pact to come into force on September 30.
The governments also agreed to allow member countries greater freedom to
negotiate their own free trade arrangements.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5696</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Court quashes Bond conviction
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN BROWN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   SYDNEY
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE long-running Alan Bond show was back on the road yesterday after the
Western Australian Court of Criminal Appeal quashed a fraud conviction
against the bankrupt Australian entrepreneur.
An emotional Mr Bond was collected by his son John from Wooroloo open
prison, near Perth, shortly after the verdict. Fighting back tears he said
he was 'very pleased' to be free after 90 days in jail.
Mr Bond, the former chairman of Bond Corporation, was jailed for 2 1/2 years
in May after being convicted of acting dishonestly during the ADollars 370m
(Pounds 133m) rescue of Mr Laurie Connell's Rothwells merchant bank, five
years ago. The charge alleged he persuaded a Perth businessman to contribute
to the rescue, while concealing the existence of a ADollars 16m success fee
to be paid by Rothwells to Bond Corporation.
His release follows fresh evidence given to the appeal court by Mr Maxwell
Healy, a former Perth building contractor. Mr Healy said Mr Connell had told
him he would lie at Mr Bond's trial to ensure a conviction which would
divert attention from his own forthcoming trial on Rothwells related
charges.
More than 20 people face criminal charges arising from the rescue, which is
also the focus of a Western Australian royal commission into allegedly
corrupt relationships between state politicians and local businessmen.
The appeal court dismissed five other grounds for appeal and Mr Bond was
remanded on ADollars 100,000 bail until October 5, when the Perth district
court will set a date for a new trial. He also faces three separate
regulatory investigations into the activities of Bond Corporation, the group
he founded 30 years ago.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5697</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Chemical arms step
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   GENEVA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
A treaty banning the use, possession and manufacture of chemical weapons has
been agreed by a committee of the 39-nation Conference on Disarmament,
passing one of its final hurdles on the way to adoption by the United
Nations, Reuter reports from Geneva.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5698</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Hizbollah victory
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BAALBEK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Hizbollah, the Shia Moslem fundamentalist group won a landslide victory in
parliamentary elections for the east Lebanon district of Baalbek, according
to results announced yesterday, Reuter reports from Baalbek. The pro-Iranian
Hizbollah (Party of God) will be joining the Lebanese assembly for the first
time.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5699</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Indian plane death
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW DELHI
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
The head of the aviation wing of India's paramilitary Border Security Force
was killed yesterday when the aircraft he was piloting burst into flames and
crashed shortly after taking off from Delhi airport, Reuter reports from New
Delhi.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5700</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Korean switch
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   SEOUL
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
A consortium led by South Korea's Sunkyong Group will give up the lucrative
contract awarded last week by the government to develop the country's second
mobile telephone network, newspapers said, Reuter reports from Seoul.
The English-language Korea Herald said the decision was taken after ruling
Democratic Liberal party leader Kim Young-sam held discussions over the
controversial awarding of the contract with President Roh Tae-woo. The son
of Sunkyong chairman Choi Jong-hyon is married to Mr Roh's daughter.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5701</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Red Cross injuries
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   GENEVA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Two employees of the International Committee of the Red Cross were injured,
one of them critically, when their vehicle came under fire in the West
African state of Liberia, Reuter reports from Geneva. Their vehicle was
returning from a survey near Tubmanburg when it came under fire 40km from
Monrovia.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5702</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Bruiser Owen steps into the ring
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALISON SMITH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE appointment of Lord Owen to replace the urbane Lord Carrington to head
the European Community's Yugoslavia peace effort brings a more
confrontational personality to the Yugoslav peace talks.
Once leader of the former British Social Democratic party, his political
reputation is as a bruiser and loner rather than a healer and mediator.
The latest in a series of international jobs for former politicians, Lord
Owen's appointment is surprising not only because of his political
characteristics, but because of his outspoken views on policy towards the
former Yugoslavia.
Less than a month ago, in an open letter to Mr John Major, the British
premier, he urged the United Nations to use the threat of force and
airstrikes to stop the movement of armed forces within the former Yugoslav
republic.
That idea was slapped down by Mr Major, but Lord Owen's urging of closer
co-operation between the UN and the European Community looks quite close to
what has been emerging from the peace conference.
This is not the first sign Mr Major has shown of the regard he has for the
charismatic but abrasive former Labour foreign secretary who left office in
1979 but stood down as an MP only at the last election.
Lord Owen received his life peerage in June with the prime minister's
backing, since he lacked a party to put his name forward. That support had
already been matched by Lord Owen's personal endorsement of the prime
minister at the election.
His career has fascinated Westminster, the British house of parliament,
since his glamorous appointment in 1977 as the youngest UK foreign secretary
since Sir Anthony Eden. He is now 54.
As foreign secretary, his time was marked by strenuous efforts rather than
dramatic successes, and his style was not to the taste of the foreign office
mandarins.
Rhodesia dominated his term of office: his relentless search for a solution
earned him the nickname 'the flying doctor', but it fell to Lord Carrington,
his Tory successor, to find the way through to Zimbabwean independence.
After leaving the Labour party, he remained a dominant political figure for
most of the 1980s as one of the 'gang of four' politicians setting up the
new centrist Social Democratic Party.
The SDP's failure to make a political breakthrough and Lord Owen's
subsequent preference for the political wilderness rather than merger with
the Liberal party were the milestones on his path from party politician to
potential diplomat.
Scarcely had he announced his intention to stand down as an MP when his name
was being canvassed for a range of posts in international or public service,
such as the governorship of Hong Kong.
Former British foreign secretaries are a select class.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5703</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / West German engineering orders fall
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BONN
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
NEW ORDERS for west German plant and engineering products slumped 16 per
cent in July, the VDMA industry association said.
Meanwhile, the inflation rate turned upwards again in August after a sharp
fall in July. The annual rate of consumer price increases rose to a
provisional 3.5 per cent, compared with 3.3 per cent in July, the federal
statistics bureau said. While still within the predicted range, and well
below March's high of 4.8 per cent, the figure will disappoint markets and
politicians alike.
The VDMA reckoned members' July export orders fell 17 per cent, and domestic
demand fell 14 per cent over the equivalent month last year. In the three
months to end-July, orders were down 11 per cent.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5704</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Survey of Malaysia (15): Guarding a dwindling asset - State
profile, The forests of Sarawak
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By VICTOR MALLET
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
IN SARAWAK, the richly forested area of north-western Borneo which forms the
largest state in Malaysia, it is hard to escape the sight of logs or the
hotly-contested debate on logging.
The Sarawak authorities regard foreign and local environmentalists, human
rights activists and journalists as interfering hypocrites who fail to
appreciate the importance of the forestry industry to the local economy, and
who romanticise the primitive lifestyles of the inhabitants of the jungle.
The forest dwellers themselves complain that their ancestral lands are being
ravaged to fill the pockets of a few timber tycoons, while the
environmentalists warn that continued over-logging will not only damage the
global environment but also finish the local timber industry in a matter of
years.
It would be too much to speak of a meeting of minds, but there are signs
that the chasm between the two sides is beginning to narrow. Although
Sarawak officials still say foreigners have no business worrying about the
state's forests, it is beginning to dawn on them that they are heavily
dependent on a dwindling resource.
With a certain amount of mental gymnastics, they maintain that Sarawak's
forests are being sustainably and selectively logged, at the same time as
promising to reduce logging to theoretically sustainable levels suggested by
groups such as the International Tropical Timber Organisation (Itto).
'There's a very definite perception everywhere that it's finite,' says a
business executive in the Sarawak capital Kuching. 'People are beginning to
realise this.'
Statistics on the logging industry are notoriously controversial. Suffice it
to say that Malaysia accounts for nearly half of world timber exports
(compared with Brazil's 2.4 per cent), that Sarawak accounts for most of
Malaysia's production, and that Sarawak's unprocessed log exports have risen
to 15.8m cubic metres in 1991 from 6.7m in 1980. The World Bank reckons the
trees are being cut at about four times the sustainable rate.
Anecdotal evidence is as telling as the statistics. Logging companies
seeking valuable trees are working in increasingly remote areas as supplies
closer to the coast become scarce.
Fifteen years ago, according to locals in the building trade, it was common
to use a soft, decorative wood known as Ramin for ornate ceilings; nowadays
it is almost unobtainable, and a substitute called Bindang - which is more
grainy and less consistent in its colouring - is used instead, but even this
is becoming harder to find.
One of the obstacles to bringing the logging industry under control is the
close relationship between the loggers and the state government of Mr Abdul
Taib bin Mahmud, the chief minister for the past decade.
Mr Taib's uncle and political rival, Mr Abdul Rahman Yakub, let it be known
during an election campaign in 1987 that his nephew's relatives and
political allies controlled 1.6m hectares of the state's timber concessions,
about a third of the total. Mr James Wong, the state environment minister,
is also one of the largest concessionaires and has come into conflict with
local inhabitants seeking to stop the depredations of his logging trucks.
There are signs, however, that the Sarawak government - noting the economic
problems faced by the greatly deforested neighbouring state of Sabah - is
seeking to enforce stricter controls on the logging industry and to
diversify the economy.
First, Sarawak is encouraging the establishment of downstream wood
industries and setting aside timber processing zones in an attempt to add
value to its exports to Japan and other tropical timber consumers. A fifth
of timber exports are now supposed to be processed in Sarawak, a proportion
which is expected to rise to 50 per cent in the next few years. Sarawak is
also trying to lure non-timber industries to Sarawak from peninsular
Malaysia.
Second, there is a drive to encourage tourism in the state, particularly
'adventure tourism' which takes advantage of Sarawak's rivers and jungles.
Third, the state is promoting the conversion of forest land to palm oil
plantations and other forms of agriculture, and the Sarawak Economic
Development Corporation (SEDC) is overseeing an aquaculture project
producing tiger prawns.
'We are pioneering a lot of industries, diversifying away from our
traditional resource base,' says Mr Jeffrey Wei, of the SEDC.
Sarawak is rich in oil and gas, but the revenue from these resources -
unlike the revenue from timber - goes mostly to the federal government. The
relationship between Sarawak and the Malaysian peninsula across the South
China Sea has long been delicate.
Sarawak, run by the Brooke family of White Rajahs until the arrival of the
Japanese in the second world war and then ceded to Britain, joined the new
Malaysian federation in 1963, whereas the neighbouring Sultanate of Brunei
chose to become independent rather than sacrifice control of its oil
revenues. Sarawak did, however, retain a measure of autonomy, and to this
day has its own immigration controls and requires west Malaysians to obtain
permits if they wish to work in the state.
The 1.6m inhabitants of Sarawak - drawn from more than two dozen ethnic
groups, including the local farmers and nomads collectively known as Dayaks
 -complain in general that the federal government does not give them
sufficient funds, and in particular that the planned tar road across east
Malaysia has yet to be completed.
Even if Sarawak's independent policies on its forests undermine the grand
environmental targets announced at international meetings by Dr Mahathir
Mohamad, the federal prime minister, the two governments appear to see eye
to eye on the desirability of ignoring foreign environmentalists and
'civilising' the few hundred nomadic Penans who continue to oppose the
intrusions of loggers in their ancestral lands.
The Penans - described by one western diplomat in Kuala Lumpur as 'a very
primitive tribe with tremendously good public relations' - have become an
international symbol of the fight against uncontrolled logging in Sarawak.
Sahabat Alam Malaysia (Friends of the Earth) has accused the Sarawak
government of flouting public promises made over the last five years to set
aside reserves for the Penan.
In its latest bulletin, the organisation quoted Mr Along Saga, a Penan chief
on the Adang River, as saying: 'Everywhere there are logging activities,
except the small area adjacent to the fisheries station near our settlement
where government ministers sometimes come by helicopter for fishing.' The
logs, it seems, will continue to leave Sarawak, but the arguments over
logging will not.
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
             VALUE OF SARAWAK EXPORTS (MDOLLARS M)
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 1980      1985      1990      1991
Crude petroleum               2,286.5   3,125.2   2,949.1   2,902.4
Petroleum products              521.2     521.2     671.4     711.9
Liquefied natural gas               -   2,299.7   2,634.8   3,448.3
Logs                            816.5   1,403.5   2,882.9   3,143.5
Sawn timber                     104.0      58.8     251.7     383.1
Major agricultural products*    232.2     257.9     271.2     252.9
Urea                                -       3.5     155.7     237.6
Others                          373.5     777.0   1,466.7   2,114.3
Total                         4,041.4   8,446.8  11,283.5    13,194
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
*includes white and black pepper, rubber, crude palm oil and cocoa
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: State Planning Unit
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page VIII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5705</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Survey of Malaysia (16): Politics impede progress / State
profile, Kieran Cooke visits the remote wonders of Sabah
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KIERAN COOKE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
'WELCOME TO the last frontier,' said an official of the state government in
Sabah.
The state, in the far north of the island of Borneo, certainly feels remote
from the rest of Malaysia. It takes two and a half hours to fly from Kuala
Lumpur to Kota Kinabalu, Sabah's capital - longer than the flight from Kuala
Lumpur to Bangkok, and not much shorter than the journey from the Malaysian
capital to Hong Kong.
Kota Kinabalu, on the South China Sea, has only 200,000 people and the pace
of life is considerably slower than on the Malaysian peninsula. The people
are different: there are more than 50 groupings of native peoples with
distinct languages and dialects. There are settlers from the peninsula, plus
Chinese, mostly the descendants of immigrants who came south in search of
work more than 100 years ago, during the time when the British North Borneo
Company had control over the territory.
It is a wild and beautiful land, still relatively undiscovered by tourism.
Though it is the second biggest state, after Sarawak, in the Malaysian
Federation, it has a population of only 1.7m. Commodities - mainly timber,
cocoa and palm oil - dominate the economy. There is only a small
manufacturing sector in Sabah. Agriculture accounts for 37 per cent of GDP,
compared with 17 per cent in peninsular Malaysia.
Though the good economic times are rolling in most of the rest of Malaysia,
Sabah is going through a difficult period. Part of the problem is its
remoteness and its lack of infrastructure. But politics is also involved.
Since it joined the Malaysian Federation in 1963, Sabah has had a variety of
governments, which in some cases ran the state like a private fiefdom. There
were occasional clashes with the federal authorities, but on the whole Kuala
Lumpur was content to leave Sabah politicians to themselves - so long as
they gave their support to the Barisan Nasional, the National Front
government.
But things changed in 1990. Shortly before federal elections, Sabah's ruling
party, Parti Bersatu Sabah (PBS), pulled out of the National Front and threw
its weight behind the opposition to the government of Dr Mahathir Mohamad,
Malaysia's prime minister.
Against the odds, the National Front won the election, though the PBS still
retains its hold on power in Sabah. Politicians and local businesspeople
agree that the economy has suffered as a result of Sabah's breakaway from
central government.
While growth has been averaging more than 8 per cent per year in Malaysia as
a whole, in Sabah it has declined to under 5 per cent. There are allegations
from the PBS and others that Kuala Lumpur is withholding federal development
funds.
'We were once one of the richest states in Malaysia,' says one PBS member.
'Now we are one of the poorest.'
One frequently heard gripe is that Sabah receives only a 5 per cent share of
revenues from the state's petroleum resources. There is also concern
expressed by the PBS that the United Malays National Organisation (Umno),
the main party in government, is now for the first time organising in Sabah.
PBS people allege Umno will be a divisive element in Sabah's multi-racial
political system.
While Dr Mahathir and other Barisan partners have made no secret of what
they regard as Sabah's political treachery, the prime minister's supporters
in Sabah say the federal government still puts far more funds into the state
than it takes out.
'Kuala Lumpur has put an enormous amount of money into Sabah,' says Mrs
Dayang Mahani, a member of the Sabah assembly and an Umno supporter. 'We
should be part of the great developments going on elsewhere in the country -
but the PBS has upset Sabah's relations with the federal government and as a
result all Sabahans are suffering.'
Mrs Dayang Mahani also rejects PBS allegations that Umno will cause trouble
in Sabah. 'They say Umno will threaten Sabah's harmony. But there has been
no political harmony.'
All parties seem to agree that Sabah has not received anything like the
investment - both foreign and domestic - that has been going to most other
states in Malaysia. But this trend was evident before the election split of
1990.
Sabah's remoteness means that costs are considerably higher than on the
peninsula - calculated at about 25 per cent above the national level. Its
vast land is sparsely populated, and infrastructural development is
expensive. Four-wheel drive vehicles are the norm in Sabah - it is only
recently that a tarred road connected the west to the east coast. Many roads
are only logging tracks.
Successive governments have tended to indulge in project politics -
investing large amounts of funds in schemes to win votes, rather than with
any overall development plan in mind.
The PBS government has encouraged downstream development of the timber
industry. But so far this has been limited mainly to sawmills for cut timber
products. A large-scale cocoa planting programme was started in the late
1970s. Malaysia has now become one of the world's top four cocoa producers,
and Sabah accounts for about 70 per cent of the country's total crop.
Malaysia, through its Sabah-based Cocoa Board, is acknowledged to be a
leader in cocoa research and development. But cocoa prices have in recent
years been steadily falling, and are now at a their lowest for nearly 20
years. Some plantations are already replacing their cocoa with palm oil,
while acres of other cocoa land are being abandoned.
Another problem - and a very sensitive political issue - is Sabah's
immigrant population. Historically, Sabah has acted as a collection point
and crossroads for travellers between the Philippines, Indonesia and the
Malay peninsula. Thousands of people from Mindanao, in the southern
Philippines, have fled to Sabah over the years as a result of fighting
between Manila's military and separatists based in Moslem Mindanao.
Other people from the Philippines and from Indonesia have arrived in search
of jobs. There are no exact figures of just how many immigrants - legal and
illegal - are now in Sabah. Some estimates put the figure as high as
800,000, or nearly half the population.
On one hand, there is concern about the immigrants' use of large amounts of
vital educational and health funds. According to some, immigrants are
responsible for a rising crime rate. But on the other hand it is also
realised that without the immigrants the economy would collapse: it is
estimated that about 80 per cent of workers on the plantations are from
either the Philippines or Indonesia.
Yet despite its present difficulties, Sabah is potentially one of the
richest states in Malaysia. It has a large amount of still untapped natural
resources. Further development of the petroleum industry is likely.
Perhaps most important of all, Sabah has great potential as a tourist
destination. The visitor is spoilt for choice: to climb Mt Kinabalu (at
4,101 metres, Malaysia's and south-east Asia's highest mountain), to dive at
Sipadan off the east coast (acknowledged as offering some of the best diving
in the world), to wander in search of the proboscis monkey, or to wonder at
the Rafflescia, the largest flower in the world.
It's all there in Sabah - and much more.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page VIII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5706</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Survey of Malaysia (12): Labour shortage is employers' main
problem / State profile of Johor
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By VICTOR MALLET
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
JOHOR, THE southernmost state in peninsular Malaysia, has set itself some
ambitious targets for the next 13 years.
Not content merely with the national vision of an industrialised Malaysia by
the year 2020, Johor's leaders want their state capital, Johor Bahru, to
become a modern 'technopolis' by the year 2005. By then they hope to have
attracted a further 1,600 manufacturing projects to the state, worth
MDollars 26.6bn in new private sector investment.
Seen from the fish stalls and fruit counters of the Johor Bahru's central
market, where some of the Chinese traders still use the abacus to calculate
their accounts, the technopolis seems a distant prospect.
Johor, however, is already well on the way to industrialised modernity.
Financed largely by investment from the neighbouring island of Singapore -
just over a kilometre from Johor Bahru across the causeway  - and from the
multinationals based there, Johor has moved rapidly along the classical
economic development path, from dependence on primary commodities such as
palm oil to food processing factories and on to export-oriented
manufacturing and heavy industry.
The state government is now trying to encourage chemical companies to come
to Johor, and is attempting to regain the interest of Taiwan's China Steel,
which had considered establishing an MDollars 8bn plant near the port of
Pasir Gudang.
With labour increasingly expensive and hard to find, the next step (as in
the other fast-growing regions of Malaysia) is to focus on high-technology
industries and services, a policy vigorously publicised and pursued by Mr
Muhyiddin Yassin, the chief minister, and other state officials.
'To do all this, we definitely need infrastructural projects to support our
industrial development programme,' Mr Muhyiddin told a conference in Johor,
in June. 'We plan to spend MDollars 2bn in the next five years to develop
industrial estates to cater to growing needs, especially for capital
intensive and high-tech industries.'
Johor - again like other parts of Malaysia and south-east Asia - is
struggling to catch up with its own startling economic growth of the last
few years, and to improve its overloaded infrastructure. Real annual gross
domestic product growth has reached 8 or 9 per cent overall in Johor, but
manufacturing GDP has been growing at about 14 per cent a year.
Among the projects designed to alleviate traffic congestion and promote
economic development are a proposed MDollars 460m bridge - the second link
to Singapore - which should be completed within three years, and the
continuing construction of the national north-south highway.
Water supply and electricity generating capacity are being expanded, and the
Senai airport's cargo facilities are being upgraded. Work has begun on the
expansion of the port of Pasir Gudang, and the authorities are considering
the building of a second Johor port as well.
In the meantime, the ties between Johor and Singapore remain essential to
the economic well-being of both sides, although the relationship is
occasionally a prickly one. About 30,000 people from Johor work in Singapore
each day, and the island's port handles about 60 per cent of Johor's
exports.
'Our concept is not to compete with Singapore, but to make use of what they
have,' says Mr Abdul Latif bin Shaari, director of the Malaysia Industrial
Development Authority office in Johor. 'Our selling point is to enjoy the
same facilities as Singapore with one third of the cost.'
The Johor state government officially supports the Singapore-sponsored idea
of the Growth Triangle, which is supposed to link the services and
high-technology expertise of Singapore to the intermediate industry of Johor
and the cheap labour available on the nearby Indonesian island of Batam.
In private, however, some Malaysian officials regard it as a meaningless
catch-phrase which legitimises land-hungry Singapore's use of Johor and
Batam and has no effect one way or the other on Singaporean investments in
Johor.
Businesses in Johor are more concerned about Singapore's effect on the
labour market than about the pros and cons of the Growth Triangle or a
simmering territorial dispute between Malaysia and Singapore over the tiny
island known as Pedra Branca or Batu Puteh.
Factory workers are hard enough to find anywhere in Malaysia, but the lure
of higher wages in Singapore makes the labour shortage a particularly severe
problem for the electronics manufacturers and other employers of Johor,
especially in southern Johor where most of them are concentrated. 'There's
really not one company in Johor that isn't looking for labour,' says one
factory manager.
Mr Jaafar Yusoff, who heads the industrial development division of the Johor
State Economic Development Corporation, believes there are more than 100,000
potential workers stranded by poor communications in remote Johor villages,
but he acknowledges that Singapore does attract workers away from Johor.
'Because of our nearness to Singapore, we have this frontier town syndrome,
like in Mexico,' he says, 'and people tend to go where the pasture is
greener.'
There are few bus services to Johor's industrial zones, and investors have
responded to the labour shortage by recruiting and bussing in workers at
their own expense from ever larger - and increasingly overlapping -
catchment areas.
They also complain of power cuts in certain areas of Johor, apparently the
result of load-shedding caused by insufficient generating capacity. Only
recently have the central government and the local officials of Tenaga
Nasional, the electricity company, begun to acknowledge the problem
publicly. Such difficulties, although frustrating for businessmen, are no
worse and probably much less severe than the infrastructural bottlenecks
being experienced in other developing south-east Asian economies.
As for the locals, they complain bitterly about rises in everything from
house rents and taxi fares to the cost of a drink of sugar cane juice.
They blame the price increases, and the appearance of pornographic videos,
on heavy demand from the Singaporeans who, armed with a stronger currency,
pour across the causeway from their own expensive technopolis each day to do
their shopping. If Johor Bahru becomes a technopolis, too, perhaps these
problems will disappear.
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
      JOHOR: FOREIGN EQUITY APPROVALS (MAJOR SOURCES) 1981-91
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
                            No of projects      Foreign equity
Country                           approved    approved (MDollars m)
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
Singapore                          540              1,429.6
Taiwan                             141              1,119.5
Japan                              141              1,156.6
South Korea                         17                426.1
US                                  40                360.5
Australia/New Zealand               21                347.6
Hong Kong                           67                217.8
UK                                  34                186.0
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Malaysian Industrial Development Authority
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page VII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5707</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAFAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Survey of Malaysia (14): Supplier to the multinationals
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KIERAN COOKE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
IN THE early 1960s, Mr Low Kim Teow ran a small business in Penang making
grills for windows and doors.
Mr Low's shophouse was like many hundreds that can still be seen in the
streets of Penang: a bustling workshop in front, with a table for meals in
the midst of all the grease and the tools. In the back there was a storeroom
and kitchen, and upstairs was the living area. But Mr Low and his family
have long since left the shophouse behind them.
He and his two sons now run an engineering company, supplying machines and
fixtures to the multinational electronics plants of Penang.
In the 1970s Mr Low saw that the newly arrived multinationals needed a
variety of local components and services - and set about supplying them. Now
the Lowcompany provides Intel and other companies with a range of
fabrication equipment, much of it highly sophisticated.
The company - like most Chinese businesses very much a family-run,
privately-held concern - employs more than 100 and had a turnover of
MDollars 13m last year.
In some cases a multinational will ask Low Kim Teow to make a particuar
piece of equipment. More often the Low company will use its own design and
engineering workshops to come up with machines that streamline the
production processes in the big plants.
This includes a machine for loading computer chips for Intel, and recently
the company has moved into the business of making moulds for computer
housings and other electronics goods.
'We now want to diversify as much as possible,' says Mr Low Kee Lin, one of
the sons, who is company managing director. 'We want to make a big push with
exports. Despite the labour shortages, we still feel we can produce
mouldings, fabrication equiment and other items more cheaply and efficiently
here. We are already making some sales abroad.'
Back in the 1960s, when Mr Low was still making iron door grills,
unemployment in Penang was nearly 20 per cent, and people were leaving the
island in search of jobs. But that was before the electronics companies
arrived in Penang. Low Kim Teow Engineering recently had to go to India - to
recruit engineers for its plant.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page VII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5708</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAE9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Survey of Malaysia (13): Silicone ousts spice on betel-nut
island / State profile of Penang
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KIERAN COOKE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THERE'S A Nirvana Street in Penang. The name may be a little bit of an
overstatement but Penang does have a few heavenly qualities.
There's the old funicular railway, built by a wayward Swiss engineer earlier
this century, that takes you up to the lush, cool heights of Penang hill.
There's the esplanade with its food stalls to suit even the most indulgent
of stomachs, the old town shophouses, the Indian shrines and Chinese
temples.
Penang, 'the betel nut island', was a vital British trading port in the 18th
and 19th centuries, a collection point for the pepper, rattan, camphor and
opium that was traded back and forth between India and China. But now there
is more silicone than spice in Penang. The island - and Province Wellesley
across the new bridge on the mainland - has grown to be the main centre for
Malaysia's electronics industry, the country's biggest export earnings
sector.
At the last count, 120 factories in Penang, employing nearly 75,000 people,
were either directly involved or in some way connected with the electronics
and electrical goods industries.
Almost all of the world's main electronics companies are there. Intel, with
6,000 workers, has its biggest off-shore plant in Penang. National
Semiconductor expects to export more than MDollars 1bn of products from its
Penang plant this year. The Penang Development Corporation (PDC), set up in
the late 1960s to promote inward investment, estimates that Penang now
accounts for about 50 per cent of Malaysia's total MDollars 35bn electronics
and electrical equipment exports.
From the first, Penang was a pioneer. The PDC set up the first free trade
zone in Malaysia in 1972 and, soon after, the electronics firms began
arriving, attracted by plentiful supplies of land and labour, with English
language skills readily available. Textile companies also invested heavily,
though their importance in the local economy has declined by comparison with
the electronics sector. Foreign companies could retain 100 per cent equity
holdings if they fulfilled certain conditions, including exporting most of
their product. They could also have full repatriation of profits.
Over the years, Penang has moved into more sophisticated areas of production
 -from purely assembly to actual component manufacturing. It now competes
with Singapore in many areas. The infrastructure has been improved, and
companies give the efficiency of Penang port as one of the major investment
attractions.
Linkages have developed with local businesses: a multitude of home grown
companies, some big, some merely a front shop room, now act as suppliers to
the electronics industry.
'Once we have the linkages in place, we feel more secure about these
companies' long-term commitment to Penang,' says Ms Lim Pao Li, of the PDC.
'A large proportion of components is now made locally, but we always have to
be aware of the changes in the industry and the problems we face.'
The number one problem in Penang, as in many other parts of Malaysia, is a
shortage of labour. Almost every factory gate has a vacancies sign. Many
hundreds of workers have to be bussed in and out of Penang each day from
areas several kilometres away. Foreign workers, mainly from Indonesia, have
started to be recruited. Factories complain of an increased incidence of
'job hopping'.
Penang realises that, in some of the more labour intensive areas, it will
not be able to compete with countries that have sufficient labour -
particularly Indonesia, Thailand and most recently, Vietnam. A semi-skilled
worker in a Penang factory might earn USDollars 10 per day. In Indonesia the
equivalent would be USDollars 1.50 per day.
A big increase in land prices is also causing many factories problems. And
the delicate racial question is never far away from any aspect of Malaysian
life. Penang is looked upon as a mainly Chinese island; but Malays say that,
though they make up nearly 40 per cent of the population, they have very
little economic power. Increasingly, there are calls from the Malay
community for a more even distribution of the growing wealth of the betel
nut, now silicone, island.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page VII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5709</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAE8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Survey of Malaysia (11): Privatisations this year
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Privatisations this year have included 30 per cent of Perusahaan Otomobil
Nasional, the maker of Malaysia's Mitsubishi-based Proton cars. This month,
the latest model, the Proton Saga Iswara, was launched in Kuala Lumpur by
the prime minister, Dr Mahathir Mohamad, seen (below) inspecting the new
Proton emblem. When he first announced the Proton project in the early
1980s, many critics predicted disaster. Yet today, every other car on the
Malaysian roads is a Proton, and the car is exported to 12 countries. As car
sales in most countries fall, capacity at the Proton factory is being
expanded, with plans to produce 150,000 cars a year by 1995.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page VI
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5710</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAE7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Survey of Malaysia (9): A fillip for the capital markets -
Privatisation / The first decade of the government's programme
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By VICTOR MALLET
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
WHERE OTHERS have talked, Malaysia has acted. For the last decade, the
government has embraced privatisation with an enthusiasm rarely matched
elsewhere.
This year alone has seen the sale on the Kuala Lumpur stock market of 23 per
cent of the equity of Tenaga Nasional, the state electricity utility, and 30
per cent of Perusahaan Otomobil Nasional, the maker of Malaysia's
Mitsubishi-based Proton cars.
A total of 54 organisations have been privatised or partially privatised in
the last 10 years, according to official figures. Most of them were existing
government units sold to the private sector, and the rest new projects such
as roads which would once have been the sole responsibility of the
authorities.
It all began in 1983. Dr Mahathir Mohamad, the prime minister, initially had
differences with Mrs Margaret Thatcher, the British premier, but her
privatisation drive apparently caught his imagination.
By regional standards, government involvement in the Malaysian economy was
then exceptionally widespread, partly because of official efforts to speed
the transfer of assets to the Malay community from the wealthier Chinese.
Even in 1990, Malaysia's public expenditure amounted to 34.5 per cent of
gross national product, compared with 21.5 per cent in Singapore and 15 per
cent in Thailand.
'Hence we have to reorientate and downsize the public sector and promote
privatisation,' Mr Mohamad Sheriff Kassim, secretary-general at the finance
ministry, told a privatisation conference in Kuala Lumpur in June this year.
Government officials cite several advantages of the privatisation programme,
including windfall income of MDollars 6.7bn so far from the sale of
government shares in privatised corporations, reduced government spending
(privatisation has reduced the public sector workforce by about 65,000), and
increased efficiency.
They say the privatisation of the Klang Container Terminal in 1986 rapidly
reduced the average length of time each container stayed on the dock, while
the telephone network partially privatised in 1990 improved its service to
customers, and the concession granted to a private television channel (TV3)
in 1983 increased competition and benefited the viewing public.
Furthermore, the privatisation programme has helped to develop local capital
markets. Privatised companies account for a third of the capitalisation of
the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange. Recently, says Mr Mohamed Sidek, senior
general manager of Arab-Malaysian Merchant Bank, 'we thought privatisation
may crowd out some other private sector initiatives, but it didn't' The
economic boom made sure of that.
So far, the government has focused on 'flagship' corporations, including
Malaysia Airlines System in 1985, in an attempt to ensure the success of the
privatisation programme. But the smaller state entities, some of them
unprofitable subsidiaries of state development corporations, need more
restructuring and are more difficult to dispose of.
On the government's own admission, 1991 was a disappointing year. Only five
out of the original 23 targeted projects were privatised, because of lengthy
and inconclusive negotiations between the government and private companies
on projects initiated by the private sector, the need for new laws to allow
for the privatisation of certain operations such as abattoirs and a failure
to agree on the valuation of assets to be sold.
However, a further 10 projects not included in the government's original
action plan were also sold, including provincial companies such as Kedah
Cement and Sabah Shipyard, bringing the 1991 total to 15.
Plans are also under consideration to privatise the railways, while the
government has shortlisted four proposals by private companies to build and
operate electricity generating plants.
Critics of the privatisation programme complain that the government has
either maintained a majority stake or control in many of the larger,
partially-privatised corporations, or effectively transferred control to
ruling political organisations such as the United Malays National
Organisation (Umno) or to influential individuals.
For example, United Engineers, a company linked to Umno, was awarded the
contract to complete the important north-south highway, a project which
recently announced large financing overruns, and will now cost a total of
MDollars 6bn. And a row erupted in parliament this year over allegations
that Mr S Samy Vellu, the minister of energy, posts and telecommunications
and leader of one of the parties in the National Front government, had
misappropriated 9m shares from the privatisation of Telekom Malaysia. The
dispute has yet to be resolved.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page VI
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5711</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAE6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Survey of Malaysia (10): Helpful neighbours can also be a
liability - Tourism is the only service industry to run a surplus, but there
is anxiety at the central bank
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By VICTOR MALLET
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
TO THE Malaysian tourism industry, Thailand is a source of both inspiration
and despair: inspiration, because of its longstanding success in attracting
foreign visitors; despair, because the political violence in Bangkok in May
has prompted some holidaymakers to cancel their visits to south-east Asia.
Malaysia is anxious to emulate Thailand's successful handling of the tourist
trade, not least because the Kuala Lumpur government is concerned about the
services deficit in the balance of payments, and tourism is the only service
industry to run a surplus.
By 1990 - or Visit Malaysia Year 1990, if you are in the tourism business -
tourists had become the country's third largest source of foreign exchange,
after manufacturing and crude oil, although arrivals have since fallen from
that year's total of 7.5m visitors.
In its latest annual report, the Malaysian central bank notes with some
Angst that the country's tourism industry is lagging behind those of its
neighbours in Asean (the Association of South East Asian Nations) in terms
of the sector's share of gross national product.
Furthermore, half of Malaysia's visitors are short-stay tourists from
Singapore (day-trippers are not counted); the average length of stay in
Malaysia is put at 4.6 nights, against 6.1 for Thailand. Average per diem
spending is MDollars 345 in Thailand, compared with only MDollars 128 in
Malaysia; Thailand has more than three times as many hotel rooms.
With holidays in the developed world becoming longer and longer, tourists
increasingly favour multi-destination holidays. Malaysia has used the
opportunity to expand its business, particularly by forging links with
Thailand and Singapore, the two main air travel gateways to south-east Asia
(the slogan for the Malaysia-Singapore tie-up is: 'Fascinating Malaysia,
surprising Singapore: two great countries, one great holiday').
The potential disadvantages of such links were graphically illustrated in
May, when troops killed at least 50 pro-democracy demonstrators on the
streets of Bangkok. Many holidays through the Bangkok gateway were
cancelled, at least in the short term, and, in the words of Mr Ahmad Bakri
Shabdin, the director general of the Malaysia Tourism Promotion Board, 'when
they cancel, they cancel both legs of a journey'.
That setback, and the competing lure of the recent Olympic Games in
Barcelona, have left Malaysia struggling to reach its target of 6.6m
visitors for 1992, although the start of the new high season is yet to come.
The Gulf war helped push down 1991 arrivals to 5.9m from 1990's 7.5m, and
Malaysia had been hoping for a brisk revival.
'Come 1992, we were hoping for a recovery, but we are now being affected
very much by the global recession,' says Mr Bakri Shabdin. 'It has been
compounded by the fact that in 1991 many countries developed domestic
tourism.'
In the European market, Malaysia finds itself competing with more convenient
destinations in America or the Mediterranean; and even in Asia, the most
important source of tourism, there are problems with the decline of the
Japanese incentive travel market.
Malaysia has much to offer the tourist, from tropical beach holidays, scuba
diving and hill resorts in the peninsula to jungle treks and mountain walks
in Borneo, but it has never been able to project a clear image to its
potential customers. The jury is still out on the success of Visit Asean
Year 1992 - an attempt to link the six Asean members (Brunei, Indonesia,
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand) - but it appears that
Asean is too little known outside the region to make much impact on the
average tourist.
Tourism officials point vaguely at Malaysia's ethnic diversity and
interesting history, but admit that the name Malaysia conjures up different
and hazy images for different people if it conjures up anything at all.
'Since 1990 we've decided to highlight our natural resources,' says Mr Bakri
Shabdin. 'That's one thing we have that is uniquely Malaysian. We are
acknowledged as being the home of the oldest rainforest in the world.'
Leaving aside the controversy over whether that rainforest is being
irreparably destroyed by logging, Malaysia also realised from its 1990
campaign that it was worth making an effort to promote the country
vigorously as a tourist destination, and worth linking its promotions to
special events already scheduled for Malaysia.
'We learned from 1990 that there is a very marked correlation between events
and people arriving in the country,' says Mr Bakri Shabdin. 'We realise that
tourism is very much a consumer-oriented activity, and therefore we have to
continually make our presence felt in the global tourism market.'
The result was a decision to launch another Visit Malaysia Year in 1994  -
an idea first mooted as early as 1991 and formally inaugurated this year -
and to repeat the process every four years. This will fit conveniently with
the Commonwealth Games in Malaysia in 1998.
Malaysia has already started to release promotional material for the 1994
campaign, featuring a jungle scene with flowers, butterflies and a
waterfall. Tourists are curious, but it is questionable whether many foreign
visitors will be drawn to Malaysia by some of the advertised events -
including a squid-fishing festival, an Asean literature meeting, the Ipoh
half-marathon, the birthday of the state governor of Malacca and a
bird-singing competition - rather than by Malaysia's more permanent charms
of sun, sea, sand and jungle.
Perhaps the important ingredients for reviving the Malaysian tourism
industry will not only be the kite shows and Malaysian fruit festivals, but
also the continued investment in real estate (up to 70 hotels and resorts
are planned before the end of the decade and the number of hotel rooms is
increasing by 10 to 12 per cent a year), the proposed new airport, and a
recovery in the world economy.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page VI
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5712</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAE5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Survey of Malaysia (8): Economic health curbs worker
militancy - Manufacturing / Victor Mallet finds concern about the shortage
of much-needed skilled technicians
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By VICTOR MALLET
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A dozen executives from manufacturing companies in Malaysia what worries
them the most, and the chances are that you will get a dozen identical
answers: the labour shortage.
Malaysia's economy has grown so quickly and its drive to industrialise has
been so successful that employers have been forced to increase wages faster
than the rate of inflation. They have even resorted to paying bonuses to
workers who recruit a friend for the factory.
'Today electronics workers sometimes change jobs because the other factory
has an air-conditioned canteen,' says the chief executive of one
multinational company.
Inflation is running at about 4.5 per cent, but most manufacturing wages
have been rising by between 8 and 15 per cent a year. Unemployment has
dropped to around 4.2 per cent - a level regarded by some employers as
effectively zero when it comes to suitable factory workers - and the labour
market in some areas is being further tightened as the numerous new foreign
investments, approved in 1990 and 1991, come on stream. Some companies spend
tens of thousands of ringgit (Malaysian dollars) a month bussing in workers
from ever larger catchment areas.
The labour shortage has been dramatised by the government's drive to
register illegal foreign workers - and by a deputy minister's mistaken claim
that a third of the foreigners who underwent medical checks for their work
permits were infected with sexually-transmitted diseases, including the
acquired immune deficiency syndrome (Aids).
About 320,000 guest workers, mostly Indonesians, were registered before the
deadline at the end of June, but thousands more are thought to remain in the
country unrecorded. Only 0.24 per cent of those tested were found to have
the virus which leads to Aids.
From the point of view of employers in the electronics sector, one of the
positive effects of the enforced higher wage regime has been to take the
heat out of a campaign by the Malaysian Trades Union Congress to establish a
national electronics union.
National unions in other industries are permitted, but the government of Dr
Mahathir Mohamad - with the full support of Japanese, American and other
employers - has forbidden the formation of a union in the important
electronics sector since 1972 and restricted workers to Japanese-style
in-house employee associations.
Despite the bitter taste left by a lingering dispute between trade unionists
and Harris Semiconductor of the US, the economic boom has dampened worker
militancy and allowed the growth of a rival trade union group - the
Malaysian Labour Organisation - which is regarded with approval by the
government, and which accepts in-house unions. Official figures show that
electronics workers earn the highest wages in manufacturing, an average of
MDollars 721 a month in 1991, compared with MDollars 526 for clothing
workers.
In the longer term, employers and senior government officials are concerned
about the shortage of the skilled technicians who will be needed to manage
Malaysia's proposed shift towards higher-technology industries.
Thailand and Indonesia are facing similar challenges.
'We are aware of this problem,' says Mr Low Peng Lum, director of industrial
promotion at the Malaysian Industrial Development Authority, 'and that is
why the government is putting a lot of emphasis now on human resource
development.'
Employers blame a shortage of Malay technicians on the government's policy
of funding university education in Bahasa (the local language) for
Bumiputras (Malays) - which they say produced too many social science and
arts graduates - while many Chinese were forced to pay for their own
education abroad and returned with technical qualifications and a useful
knowledge of English. 'The government policy on Bumiputeras has done the
opposite of what the government wanted,' says one foreign executive.
Most of the other problems identified by manufacturing companies -
occasional power shortages, telephone and data line problems, congested
ports and roads - are the result of Malaysia's rapid economic growth and the
consequent strains on communications, transport and other infrastructure.
Malaysia, which hosts such giants as Matsushita and Motorola, is now one of
the top three semiconductor exporters in the world, the largest
air-conditioner exporter and one of the biggest manufacturers of television
sets and video cassette recorders.
Since 1989, the manufacturing component of gross domestic product has been
rising by 14 per cent or more a year, and manufacturing's share of total GDP
had doubled to more than 28 per cent last year from 14 per cent in 1970.
The Malaysian electronics industry has matured quickly, moving from
'screwdriver' assembly operations to an emphasis on 'backward integration' -
domestic production of components. 'Now we see more people coming in to
build more components and parts,' says Mr Low.
In general, the aim is to concentrate on high-technology industry and add as
much value to the product in Malaysia as possible, while leaving behind
labour-intensive industries such as textiles.
'Malaysia wants to get into high technology,' says Mr Roger Bertelson,
managing director at Motorola Malaysia. 'They want to attract electronics
downstream manufacturers that can use a high proportion of the
semi-conductors made in the country.'
An executive from another multinational company says: 'These are not
screwdriver operations. Today all companies divert their screwdriver
operations to Indonesia, and people are considering going to Vietnam or
southern China.'
Malaysia has been so successful in developing its economy that it faces the
loss of tariff privileges on some of its exports - the US has already
withdrawn preferences for Malaysian rubber threads, Mr Low says  - and so
good at attracting foreign investors that it has been forced to become more
choosy.
Bank Negara, the central bank, expressed concern in its 1991 annual report
about what it called the country's 'narrow manufacturing base'. Although new
products made in Malaysia included toys, sporting goods, photographic
equipment and jewellery, it noted that electronics, textiles and
rubber-based products still accounted for 32 per cent of manufacturing
output and nearly 70 per cent of manufactured export earnings, making the
country vulnerable to the vagaries of the world economy.
Malaysia is attempting to reshape its industrial base by adjusting and
reducing foreign investment incentives, and encouraging more domestic
investment. 'We are now becoming selective,' says Mr Low. 'Incentives will
only be given to those industries which are high-tech, capital intensive. .
. We are beginning to feel some problems now with the supply of labour.'
Henceforth, for example, 100 per cent foreign ownership is allowed only if
the project exports 80 per cent of production or meets other criteria of
size or value added. The previous export level required was only 50 per
cent.
As a result of this and other changes, there was a surge of foreign
investment in 1990 and 1991 to gain the older and more advantageous
incentives. Foreign investment approvals rose from MDollars 8.7bn in 1989 to
MDollars 17.6bn in 1990, and dipped slightly to MDollars 16bn last year.
This year's half-year total of MDollars 9bn has been inflated by the
inclusion of a few exceptionally large petrochemical projects.
Critics of the Malaysian government complain that officials are slow to
begin a public debate when an economic problem emerges - whether it be a
labour shortage or a lack of electricity - but they acknowledge that the
authorities do respond to private lobbying and do eventually take action.
Few countries could have predicted or easily absorbed the economic growth
that Malaysia has seen in the last few years. 'Growth in Malaysia,' says one
businessman, 'has been beyond their best-case scenario.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page V
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5713</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAE4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Survey of Malaysia (5): Splits appear in Umno as its
opponents coalesce - Politics, Dr Mahathir presides over a delicate
structure
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KIERAN COOKE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ON ONE level, politics in Malaysia is all about one man. After more than 10
years in power, Dr Mahathir Mohamad dominates the scene. A generally passive
media quotes his every word, the first items on the nightly television news
more often than not being devoted to Dr Mahathir's activities.
But Dr Mahathir presides over a delicate and at times shaky political
structure. There are divisions within his United Malays National
Organisation (Umno). Partners in the prime minister's National Front
government, though electorally weak, have to be constantly mollified and
appeased. The opposition shows signs of greater unity and, perhaps the most
precarious element of all in present day Malaysian politics, the government
is embroiled in increasingly bitter federal-state arguments with the
opposition-governed states of Kelantan and Sabah.
Umno has dominated Malaysian politics since the days of independence from
Britain. But there have been frequent splits within the organisation, and in
1987 Dr Mahathir was forced to form the present Umno Baru party, or New
Umno, after an attempted party putsch against his leadership and a court
ruling against the legality of the old party structure.
Umno represents the Malays, who make up more than than half of Malaysia's
18.5m population. Umno MPs are very dependent on continued support in their
home states, and have to echo views which at times run contrary to
government policy.
Some states, particularly the more conservative northern ones, want a
greater Umno commitment to moves towards a more Islamic society. There is
concern within some sections of Umno about the new direction in government
economic policy, with less emphasis now being given to the spread of wealth
as a natural right among the Bumiputra, or Malay, community.
At times, Umno bickering intrudes into international affairs: a recent
quarrel with Singapore about ownership of an island off the southern state
of Johor was seen by some as an attempt by dissident Umno elements in Johor
to embarrass Dr Mahathir, rather than a Kuala Lumpur-Singapore clash.
In the last elections, in late 1990, the National Front's share of the vote
dropped from 57 to 52 per cent, but it still has 127 of the 180 seats in the
lower house of parliament. Umno politicians hold the important cabinet
positions. The Malaysian Chinese Association, one of the main National Front
partners, is still tainted with past corruption charges, and has failed to
capture the hearts and minds of the majority of Malaysia's 30 per cent
Chinese community.
The Malaysian Indian Congress (MIC), another coalition partner, seems to
lurch from one scandal to another. Mr S Samy Vellu, the MIC leader and
minister of energy, telecommunications and posts in Dr Mahathir's
government, was last month asked by the country's anti corruption agency to
provide details of his financial assets, following investigations into the
misappropriation of 9m shares in Telekom Malaysia, the country's second
biggest listed company. In recent weeks MPs have listened to a number of
allegations by the opposition that another leading MIC member and former
parliamentary deputy speaker has been involved in various group sex
exploits.
The opposition has attacked government for what it regards as its
unwillingness to tackle corruption and its increasingly high handed
approach. Mr Lim Kit Siang, leader of the opposition Democratic Action Party
(DAP) says there is an increasingly 'anti-democratic trend' in Malaysia.
Mr Razaleigh Hamzah, once a close colleague of Dr Mahathir but now heading a
rival political party to Umno, has launched a broadside against the
government's industrialisation policy, saying that it will only lessen the
role of the Malays in the economic life of the country - a claim dismissed
as 'rubbish' by the government.
Some of the opposition groups have recently formed a coalition: while an
increased show of unity might make attacks on the government more effective,
the opposition is hampered by the apparent unwillingness of the media to
give detailed coverage to anti-government views. The opposition is also up
against the enormous financial resources of Umno, mostly derived from the
party's involvement in a myriad of business conglomerates and enterprises.
The federal-state battle is of greater concern to Dr Mahathir's government.
In the 1990 elections, the state of Kelantan, on the east coast of peninsula
Malaysia, voted out Umno and in Parti Islam Malaysia (PAS). Kelantan is the
most Islamic of the Malaysian states, with more than 90 per cent of the
population Moslem. Umno sees itself as the representative of Malay - by
extension Moslem - values and traditions. PAS, which emphasises the need for
more thorough Islamisation, is seen as a leading threat to Umno.
Dr Mahathir makes no secret of his anger that the people of Kelantan have
chosen PAS instead of Umno. Investors are shying away from Kelantan because
it is controlled by an opposition party, says the government. It says that
attempts by the Kelantan government to implement 'Hukum Hudud', the
traditional Islamic penal code which can mean the stoning of adulterers and
the amputation of the hands of thieves, will only mean that Kelantan will
become less developed. The Kelantan authorities accuse the federal
government of withholding development funds in order to punish the state for
voting against Umno.
In the state of Sabah, in East Malaysia, the situation is more complex. The
principal political party in the state, the Parti Bersatu Sabah (PBS), is
multi-racial, mainly representing Sabah's diverse native peoples. PBS was
formerly part of the National Front government, and Umno did not involve
itself in Sabah's politics. But this changed in the elections of 1990, when
the PBS decided to leave the coalition and support the rival Umno group, led
by Mr Razaleigh. Following this, Umno moved into Sabah and launched a
membership drive among the native peoples, who in official parlance are also
referred to as Bumiputras, though most are not Malays.
The PBS, which still controls Sabah's administration, accuses Umno of
importing its own racially-based politics into the state and threatening
stability. The government has brought corruption charges against Mr Joseph
Pairin Kitingan, head of the PBS and Sabah's chief minister. Mr Pairin's
brother has been detained under Malaysia's Internal Security Act, suspected
of plotting to have Sabah opt out of the Malaysian Federation.
Echoing the accusations of Kelantan, Sabah says Kuala Lumpur is punishing it
for not obeying Umno edicts and is hindering its development.
These political issues are manifesting themselves at a time of considerable
change in Malaysian society. As the country rapidly industrialises, it is
becoming less rural. Malays in particular are migrating in increasing
numbers to the cities. The government's New Economic Policy, in place over
the past 20 years, did succeed in transferring a proportion of the national
wealth into Malay hands. But Malays themselves see the divisions that have
arisen within their own group - between a monied, mainly urban elite and an
underprivileged rural class. Umno is nervous that the latter group could
desert the party and turn instead to PAS.
Over the years, Dr Mahathir has shown himself to be a highly skilled, and at
times ruthless, politician. In his mid-sixties, the prime minister sets a
fast pace and shows no signs of wishing to retire. At the moment, Mr Anwar
Ibrahim, the minister of finance, is viewed as the heir apparant.
'For the next five years,' said Dr Mahathir after the 1990 election, 'I will
be free from this kind of nasty politicking. I can concentrate on developing
the country, giving people a better life, improving their lot.'
His government has certainly improved the Malaysian economy. While growth
continues, the opposition and dissident elements within Umno will have
little opportunity to mount a clear challenge to Dr Mahathir's leadership.
But a change in economic circumstances could mean trouble. Few, least of all
Dr Mahathir, forget that the last challenge to the prime minister's
leadership was in 1987, a time when the clouds of recession were still
blowing across Malaysia.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page IV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5714</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAE3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Survey of Malaysia (7): New techniques needed - Agriculture
/ Kieran Cooke considers its diminishing role
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KIERAN COOKE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
'Our traditional kampungs (villages) are actually more often full of
dilapidated pondok (shacks), dirty and without modern amenities. To lead a
life against the background of swaying palms and the full moon might be
beautiful as depicted in a painting, but to continue to do so might not be
suited to modern times' - Dr Mahathir Mohamad, the Malysian prime minister.
THE AGRICULTURAL sector was once the main engine of growth in the Malaysian
economy. But as the economy has grown, agriculture's role has diminished. As
the manufacturing sector has prospered, agriculture has had to battle
through increasingly difficult times, bringing considerable change to rural
life.
Malaysian agriculture is dominated by the country's wealth of primary
commodities, including rubber, palm oil and cocoa. In 1980, primary
commodities accounted for 43.7 per cent of total exports; but by 1991 they
made up barely 19 per cent. On the other hand, manufactured goods exports
made up 22.4 per cent of exports in 1980, but had risen to 65 per cent of
the total by 1991.
Due largely to the runaway growth of Malaysia's manufacturing sector,
agriculture's contribution to overall GDP has been declining: in 1991 it was
17.2 per cent, compared with 18.6 per cent in the previous year.
Such a trend is natural in an industrialising economy. But the speed at
which the change has taken place has caused problems. Furthermore the
manufacturing sector's growth is not entirely responsible for agriculture's
decline. The sector as a whole faces its own difficulties, with stagnant
growth and problems of scale and structure.
Over the past 20 years, the main thrust of government agricultural policy
has been support for smallholders and the sponsoring of state farms. The old
foreign-owned plantation companies, through government ownership
restrictions or due to their own financial constraints, found it
increasingly difficult to run profitable enterprises. The government poured
money into smallholder support schemes. Cheap credit facilities and a range
of other aids were readily available.
More than half the agricultural workers are Malays. Agricultural policy
dovetailed with overall government aims: to eradicate poverty and to give
the Bumiputras - mostly Malays - a greater share of national wealth. During
the past 20 years, poverty has been significantly reduced, while
smallholders and state farms now account for most commodity production. More
than 70 per cent of rubber production in 1991 came from smallholder units.
Policy is now changing. The government admits that the heavily subsidised
smallholder and state farm systems have been inefficient and excessively
bureaucratic. It now emphasises economies of scale and the need to move
towards more sophisticated production techniques, plus improved marketing.
Farmers' incomes have not kept pace with those in the manufacturing sector.
Smallholders have been reluctant to invest in new technology to improve
yields: while rubber yields per hectare in the estate sector increased last
year, they once again declined among smallholders. The government now
proposes a return to estate-type structures, with equity-holding
smallholders consolidated into private corporate entities. Foreign
investment in such areas is being encouraged.
The need to improve production techniques is crucial, in order to combat
domestic labour shortages and increased foreign competition. Malaysia as a
whole faces a labour shortage, but in agriculture the problem is critical.
Malays and to a lesser extent Indians - the traditional rubber 'tappers' -
have migrated to the cities, finding better-paying and less arduous jobs.
According to Bank Negara, the central bank, the total labour force in the
rubber industry was more than 11 per cent lower at the end of 1991 than at
the end of 1990.
Meanwhile, thousands of Indonesians and Bangladeshis, many without permits,
work in the plantation sector. A recent government clampdown on 'illegals'
has caused concern. The Malaysian Agricultural Producers Association says
output in the plantation sector could drop by as much as 30 per cent if all
'illegals' were deported.
Both Indonesia and Thailand, with low cost labour, are now bigger rubber
producers than Malaysia.
Malaysia still retains its commanding position as world's leading palm oil
producer, but competition for markets is becoming greater each year. In the
worldwide rubber industry, in particular, there have been many attempts to
achieve more equitable prices for the producing countries. Rubber producers
want a more 'transparent' trading system, with prices set according to
worldwide demand and supply, and not through private party-to-party deals
between the plantations or smallholder groups and the main consumer
companies, mainly the tyre manufacturers.
Some moves towards such an open system at last seem likely. Consumer
companies have become concerned that, if prices remain low, there can be no
guarantee of long-term supply. Already several Malaysian rubber producers
have moved into more profitable palm oil - or sold their land for leisure
and real estate purposes.
The government faces an uphill battle in its attempt to achieve dynamic but
balanced overall economic development and to ensure the 3.5 per cent per
annum growth in the agricultural sector targeted in the present Sixth
Malaysia Plan. It seems inevitable that the more the manufacturing sector
prospers, the more constraints the agricultural sector will face. Wider
affluence has led to more food imports. Farmers continue to drift away from
the countryside. Malaysia's rice production fell by nearly 8 per cent last
year, and 20 per cent of local consumption has to be imported.
But the outlook is not wholly discouraging. In the first quarter of 1991,
overall agricultural production (including timber) increased by 7.7 per
cent. While rubber exports declined, palm oil showed a healthy increase. A
USDollars 500m government export credit financing programme for palm oil,
granting various countries deferred payment terms for the purchase of large
quantities of Malaysian production, has given new life to the palm oil
industry.
The emphasis now is on the development and expansion of agriculture-related
production facilities. Much has been invested in research and development,
and in downstream 'value added' activities. The palm oil sector is
diversifying more into the oil and fats market. The rubber sector is
producing more goods, including gloves and condoms.
The Sixth Malaysia Plan says that agriculture has reached a watershed. The
private sector, as in other industries, is expected to play a central role
in onward development:
'In contrast to the previous plans, when agricultural development was
largely public-sector driven, the emphasis will be on the important role of
the private sector in revitalising the agriculture sector,' it promises.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page IV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5715</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAE2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Survey of Malaysia (6): A post-Cold War dilemma / Discussing
the country's 'abrasive' foreign policy
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By VICTOR MALLET
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THERE IS no mistaking the anxiety aroused in south-east Asia by China's
recent and loud reiteration of its claim to the South China Sea, a claim
underlined by the granting of an oil exploration concession in May to a
little-known American company in a disputed area near the Spratly islands.
Notwithstanding China's statements to the contrary, the governments of the
region believe that Beijing is taking advantage of a post-Cold War power
vacuum - left by the collapse of the Soviet Union and the withdrawal of US
forces from bases in the Philippines - to assert some authority over its
weaker neighbours.
The foreign ministers of Asean (the Association of South East Asian Nations,
comprising Malaysia, Indonesia, Brunei, Singapore, the Philippines and
Thailand) confronted the Spratlys dispute head-on at their annual meeting,
held in Manila in July. They put their concerns directly to their Chinese
counterpart Mr Qian Qichen, and appealled for a peaceful settlement of the
various disputes.
The claimants to the islets, reefs and atolls of the Spratlys include China,
Taiwan, Vietnam, the Philippines, Brunei and Malaysia - and all except
Brunei have troops in the archipelago. Scuba-diving expeditions for tourists
to one of the Malaysian-held islands are regarded as another useful way of
asserting sovereignty.
Mr Abdullah Badawi, the Malaysian foreign minister, told the Asean meeting
that his government wanted to sustain Asean's record as the world's fastest
growing economic region, and therefore viewed 'with grave concern' the
revival of the Spratlys issue.
'Any adverse development leading to heightened tension or conflict could
only result in dire consequences to the region's well-being,' he said,
'bringing in its wake the risk of extra-regional involvement and putting
back years of painstaking efforts at nurturing relations based on mutual
trust and confidence.'
The end of the Cold War, in other words, has created something of a foreign
policy dilemma for Malaysia, whose government regards itself as a champion
of the developing world and the non-aligned movement. The disintegration of
the Soviet Union threatens to give the United States an unacceptably
dominant role in world affairs, but too great a reduction of the US presence
in Asia could leave the way clear for equally unacceptable moves by regional
powers such as China, India and Japan.
Malaysia's response has been to continue condemning the west in public,
while maintaining good relations with the western powers in practice and
strengthening and rearming its own military forces. Western diplomats say
hopefully that they detect a lessening of Malaysian rhetorical support for
Zopfan - the south-east Asian, anti-superpower concept which stands for Zone
of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality.
Aside from arms purchases, Malaysia's ties with the west include the
five-power defence agreement (linking Malaysia, Singapore, Britain,
Australia and New Zealand), a commercial deal to repair US Navy ships at
Lumut on the west coast of the peninsula, and a US-Malaysian joint venture
called Airod at Kuala Lumpur's Subang airport to maintain C-130 transport
aircraft.
Malaysian officials and Kuala Lumpur-based diplomats agree that Malaysia's
abrasive foreign policy is very much the creation of Dr Mahathir Mohamad,
the prime minister.
They attribute his combative speeches - whether he is rejecting criticism of
Malaysia's logging industry or accusing the west of imperialism - partly to
personal conviction and partly to his ambitions as a leader of the third
world.
'He felt Malaysia would get more attention if it became more awkward,' said
one senior diplomat. 'His desire is partly to make sure that Malaysia is not
taken for granted, but also to put Malaysia on the map in a leadership role
for the third world.'
Dr Mahathir is said by his advisers to receive letters of support from other
third world leaders, who agree with what he says but do not dare to say it
themselves, although his confrontational style is not always appreciated.
At home, some officials have sought to prevent him from antagonising the
country's allies, and at the Earth Summit in Brazil in June he received less
support than he would have liked for his adversarial approach to the
industrialised nations. He also angered some of his fellow Asean leaders by
announcing a proposal to set up an East Asian Economic Caucus - a
controversial trade group excluding the US - without sufficient prior
consultations.
An increasingly important influence on Malaysian foreign policy is the
country's domestic Islamic constituency, which has some sympathy for the
newly-devout President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, for the Moslem inhabitants of
Bosnia and for all things Moslem.
Dr Mahathir often accuses the west of double standards - he recently
commented that western countries were willing to interfere in defence of
human rights in Malaysia but not in Israel or Bosnia - but his critics make
the same accusation in reverse about Malaysia. It was noticeable that
Malaysia took little interest in the persecution of the predominantly
Buddhist Burmese people by the authorities in Rangoon until Burmese Moslems
started fleeing into Bangladesh.
'Mahathir runs foreign policy, and some of what he does is aimed at
protecting his Islamic flank,' says another diplomat.
Perhaps the most commonly heard criticism of Malaysian policy is that it is
old-fashioned, rooted in the 1960s and based on the questionable assumption
that the world is divided into two rival factions - the rich industrialised
north, and the poor exploited south.
Such a world vision is difficult to reconcile with the reality of Asia:
while Dr Mahathir was forging a third world consensus on the environment at
a pre-Earth Summit meeting in Kuala Lumpur in April, companies and
governments from north and south were happily selling weapons to each other
at a defence exhibition a couple of kilometres away across town; in the
South China Sea, Beijing - a leader of the south - is flexing its muscles to
the detriment of its fellow southerners; and Malaysia, a champion of the
south, is developing so successfully along capitalist lines that it is well
on the way to becoming a fully paid-up member of the north.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page IV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5716</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAE1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Survey of Malaysia (4): Key Facts
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
                              KEY FACTS
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
Area                                                    329,293 sq km
Population                                               18.2 million
Head of State                              King Yang di-Pertuan Agong
Currency                                            Malaysian ringgit
Average exchange rate                  1990 USDollars 1=MDollars 2.70
                                       1991 USDollars 1=MDollars 2.75
Exchange rate, August 24      Pounds 1=MDollars 4.9545; USDollars 1=M
                                                        Dollars 2.484
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
ECONOMY
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               1990         1991
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
Total GDP (Dollars bn)                         42.4         46.7
Real GDP growth (%)*                            9.8          8.3
GDP per capita (Dollars)                      2,387        2,570
Components of GDP (%)
   Private consumption                         54.1         55.8
   Total investment                            32.3         35.8
   Government consumption                      13.6         13.8
   Exports                                     78.0         80.9
   Imports                                     78.1         86.4
Consumer prices growth*                         2.7          4.4
Ind. production growth*                        12.1         11.2
Reserves minus gold (Dollars bn,Dec)          6,205        7,251
Narrow money growth*                           15.6         na
Discount rate (% pa, year end)                  6.8          7.4
Stock mkt index growth**                       -7.4          1.0
Total external debt (Dollars bn)               19.5         14.9e
  Debt service ratio (%)***                    11.7         11.0e
Current account balance (Dollars bn)           -1.7         -4.4
Exports (Dollars bn)                           29.0         33.7
Imports (Dollars bn)                           27.0         34.0
Trade balance (Dollars bn)                      2.0         -0.3
Main trading partners****
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Exports       Imports
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
Japan                                          16.3         34.8
Singapore                                      22.4         17.4
US                                             16.9         16.5
UK                                              4.6          5.1
Germany                                         3.7          4.4
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
Notes:
(*)    Percentage change over previous year.
(**)   Percentage change at 31st Dec. over the previous year.
(***)  Total debt service as a percentage of all exports.
(****) Percentage share by value in 1991. (e) Estimate.
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
Sources: IMF, World Bank, Datastream, EIU, Asian Development Bank.
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page II
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5717</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAE0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Survey of Malaysia (2): In rude health - but watching Japan
/ The economy, in preventing overheating, the government does not want to
inhibit growth
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KIERAN COOKE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BY THE standards of the fast-developing countries of east Asia, Malaysia's
growth over recent years has been impressive. By the standards of western
economies, still trolling the economic depths, Malaysia's growth is a cause
for envy, if not amazement.
For the fourth consecutive year, Malaysia's economy grew by more than 8 per
cent in 1991. The evidence of this sustained boom is everywhere:
condominiums are being built on virtually every corner of Kuala Lumpur and
other cities. Roads are choked with the Proton Saga, Malaysia's
home-produced motor car. A country which not so long ago had unemployment
problems is facing serious labour shortages.
There is an air of economic confidence about. Since the beginning of the
year, the Malaysian dollar (the ringgit), has appreciated by between 7 and
12 per cent against major currencies. Large amounts of funds have been
lodged in the country, attracted by some of the highest interest rates in
the region.
Now, after running in the fast lane for a number of years, the economy looks
as if it is taking a short breather and contemplating the far-off finish
line target set by the government: full industrialisation by the year 2020,
demanding an average annual growth rate of more than than 7 per cent over
the next 27 years.
While the planners are making their projections, others are grappling with
some of the adverse effects of sustained growth: increased consumer and
public expenditure, rising rates of inflation, more imports and a growing
balance of payments deficit. But while seeking to apply the brakes to an
economy which shows signs of overheating, the government does not want to
inhibit the momentum for growth. Latest growth forecasts for this year vary
from 8.9 per cent at the top of the scale to 7 per cent at bottom. In the
first quarter of this year growth was 8.9 per cent.
The manufacturing sector has been the great success story of the economy.
Over the past 20 years, Malaysia has been transformed from a commodity-based
to a manufacturing economy. In the early 1970s, more than 80 per cent of
exports were commodities - mainly rubber, tin and petroleum products. In
1991, manufactured goods accounted for nearly 65 per cent of export
earnings, with electronics and electrical goods leading the export charge.
Overall, exports grew by 18.9 per cent in 1991, though imports grew by 30
per cent.
The manufacturing sector's performance has held up remarkably well, despite
the downturn in some of Malaysia's main export markets in the US and Japan.
In the first quarter, output in the manufacturing sector increased by 10.4
per cent compared with a 15.3 per cent rise in the same period in 1991.
However, this slowdown was in part offset by a marked increase in commodity
production, mainly of palm oil.
But the balance of payments is clearly an area of considerable concern. At
the beginning of last year, the Ministry of Finance forecast a current
account deficit of MDollars 4bn for the year. By the end of 1991, the
deficit had reached MDollars 12bn. In the first quarter of 1992 the trade
deficit widened to MDollars 2.2bn from MDollars 363m in the previous
quarter. Bank Negara, the central bank, forecasts that the deficit will
widen to MDollars 13. bn (about 10 per cent of GDP) by the end of the 1992.
The main share of the current account deficit is on services and foreign
investment income. Most analysts expect little change in the situation in
the short to medium term. The government has had some success in moderating
merchandise imports, in part as a result of tighter fiscal measures designed
primarily to fight inflation. Central bank officials are now predicting a
small surplus in the merchandise account by the end of the year, compared
with a deficit of MDollars 0.7bn last year, the first merchandise trade
deficit for nearly 10 years.
The fight against inflation is the other area that preoccupies Malaysia's
economic policy makers. Buoyed by renewed confidence in the economy, and
influenced no doubt by the conspicuous consumption indulged in by many of
the elite, Malaysians have been on something of a spending spree,
particularly in the first half of 1991 when domestic credit rose 70 per cent
on an annualised basis.
A number of privatisations in recent months, including the vastly
oversubscribed sale of a 22 per cent government stake in Tenaga Nasional,
the country's electricity utility - now the biggest company on the Kuala
Lumpur stock exchange - introduced another heady element into the financial
atmosphere.
Mr Anwar Ibrahim, the finance minister, surprised many by announcing a
mildly expansionary budget at the end of last year with continuing increases
in public expenditure. The government has, however, made determined efforts
to dampen consumer credit and limit the growth of the money supply.
In recent months the central bank has mopped up more than MDollars 2bn in
excess liquidity from the banking system as part of its anti-inflationary
campaign. It has tightened up on car purchase credit arrangements, resulting
in the first fall in car sales since 1987. Inflation is now about 4.5 per
cent on an annual basis, though food costs are rising considerably faster.
'With pragmatic monetary policies, and a little bit of luck, we could even
bring inflation down to 4 per cent or lower,' says Mr Anwar. Central bank
officials say they will not be happy until inflation is between 2 and 3 per
cent, and promise a new set of anti-inflationary measures in the next budget
at the end of the year. 'We want to make spending a bit more painful,' said
one official.
On the public expenditure side, the government is on the one hand determined
to push ahead with vital infrastructure projects to fight bottlenecks
already appearing in the economy, but on the other is conscious of the
dangers of runaway expenditure. In the first quarter of this year government
spending went up by 40 per cent to MDollars 7.1bn, mainly due to pension
adjustments and payments of salary arrears to civil servants.
Some projects, both public and private, are being reassessed. Costs overruns
on one project, the North South Highway, have reached MDollars 2.54bn,
against an original cost of MDollars 3.45bn. The government says the private
sector, both foreign and domestic, must be encouraged to play a greater role
in infrastructure development.
Whether or not that investment is forthcoming is crucial to the success of
economic plans. Malaysia is still very dependent on foreign investment:
about 60 per cent of the total investment in the manufacturing sector over
the past five years came from abroad. A number of investment tax incentives
for foreign investors have recently been removed. The government believes
they are no longer relevant to attracting more high technology, less labour
intensive projects.
Foreign investment dropped by 10 per cent last year to MDollars 15.95bn. In
the first six months of this year, MDollars 8.9bn of foreign investments
have been approved, though a small number of petroleum industry projects
account for the bulk of this figure and the number of new investment
applications from abroad is falling. While there has been a pick-up in
domestic investment, it seems that many Malaysians are still unwilling to
make substantial long-term investments - without the participation of
foreign capital.
Investors, both domestic and foreign, voice concern about the erosion of
Malaysia's competiteveness due to increased wages and the strength of the
Malaysian dollar. Some domestic manufacturers say they will be forced out of
business unless there is intervention to stop the ringgit rising any
further, though the central bank has been firm in its view that it cannot
interfere in the workings of the currency market. Manufacturers, it says,
have no choice but to improve their efficiency.
But no matter how efficient Malaysia's production becomes, it's economic
health is still to a very great extent dependent on a range of forces
outside its control. The fortunes of both the US and Japanese economies are
central. Together the US and Japan account for well over 30 per cent of
Malaysian exports. Japan accounts for nearly 25 per cent of foreign
investment in Malaysia, much of it in important projects such as production
of the Proton car. A serious downturn in Japan, the financial engine of
growth not only for Malaysia but for many other economies in the region,
would have serious consequences.
Till now, Malaysia has defied the consequences of bad economic times in its
main markets. That is going to be increasingly difficult to accomplish in
the months and years ahead.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page II
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5718</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAEZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Survey of Malaysia (3): 'Our market has matured and deserves
attention' / Profile of Rashid Hussein, stockbroker and exemplar of Malay
business skill
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KIERAN COOKE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
IN THE 1960s Mr Rashid Hussein went to London as a law student. Disenchanted
with the legal world, he switched to philosophy. Finally he pushed Kant
aside and moved into stockbroking.
Mr Rashid now runs the Rashid Hussein company (RHB), the first stockbroking
firm in Malaysia to be listed on the Kuala Lumpur stock exchange and the
largest capital market specialist in the country.
He is listed as one of the country's 25 richest directors: RHB, with pre-tax
profits of MDollars 68m in 1991, has its own modern office block in the
middle of Kuala Lumpur (the Rashid Hussein 1) and recently purchased a
controlling stake in the country's fifth largest bank.
Mr Rashid, still only in his mid-40s, was born in Singapore but changed to
Malaysian citizenship while away studying in London. He is often pointed to
as a leading example of Bumiputra - or Malay - entrepreneurial skill.
'I did not come from a poor background, but my family was certainly not a
very wealthy one,' says Mr Rashid. He discovered a flair for stockbroking
when he worked in the City of London in the early 1970s. 'When I returned to
Malaysia in the mid-1970s stockbroking here was a real bucket shop
business.'
Mr Rashid started to do investment research. He then joined Bumiputera
Merchant Bank, at that time part managed by Rothschilds, and became its
first Malaysian fund manager in 1976.
'It was very difficult at first. Customers, particularly locals, were unused
to dealing with a Malaysian fund manager. They preferred to deal with
foreigners. It took time to build up confidence and trust.'
By 1983, he had grown tired of banking and returned to stockbroking, setting
up Rashid Hussein Securities. 'I realised that, although things were
happenning in Malaysia, a lot of stockbroking business was going elsewhere,
particularly to Singapore'.
The opening of Rashid Hussein Securities coincided with a recession in
Malaysia, which swept away half Kuala Lumpur's stockbrokers. Rashid Hussein
survived, and in 1988 went public, a move fiercely contested by the
authorities.
'They didn't like the idea at all, but my argument was that I could show
them more banking failures than stockbroking failures. Most people thought I
was mad, but we needed capital to diversify into other financial areas in
order to take advantage of the deregulation going on in Malaysia and the
corporatisation or privatisation process.'
The Rashid Hussein company has certainly done well out of Malaysia's
privatisation policy. RHB was lead manager, along with Morgan Stanley, in
the late 1990 partial privatisation of Telekom Malaysia, the state telephone
utility. The privatisation involved the issuance of a USDollars 190.15m
sovereign bond, and was heavily oversubscribed.
Mr Rashid is married to the daughter of Mr Kuok Hock Nien, one of south-east
Asia's wealthiest businessmen, who heads a hotel, shipping and trading
empire. Competitors say such a connection gives Mr Rashid a distinct
business advantage: they also allege that a large measure of RHB's success
is dependent on Mr Rashid's connections with leading political figures.
'That's rubbish,' he replies. 'It's only envy. No one in their right mind
would think that the authorities would give you business if they thought you
couldn't deliver.'
For more than 20 years, the Malaysian government has had a policy of
positive discrimination in favour of the Malay majority, in order to give
Malays a greater share of national wealth. Mr Rashid admits that he has been
helped by this Bumiputera policy. 'If it had not been for the Bumiputera
policy, it would not have been easy to start off my business. There was help
with various banking facilities, but still it is wrong to conclude that this
alone is responsible for RHB's success. There's an awful lot of competition
in the financial market here now.'
Largely due to privatisations, plus a host of new companies coming to the
market, the Kuala Lumpur exchange is now south-east Asia's largest. Although
about 30 per cent of total funds on the market come from foreign sources, Mr
Rashid feels the main financial centres still do not take Malaysia seriously
enough:
'Many foreign investors still see Kuala Lumpur as one of the world's
colourful, rather exotic markets. They play with it, moving funds around.
It's still seen as a rather volatile market. Yet it has matured
considerably, and is worth much more attention.'
RHB now plans more regional moves. RHB was the first Malaysian stockbroking
company to win approval to buy a stake in a Singapore-based stockbroking
firm. The company is doing substantial business in Hong Kong, and there are
plans for expansion to the UK and US. 'We are going at things carefully, but
there's no reason why we Malaysians cannot compete with the biggest and the
best,' says Mr Rashid.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page II
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5719</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAEYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Survey of Malaysia (1): Still in the fast lane - The
government's goal is full industrialisation by the year 2020, requiring a
growth rate of 7 per cent in each of the next 27 years. The challenge is
immense, particularly in view of the dependence on foreign funds.
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KIERAN COOKE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ON A rainy evening earlier this month, Dr Mahathir Mohamad, Malaysia's prime
minister, stood in Kuala Lumpur's Independence Square and, with much fanfare
and pageantry, unveiled the latest model of the Proton, Malaysia's
home-produced motor car. It was a symbolic occasion.
When Dr Mahathir first announced the Proton project in the early 1980s, many
predicted disaster. How, they asked, could a poor country with under 20m
people sustain such a project? The prime minister was suffering delusions of
grandeur.
Today, every other car on the Malaysian roads is a Proton, and the car is
exported to 12 countries. At a time when car sales in most countries are
falling, capacity at the Proton factory is being expanded, with plans to
produce 120,000 cars in 1993 and 150,000 a year by 1995 (see also page 6 of
this survey).
As the Proton has bucked the international trend, so has the Malaysian
economy.
In the early 1980s, few would have predicted that the country would now be
in the economic fast lane and have moved from virtual stagnation to a
position where it is now expanding faster than any other economy in the
south-east Asian region, with growth of more than 8 per cent in each of the
past four years.
The turnaround in Malaysia's economic fortunes began in 1987, a year which
coincidentally marked a failed attempt to oust Dr Mahathir and subsequent
measures which led to a more authoritarian style of government. The
government made a big push for foreign investments: it also stepped up its
much praised privatisation policy. In 1987, there was just over MDollars 2bn
of foreign investment in Malaysia. In 1990, this rose to MDollars 17.6bn and
in 1991 was MDollars 15.9bn.
So far, more than 50 organisations, most of them former inefficient state
enterprises, have been fully or partially privatised. In the first six
months of this year, nearly MDollars 2bn was raised on the Kuala Lumpur
stock exchange, much of it through the part privatisations of Proton and
Tenaga Nasional, the Malaysian electricity utility.
Malaysia has been transformed from a mainly commodity-based to a
manufacturing economy. Economic success has brought a rise in incomes,
virtually full employment and a new sense of self confidence.
The goal now is full industrialisation by the year 2020 (termed 'Vision
2020' by the government's copywriters), necessitating a growth rate of 7 per
cent in each of the next 27 years.
But success has caused economic overheating, a growth in imports leading to
balance of payments problems, a battle against inflationary pressures and
serious infrastructural bottlenecks.
The challenge of achieving Vision 2020 is immense. Malaysia remains to a
large extent dependent on the economic health of its main trading partners,
the US and Japan. It is also still heavily dependent on foreign funds, which
account for 60 per cent of total investments in the manufacturing sector.
Many foreign companies have extensive linkages in the local economy: but
there is nervousness about competition, the formation of the North American
Free Trade Area (Nafta) and the leakage of investment capital.
Malaysia faces serious labour shortages: not enough technicians are being
produced to meet development needs. While the government has taken a tough
stance on unions, in its efforts to hold down pay, wages are rising.
Dr Mahathir has been in Malaysia's driving seat for more than 10 years.
There's no doubting his readiness to meet these difficulties head on. Some
are puzzled by his frequent attacks on the west. But often the prime
minister seems to be merely emphasising that Malaysia must become more
self-reliant.
'We do not want to beg from big nations like the US,' says Dr Mahathir. 'If
we can stand firmly on our own feet, we will not be pushed down easily by
the bigger powers.'
One academic has referred to Dr Mahathir as 'a latter day Malaysian Ataturk
. . . a man in a hurry, an impatient moderniser: a man with a clear vision
of doing, achieving, realising, not merely preserving and maintaining.'*
Less kindly, a former political foe once said that the prime minister, like
the doctor he is, believes in prescribing strong medicine: 'The problem with
Dr Mahathir is he is crass, rough and hard. This man pushes things down your
throat.'
Malays make up more than half Malaysia's population, Chinese account for
about 30 per cent, and the rest is taken up by Indians and native peoples.
For the past 20 years, the main thrust of Malaysian economic policy has been
the eradication of poverty and the greater participation of the Malays or
Bumiputras (literally 'sons of the soil') in the economy.
In 1971, as part of a response to serious race rioting, the government
inaugurated its New Economic Policy (NEP). It emphasised discrimination in
favour of the Malays in the economy, and set a goal of having 30 per cent
Malay ownership of the corporate sector by 1990 (see chart on page 2 of this
survey). The NEP was a partial success: according to government figures,
Bumiputras (including holding companies) controlled about 20 per cent of
corporate equity by 1990. But new disparities have emerged within the
Bumiputra community with the formation of a Malay elite grown fat on
government handouts and favours.
The government, the top echelon of which is Malay, says the NEP was
essential to prevent a racial explosion, and still insists on policies which
will give Malays a greater share of national wealth. But a new National
Development Policy (NDP), covering the years 1991-2000, puts far more
emphasis on growth as the principal way of achieving this goal.
Dr Mahathir frequently berates Bumiputras for what he sees as their
unwillingness to participate fully in the economy. The privatisation policy,
while increasing Malay equity holdings, has encouraged what Dr Mahathir
terms a 'get rich quick' attitude. Many Bumiputras have grown wealthy
overnight through preferential share allocations, sold on at considerable
profit. 'Because of a lack of confidence and patience, Bumiputras often sell
their licenses, shares and contracts on at enormous gain. . . So long as the
get-rich-quick attitude prevails, Bumiputras will fail in economic
activities.'
The new government message is clear: there will be fewer privileges from now
on. The umbrella of the state is slowly closing.
A policy which attempts to be less discriminatory and race-related carries
considerable political risks. The raison d'etre of the United Malays
National Organisation (Umno), the party which has dominated Malaysia's
politics since the days of independence from the British and headed by Dr
Mahathir, is the enhancement of the Malay community.
Factional fighting within Umno is a favourite political sport. There are
those in Umno who would not look kindly on any move that might threaten the
position of the Malays. The opposition - in particular, staunchly Moslem
elements - can capitalise on Malay dissatisfaction. Umno is deeply involved
in business, and through various holding companies influences performance in
a large slice of the economy. A system of political patronage has been
allowed to grow. Any attempt to unravel this could cause political ructions.
Dr Mahathir does not tolerate fools easily. Information in Malaysia is
carefully controlled. An emerging middle class might wish to have more of a
say in the direction of policy. A confrontational approach to any
opposition, whether at federal government or state level, does not seem to
augur well for steps towards national integration.
Dr Mahathir's strength lies in his government's management of a flourishing
economy. As long as the economic cake is big enough and keeps growing, there
seems little that can disturb the prime minister's pre-eminent position in
Malaysian political life. But if there is an economic downturn then problems
might occur.
It is like the Proton story. Malaysia's car has been a great success. But it
has been built with considerable financial and technical aid from Japan. Its
sales have been greatly helped by high import tariffs on foreign models. Dr
Mahathir is trying to make the Malaysian economy more competitive and less
protected, to face the challenge of the years ahead. To stay in the economic
fast lane will be tough going.
*Clive Kessler in 'Fragmented Vision, Culture and Politics in Contemporary
Malaysia', published by the Asian Studies Association of Australia.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page I
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5720</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAEXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Letter: National rate differential is diversion
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr FRANK BOLL
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, Lex (August 25) repeats the argument for dollar bearishness dominant in
the market today: that 'any immediate narrowing of the short-term interest
rate differential looks highly unlikely'.
A narrowing of that differential is not necessary for the dollar to bottom
out. An awareness that it stands at its maximum is sufficient. Sooner or
later activity in the US will pick up and that in Germany decline: that is
almost a certainty, and the market will realise it.
The expectation of an eventual narrowing is much more important than the
narrowing itself. The market is currently reluctant to consider the
likelihood of narrowing, mainly because such expectations have been
frustrated in recent months.
The market could also move its focus to many other subjects. Market
sentiment can turn round quickly and unpredictably.
Moreover, to earn the present 6.5 per cent differential, one needs to hold
D-Marks for one year. But the dollar has been known to move by 4 to 5 per
cent in just 24 hours at times during the last 10 years.
Finally, capital flows are provoked by portfolio decisions. The rising
interest rate differential has increased the proportion of D-Marks that
agents want to hold. As that proportion is approached, capital flows taper
off, in spite of the differential remaining the same.
Frank Boll,
managing director,
Ecofis,
Beatrijslaan 39,
3110 Rotselaar,
Belgium
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5721</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAEWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Letter: Rise in UK exports vital for companies' survival
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr IAN J CAMPBELL
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, Our worsening trade figures indicate that the UK is on track for a
Pounds 10bn deficit in 1992.
It is perhaps instructive that the figures were published on August 24, the
same day as your article, ''Heads buried in the sand' over VAT rules', which
pointed out that nearly 90 per cent of UK businesses are not yet prepared
for VAT reporting in the single market.
Until and unless exports feature as a priority on every chief executive's
agenda, our balance of trade will remain negative. Sterling will stay under
pressure, and interest rates, home repossessions and unemployment will
continue to rise.
UK companies must export more - not only to prosper, but to survive.
Ian J Campbell,
director-general,
Institute of Export,
Export House,
64 Clifton Street,
London EC2A 4HB
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5722</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAEVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Observer: Socialist art?
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
From the gallery guide for the current Sisley exhibition at the Royal
Academy:
Alfred Sisley remained a British citizen throughout his life, although he
made two attempts(in 1888 and 1898) to become a nationalised Frenchman.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5723</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAEUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Observer: Eye on the ball
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
No doubt it is a statistical quirk. But have you noticed that some big
British property companies, where the chairman has collected lots of outside
directorships, don't seem to be doing as well as those property companies
where the chairman has few outside interests?
Take Sir Nigel Mobbs, chairman and chief executive of Slough Estates,
Britain's largest industrial landlord. The 54-year-old Sir Nigel, whose
grandfather started the business, has been an executive director since 1963
and has led the company during the most successful period in its history.
He is also a non-executive director of Barclays Bank, Kingfisher, Cookson
and chairman of the DTI Advisory Panel on Deregulation.
Sir Christopher Benson, 59, chairman of MEPC, is another property magnate
with lots of outside jobs. He's also chairman of Boots and The Housing
Corporation, deputy chairman of Sun Alliance and a director of the Royal
Opera House.
Both men have able lieutenants to keep an eye on the shop when they are on
other duties. Even so their own companies are finding the current property
slump tough going.
Slough Estates has cut its dividend for the first time since World War II
and there must be some doubt about MEPC maintaining its payout.
Contrast the performance of these two companies with that of Land Securities
and British Land, whose respective bosses - Peter Hunt and John Ritblat -
are not over-burdened with non-executive directorships.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5724</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAETFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Observer: Ready-to-wear
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Recognition at last for the world's condom industry. Recent news from as far
afield as Japan and Russia demonstrate that the industry is finally coming
out of the closet.
Japanese couturier Michiko Koshino, has launched the country's first
designer condom. This season's colours are pink, blue, and natural. Called
Michiko London, it will be produced in a tie-up with Fuji Latex, Japan's
second largest condom maker, and sold through the 50 retail outlets in Japan
which bear her name. The American and European markets are next on the list.
Koshino says her 31 licensees who run the shops were at first uneasy but had
been won around. 'Having a condom in the handbag is fashionable for a young
woman', she avers. Koshino will donate her share of the profits - she
expects annual sales of Y2bn - to AIDS causes. Japan no longer thinks of the
HIV virus as a foreigner's problem.
Meanwhile, Observer hears that shopkeepers who run short of small change in
the Russian port of Severomorsk have found a novel solution - they give
their customers condoms instead.
Newspaper kiosks have started using contraceptives as small change instead
of more traditional alternatives like bus tickets, sweets or tiny packets of
salt.
It is not clear whether the kiosk owners are trying to promote safe sex or
simply getting rid of excess stocks.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5725</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAESFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Observer: Rejected
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The British government moves in strange ways in its efforts to revive morale
at the chalkface. Who has John Major just appointed as the new member of the
school teachers' pay review body? None other than Mrs Anna Vinton, joint
chairman of the Reject Shop.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5726</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAERFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Observer: Fine example
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The economics profession is out of touch with the real world and has failed
dismally to predict the future. So said Paul Ormerod, chief economist at the
Henley forecasting centre, at the British Association science meeting
yesterday.
Ormerod should know all about forecasting problems. In January last year
Henley predicted the UK economy would expand 0.8 per cent in 1991. In fact
it contracted 2.4 per cent. This January it projected 1.9 per cent growth
for 1992. Output now looks like declining by around 0.5 per cent.
Is this a case of self-flagellation, or is Ormerod offering himself as a
suitable case for treatment?
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5727</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAEQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Observer: Sending for Mr Major
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Does President Francois Mitterrand really know what he is doing in
attempting to enlist John Major's help for his own faltering pro-Maastricht
campaign?
Asking Britain's prime minister to appear on French TV ahead of next month's
referendum could be another sign of the old fox's astute political cunning.
But then again, it could be an indication that the 75-year-old president is
simply losing his touch.
Major does, it is true, tend to sound a lot more persuasive on the virtues
of Maastricht when translated into French. His eloquent support for the
treaty in his interview in Le Monde a couple of months ago - Je l'ai
negocie], j'y crois] - sounded a great deal more fulsome than anything
before.
On the other hand, the intervention of a politician from perfidious Albion
in French domestic politics might make many French voters suspicious of some
sort of outre-Manche plot against French interests.
Similarly, yesterday's announcement by Mitterrand's arch-enemy Jacques
Chirac, the leader of the neo-Gaullist opposition, that he will aid the
'Yes' campaign may have sent a frisson through the Elysee palace. Perhaps
Mitterrand would be well advised to rely on the support simply of Chancellor
Helmut Kohl - who has so many problems of his own that he clearly cannot
afford to meddle beyond his borders.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5728</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAEPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Letter: Change in attitude to dividends not recognised
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr R J STONE and Mr C EVANS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, The recommendations against dividend cuts by Professor Paul Marsh ('Why
dividend cuts are a last resort', August 12) are historically correct and no
doubt welcomed by nervous income fund managers. But are they relevant in
1992?
The majority of the survey covers a period when dividend cuts were
relatively unheard of. The rigours of a long recession are now exposing the
weak areas in the operations of many companies, and share prices tend to
discount dividend cuts long before any announcement.
What the survey fails to recognise is the significant change in attitude by
many companies to dividend payments over the past few months. As the
prospect of an upturn recedes and strong positions have weakened, the most
popular statement in the forthcoming results season could be: 'In order to
conserve resources your directors have decided to maintain/ reduce/pass the
dividend.'
The obviously weak will pass payments, those with fragile balance sheets
will reduce, while former stars of dividend growth will decide that a
maintained dividend or a modest increase will not only help future
investment but probably do little or no harm to their share price in the
current climate.
R J Stone and C Evans,
Dividend Analysis, 25 Luke Street,
London EC2A 4AR
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5729</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAEOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Letter: Driving out photocopier 'cowboys'
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr RON YOUNG
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, Members of the Finance &amp; Leasing Association, who account for about 80
per cent of the UK photocopier leasing market, are concerned about the bad
publicity on the industry ('Companies fooled by 'cowboy' copier salesmen',
August 18). Much coverage has not mentioned steps taken to correct the
situation described.
The vast majority of complaints are not against members of the FLA. Detailed
FLA guidelines were agreed in January addressing the problems of
documentation. These were registered by the Office of Fair Trading. All
members' documentation had to be revised by April 1 and this was achieved.
These guidelines ensure contracts do not contain unclear clauses which could
involve costly extras. They state that the period of hire must not be longer
than the expected life of the equipment.
We, like the CBI and the Campaign To Clean Up Copier Contracts, are
determined to eliminate the industry's problems. Ron Young,
chairman,
Finance &amp; Leasing Association,
18 Upper Grosvenor Street,
London W1X 9PB
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5730</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAENFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Letter: How to help industry without cutting rates
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr MALCOLM LEVITT
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, The impression that nothing can be done to help British industry until
interest rates fall is astonishing - the more so now that interest rates
might even be increased.
Let us initially assume that the public sector borrowing requirement must
not increase. The government should raise public spending in a manner which
maximises domestic output and employment per pound spent as soon as
possible. Public spending in any event tends to have a relatively low import
content, so that less leaks into the stimulation of foreign output than is
the case with personal consumption.
Simultaneously, it should declare that taxes will be increased from next
year - other than those which would raise business costs; the additional
revenue would be partly at the expense of reduced personal savings but
mainly at the expense of reduced consumption - which has a relatively high
import content.
The aim would be to ensure a balanced budget increase (that is, a fiscally
neutral one) over the coming 18 months - or longer. The net effect would be
a stimulation of domestic output. One might even drop the assumption or
requirement of fiscal neutrality and go for a straight increase in public
spending without a wholly offsetting increase in revenue, but for a limited
period.
Malcolm Levitt,
1 Oakcroft Road,
London SE13 7ED
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5731</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAEMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Busier groves of academe: Funding higher education will be
difficult
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW ADONIS and DAVID HOOK
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
More than one in four of the 16-year-olds in the UK who received GCSE grades
yesterday will be off to university in two years, on government projections.
Of their parents' generation, barely one in 10 went on to higher education.
In the mid-1980s, only one in seven 18-year-olds did so. By the year 2000 it
is expected to be one in three.
The challenge facing Britain's universities is to create a system of mass
higher education in about a decade. For all the current preoccupation with
schools opting out of local authority control, financing and building that
system is the most pressing policy issue on today's education agenda.
Most of the expansion will be met by existing, not new, institutions. While
educationalists argue about falling GCSE and A-level standards,
vice-chancellors are drawing up urgent plans to increase their student
intakes. The political pressure behind them is intense: Mr John Major sees
higher education as the key to his 'classless society', and not just for
school leavers. The number of mature students nearly doubled in the 1980s.
In 1990, for the first time, more mature than young students embarked on
courses, and the trend appears to be continuing.
In a research paper published this week by the National Commission on
Education, Professor A H Halsey of Nuffield College, Oxford, argues that
Britain is moving towards 'an American concept of higher education as
embracing all post-compulsory or post-secondary schooling'.
It is also moving towards American-size lecture crowds and American-style
student finance, with students borrowing or working their way through
college. Already, student maintenance grants are fixed, with a larger
proportion of state funding taking the form of loans each year. Fees for
full-time UK students studying for first degrees are still paid in full by
the state, but some vice-chancellors want to charge top-up fees to boost
their colleges' income.
The government is resistant, but if one prediction can be made with
confidence, it is that financial support from Whitehall will not rise by the
one-third necessary in real terms to keep pace with the rise in full-time
student numbers over the next eight years.
The increased numbers will not, however, be spread evenly across the system.
Glossy new signboards will not miraculously change South Bank Polytechnic
into Oxford. In reality a threefold division between research, teaching and
'mixed' universities will soon be as firmly fixed as the old divide between
universities and polytechnics.
The former polytechnics (now dubbed 'new universities') have borne the brunt
of expansion, some doubling in size. Student numbers at Leeds Polytechnic
will rise from 16,500 to 19,000 in the next year alone, on top of annual
increases of between 12 and 15 per cent in each of the past four years.
At the other end of the spectrum, between 1989 and 1994 Cambridge University
is planning to increase its full-time undergraduate numbers from 10,190 to
just 10,600. Cambridge is determined to defend its research capacity, and
believes that to be incompatible with any large increase in student numbers.
The new funding methodology used by the Universities' Funding Council, which
directs research grants disproportionately towards highly rated research
institutions, will enable it to do so without financial penalty.
Only about a dozen other institutions will be similarly privileged: the rest
 -including most of the 'old' universities - will have to pack in the
students to earn their cash.
'We have coped by putting immense pressure on the working week,' says Mr
Frank Griffiths, deputy director of Leeds Polytechnic. 'Our day now lasts
from 9 am to 9 pm. But the next increase will require more space - and
capital funding will have to be found from somewhere.'
'Somewhere' will increasingly be the commercial banks. The University
(formerly Polytechnic) of North London (UNL), which plans to double in size
over the 1990s, is completing a building project funded by the government.
For the rest of the decade its expansion will have to be funded largely by
loans and an appeal to mark its centenary.
The university wants to maintain its 1:10 ratio of bedspaces to students and
is anxious to prevent its staff:student ratio - at 1:20, already far worse
than for state secondary schools - from deteriorating further.
Says Mr Cliff Wragg, UNL's secretary: 'Five years ago we were not involved
in the commercial borrowing market: now, if we are to increase access, we
have no choice.' His main worry is the government rules that restrict
universities from borrowing against assets originally paid for by government
grants. The recent Pearce report on higher education expansion recommended a
relaxation of the rules, but the Treasury has yet to respond.
The 'old' universities have not been immune from the pressure. According to
estimates by the Association of University Teachers, last year's 'unit of
resource per student' was about Pounds 4,000 at Cambridge; but at Keele,
which is growing rapidly, it was Pounds 2,300. This year, half of Keele's
students are funded on a 'fees only' basis, with no contribution to their
overheads forthcoming from the Universities Funding Council. Spending on
repairs and maintenance in the 'old' university sector fell by about 50 per
cent in real terms between 1979 and 1990.
Visit a university, however, and you will find at least as much enthusiasm
as gloom. Vice-chancellors are full of ideas for moving to semesters to use
the year more productively, for using their buildings more efficiently, for
innovative use of information technology and distance learning, for the
franchising of courses, and for conference and research companies to
maximise income.
'Universities are big business, and we are less financially dependent upon
the government with each passing year,' says Mr Colin Campbell,
vice-chancellor of Nottingham University. How long that process can or
should continue is one of the principal issues of the next decade.
Additional reporting by David Hook.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5732</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAELFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / 'Collorgate' and the costs of corruption: Despite a carnival
atmosphere, Brazil's political crisis threatens prolonged economic
uncertainty
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTINA LAMB
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
In the demonstrations which have recently erupted across Brazil, demanding
the resignation of President Fernando Collor, there is a surprisingly
carnival-like atmosphere, despite the black mourning dress worn by
protesters. Such festive spirit is hard to understand in a country which is
suffering severe economic difficulties and which has now been plunged into
its worst political crisis with the publication this week of a congressional
report accusing the president of involvement in a multi-million-dollar
corruption scandal.
'We have inflation of 23 per cent a month and a minimum salary of Dollars 40
a month' complains one demonstrator who demands Mr Collor's departure.
'Things can only get better.'
Few doubt the importance of the coming weeks for the future of Latin
America's largest economy. After Wednesday's approval of the congressional
report on the scandal, which implicates its first president to be directly
elected for 30 years, Brazil is now set to embark upon the unfamiliar
process of impeachment.
The report was the culmination of 85 days of investigations by a special
congressional panel set up after Mr Collor's younger brother accused him of
profiting from his position on a large scale.
Although the focus of the inquiry was Mr Paulo Cesar Farias, the president's
former campaign treasurer, the final report detailed how in two and a half
years in office Mr Collor and his family profited from a kickback scheme run
by Mr Farias.
The report has underlined how deeply corruption is engrained in the
political system. Mr Collor came to office vowing to crush corruption; many
of his supporters were Brazil's 'shirtless ones', the poorest people in a
country with wide income disparities.
Tax revenues have fallen partly because of a belief that the government will
abuse the money. Added to that, the inaction in government as Mr Collor
struggles to hang on to his office threatens further the stability of the
government's fiscal position, which in turn puts at risk agreements with its
international creditors to reduce Brazil's debt.
The crisis has united Mr Collor's opponents. The fractious opposition of
more than 15 parties has joined forces to back a formal request for the
president's impeachment. This request will be presented to congress next
Tuesday, jointly by the heads of the Brazilian Lawyers' and Journalists'
Associations.
From his office in Brasilia, where he is sheltered from the worst of the
demonstrations, the country's 43-year-old president insists that the
situation is 'normal' and that he has 'no problem sleeping'. He refuses to
resign.
Brazil's current situation would cause a mood of despondency in most
countries. Professor Riordan Roett, head of the Johns Hopkins School of
Latin American Studies in the US, says: 'Increasingly I see Brazil as having
a set of intractable economic and political problems which no one person can
solve'.
Yet the mood in the streets is one of hope, particularly because the
military, which held power between 1964 and 1985, shows no sign intervening.
Even within the embattled government there is optimism. Mr Carlos Garcia,
the Minister for Special Projects, says: 'This is the ultimate crisis. The
good thing is if we can survive this we can survive anything.'
Over the next few weeks Brazil's this sentiment will certainly be put to the
test.
Mr Collor's lawyers are expected to put up technical challenges to the
congressional report, arguing that the subject of inquiry was Mr Farias and
thus did not have the right to incriminate the president. They also plan to
contest the impeachment process; the section of the 1988 Constitution which
sets down the procedure has not yet been ratified.
Mr Ibsen Pinheiro, president of Congress, has already said that he will
accept next week's request. The battleground then becomes the lower house of
Congress where a two-thirds majority is required to open proceedings.
Mr Collor's allies and opposition are currently engaged in a frantic game of
political arithmetic to ensure success in the vote. A wave of defections
prompted by the demonstrations and reflected in the overwhelming approval of
the report, suggests that Mr Collor no longer has the 168 votes needed to
hold onto power. Influential politicians and businessmen are already queuing
up to see Mr Itamar Franco, the vice-president who assumes office in the
event of Mr Collor's departure.
If the vote goes against Mr Collor he will be suspended from office for 180
days. Mr Franco will take over while the Senate carries out its own
investigation and hears the president's defence before making
recommendations to the Supreme Court on whether he committed a 'crime of
responsibility' for which the penalty is losing office.
A criminal investigation may also be brought against him by the Federal
Prosecutor, head of the country's independent judiciary. If convicted he
could go to jail. This is thought quite likely if impeachment is approved.
Even if Mr Collor manages to muster sufficient votes in congress to
withstand the impeachment process or succeeds in convincing the Senate of
his innocence it is likely to be a hollow victory. He is likely to be left a
lame duck president, discredited in the public eye and unable to push
through the reforms which are necessary to balance government finances and
revive the economy.
Whichever outcome emerges, the one certainty for the coming months is
continued economic paralysis.
Although the economics team has kept the currency fairly stable during the
crisis, all investment decisions by foreign and domestic companies are
currently on hold. Crucial fiscal reform has been delayed, tax revenues are
falling, an agreement with the International Monetary Fund has all but
collapsed threatening the recent accord with creditors on the restructuring
of Dollars 44bn of commercial debt.
In the year to the end of June, prices increased by an average of 850 per
cent, compared to 20 per cent in neighbouring Argentina. Monthly interest
rates are in excess of 30 per cent.
The financial markets are making no secret of their hope that Mr Collor
makes a speedy exit. They rose last week on rumours of his resignation and
again this week because the pace of events has been moving faster than
anticipated.
Already the slowest growing of the large Latin American economies, Brazil is
lagging far behind its neighbours in economic reform programmes such as
tariff reduction, privatisation, and particularly in fiscal reform. This
year, it is expected to achieve a nominal expansion of Gross Domestic
product of a meagre 1 per cent.
But long-term comfort is being drawn from the resilience of the country's
political institutions and the political reform expected to result from
'Collorgate'. These include new electoral rules and the introduction of a
parliamentary system of government, as well as the implementation of
anti-corruption measures being pursued by congress.
Mr Ulysses Guimaraes, Brazil's most respected politician, says that in his
44 years as a congressman he has never seen such a wide-ranging crisis. 'But
we now have the chance to create a new Brazil where no corrupt person can
come to power.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5733</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAEKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Letter: Over-shadowed
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   From Mr JOHN EAST
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Sir, Observer (August 24) errs in stating that, in 1991, the Daily Mirror
regained the number one circulation spot among national newspapers. The Sun
overtook the Mirror in 1978 and has remained ahead ever since. The Sun has a
circulation of 3,567,863, some 700,000 more than the Mirror, according to
Audit Bureau of Circulation figures for February to July this year.
If Observer was referring to the combined sales figure of the Daily Mirror
and the Daily Record in Scotland, this should have been pointed out to your
readers.
John East,
circulation director,
News International
Newspapers,
PO Box 481,
Virginia Street,
London E1 9BD
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5734</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAEJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Leading Article: How to advance British science
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE ANNUAL ritual of the British Association meeting, going on all this week
in Southampton, shows the strength of tradition in science - and journalism.
The BA attracts far more media attention than any other scientific event in
the UK. Several national newspapers have two or three correspondents at the
conference and they devote half a page or more to it every day. Yet serious
new research findings are hardly ever announced to the BA any longer, except
in the social sciences; even the great debates about scientific issues that
lit up Victorian meetings are now absent.
The journalistic endurance of the BA meeting is explained partly by its
timing, at a point of the year when papers are normally short of news. And
it is, for all its faults, the best showcase UK science has - an opportunity
that neither scientists nor those who popularise their work would wish to
abandon.
At this year's conference the president, Sir David Attenborough, launched a
corporate plan for the next five years. It envisages building on the
visibility of the annual meeting to expand the BA's other activities, which
remain largely invisible and, some scientists would say, ineffective.
The plan would increase the BA's promotional work among children and
teenagers - much needed in view of the continued decline of science in
British schools - and the general public. Another worthwhile expansion
scheme is to set up a network of 16 regional offices throughout the UK, each
with a full-time co-ordinator to stimulate year-round local activities.
Raising money
Its implementation depends on raising more money, with spending scheduled to
rise from Pounds 870,000 this year to Pounds 1.54m in 1996-97. Since the BA
relies largely on corporate and charitable funding (government grants making
up only 16 per cent of this year's income, and membership fees and
subscriptions 23 per cent) it will be appealing for more support from
industries such as chemicals, pharmaceuticals and electronics.
Companies whose prosperity depends in the long run on the health of British
science should respond generously, because the BA plan is soundly based as
far as it goes. But at the same time they should be pressing for a
fundamental realignment between the three ancient organisations charged with
promoting science in Britain: the BA (founded in 1831) and its two older
sisters, the Royal Society and the Royal Institution.
Meagre resources
Although the three already work together to a limited extent through Copus,
the Committee on the Public Understanding of Science, there is scope for far
more productive co-operation between them. Indeed, if they were not so
inhibited by their venerable traditions, it would make sense for the smaller
and poorer pair, the BA and Royal Institution, to merge. They could make
much better use of their meagre resources by joining forces. And the BA,
which is likely soon to have to leave its rented accommodation in Mayfair,
could find a splendid home around the corner in the neo-classical
headquarters of the Royal Institution.
In recent years the RI has been even less visible than the BA, with the
exception of its televised Christmas lectures, and is arguably in greater
need of revitalisation. Unlike the BA, the RI does some research in its own
laboratory. That has produced excellent results in the past, for example in
chemical crystallography, but the RI should ask itself whether a Mayfair
basement is still a sensible place for world-class physics or chemistry. If
not, the remaining research should move to a university and the building
should be renovated to provide a joint home for the BA and RI - a fitting
'Parliament of Science' for the 21st century.
At the same time the BA annual meeting must continue to move around
Britain's universities, as the country's leading festival of science. An
encouraging sign is the BA's recruitment of Mr Brian Gamble, head of the
successful new Edinburgh Science Festival, as its programmes director. His
challenge is to make the annual meeting more popular, while persuading
leading scientists to divulge genuinely newsworthy results.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 12
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5735</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAEIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Personal View: Worthy sacrifice
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By QUENTIN DAVIES
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Should the government change course on the economy? Not, we are told, if we
want to beat inflation. But does the cure have to be so tough? And is
controlling inflation worth the pain? These are surely the summer's most
important economic questions.
Inflation has become deeply embedded in our psychology and behaviour over
the past 30 years, and adjustments to deeply engrained habits of mind are
required as we move into a non-inflationary world. Moving out of inflation
requires nothing less than a reassessment of all assets and liabilities in
the country - a revision of the balance sheet of every business and every
family. Levels of debt which are prudent to hold under inflation become
foolhardy and dangerous once inflation can no longer be counted upon to
erode the real value of assets. So levels of debt have to be slashed.
There are only two ways to reduce debt levels. One is by saving a higher
share of current income and using it to retire debt. That, of course, means
that a smaller proportion of incomes will be available for investing and
buying goods or services. In other words, demand falls and recession ensues.
The alternative is the writing-off of debt through default and bankruptcy.
But that creates great strains in the financial system, reducing the capital
of banks and constraining their ability to lend. That further damps demand
and deepens recession.
What of the asset side of the balance sheet? In an inflationary economy, all
real assets carry a premium - the additional sum that people are prepared to
pay for them based on the protection against inflation they appear to offer.
But revising asset prices downwards has its pain. Where businesses have
borrowed money on security, or families have taken out high mortgages, they
may find themselves in technical default with the value of the borrowing
higher than that of the security. The result is more bankruptcies,
foreclosures and human disappointment.
This is exactly what is happening today in the UK. Is it avoidable? No, it
is an essential, inevitable part of the process of adjusting to a
non-inflationary world. The government would be unwise to halt the process
in mid-stream for two reasons. Firstly, a great deal of the pain has already
been incurred. Secondly, we almost certainly have a better chance of licking
inflation now than we have had for a generation. We have a government that
is committed to the task. And we have the European exchange rate mechanism,
which provides credibility to our monetary discipline.
But is the fight against inflation worth it? The answer is yes. Inflation
imposes great penalties on any society. There is the unfairness to millions
of pensioners and others with fixed incomes. There are the economic costs as
well. Businesses react inefficiently or perversely to changes in prices.
Investment decisions are more risky. Savings are directed into unproductive
stores of value, such as property.
Worst of all, our national self-confidence would be threatened if we find
that, after so many failed attempts in the past and after all the sacrifices
of the present recession, we are condemned to return to an inflationary
economy.
A final question remains: can the government do anything to alleviate the
pain? It is facing several constraints: it must not leave the ERM or devalue
within it; it must not reduce interest rates until the foreign exchange
markets signal that it is safe to do so; it must do nothing that would
undermine the credibility of its monetary policy.
However, when monetary policy has to be tight, it is a good moment to see
whether fiscal policy can take some of the strain. I think it can - and
should.
There are calls for the 'toughest ever' public spending round in the autumn.
That is right if the intention is to squeeze recurrent - what local
authorities call 'revenue account' - spending. If spending is too high,
total public debt may rise to a point where only inflation would enable any
government to sustain the burden of servicing it. That would destroy the
credibility of present monetary policy.
That fear will be much reduced if the markets accepted that any additional
public spending was genuinely non-recurring, as in the case of the German
government's accounts over the past three years. Such would be the case if
the government were now to increase investment spending in a move to take
advantage of lower construction and capital goods costs.
The problem is that the Treasury's accounts have never distinguished between
recurrent and non-recurrent spending, including capital expenditure.
It is not a semantical change that I am suggesting. It is the introduction
of a new rigour into the Treasury's rules - the need, which any well-run
business accepts, to distinguish between recurrent and non-recurrent
expenditure.
There may never be a perfect time to change the rules. But there is no time
like the present.
The author is a Conservative MP and a member of the House Treasury Select
Committee.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 12
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5736</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAEHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Tough times to keep on trucking: Europe's commercial vehicle
makers are restructuring, with the weakest players being swallowed up
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN DONE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
In 1950 there were 55 independent commercial vehicle makers in west Europe.
By the late 1980s the number was down to 11 and falling.
In the latest move in this ruthless war of attrition, DAF, the troubled
Dutch commercial vehicle maker in which British Aerospace holds a 16 per
cent stake, admitted yesterday that it had been forced to enter discussions
on 'a strategic alliance'.
DAF is refusing as yet to identify publicly the hoped-for saviour. It
appears, however, that it is seeking shelter under the giant shadow of
Daimler-Benz, Germany's biggest industrial group, although the two companies
seemed confused yesterday about each other's intentions.
Mercedes-Benz, the German group's automotive subsidiary, denied it intended
taking an equity stake in DAF, but admitted that discussions on a less
far-reaching collaboration were under way, after an approach from DAF.
As DAF's finances have weakened, so speculation about a predator has grown.
Until the disclosure of the present talks with Mercedes-Benz, an approach
has always appeared most likely to come from Japanese truck makers, which
have, until now, established a negligible presence in Europe.
DAF's well-developed pan-European distribution network and its expertise in
particular in heavy trucks would provide a highly attractive way into Europe
for one of the leading Japanese producers, Isuzu, Hino (Toyota), Mitsubishi
or Nissan Diesel.
The leading European truck makers are keen to discourage such an entry into
an arena where they feel competition is already sufficiently fierce,
however. A pre-emptive move to keep DAF out of Japanese hands could be
welcomed by rival truck makers in Turin, Paris and Gothenburg, although any
equity deal with Mercedes-Benz would come under severe scrutiny by the
European Commission's competition authorities in Brussels.
Mercedes-Benz is the world's biggest truck maker. It has made no secret of
the fact that it expects concentration in the European truck industry to
proceed apace to the end of the decade. And it is determined not to
relinquish its leadership.
'By the end of the 1990s we will have three supranational strategic
alliances in Europe, each with one major company at its core,' says Mr
Helmut Werner, who has led the Mercedes-Benz truck operations in recent
years and takes over as chief executive of the combined Mercedes-Benz car
and commercial vehicle operations next May.
The restructuring process in Europe is well-advanced, with the weakest
players either being swallowed up or falling by the wayside. They are under
pressure from falling sales, but just as important they are confronting
spiralling product development costs and rising expenditure to meet tougher
environmental regulations.
DAF, now in its third year of heavy losses, admitted yesterday that it was
seeking an alliance where the new partner would provide fresh equity to
bolster its battered balance sheet, as well as a collaboration where it
could share products, new product development costs and plant capacities.
Much larger producers than DAF have concluded that times are becoming too
tough to go it alone. In the most significant realignment of forces, Volvo
of Sweden and Renault of France have embarked on a far-reaching alliance
which includes 45 per cent cross-shareholdings in each other's truck
operations. This combination is the world's biggest maker of heavy trucks
(above 15 tonnes) and has overtaken Mercedes-Benz in this sector. The
Franco-Swedish alliance has made its play to be among the survivors at the
end of the decade.
The other member of the European premier league is Iveco, the commercial
vehicles subsidiary of Fiat of Italy, originally formed from the merger of
smaller Italian, French and German truck makers. In the second half of the
1980s it took over management control of Ford's UK-based truck operations,
and in its most recent move it has acquired control of Spain's loss-making
Enasa, the formerly state-owned maker of Pegaso trucks.
MAN of Germany, which itself has links with Mercedes-Benz with a cross-flow
of components, has swallowed up Steyr's truck operations in Austria. While
the big groups consolidate, the minnows continue to disappear. This summer
the small, privately owned UK truck maker, AWD, has been forced to admit
defeat and has called in the receiver after failing to make a go of of
General Motors' former Bedford truck operations.
For DAF, the present talks with Mercedes-Benz are a cruel reminder of how
quickly the hunter can become the prey. In the late 1980s it moved into high
gear in a drive to acquire the critical size that might have promoted it
into the top league of European truck makers.
In 1987 it took over the then British Leyland truck and van operations in a
move that transformed it from being essentially a heavy truck and bus maker
into a commercial vehicle producer. Buoyed by the record sales and profits
of 1989 it then tried successively to take over both Enasa in Spain and
Steyr in Austria, but each time it was thwarted as bigger rivals stepped in.
It successfully chose the peak of the wildly fluctuating truck market cycle
to float itself on the Amsterdam and London stock exchanges in 1989, but it
was not long before the ambitious rush for growth was knocked off course by
the gathering clouds of recession in the UK.
Among today's surviving European truck makers, DAF is exposed by having the
breadth of product range of the biggest players without their production and
sales volumes. It has entered a collaboration with Renault to develop a new
van range for the mid-1990s, but until it started its present negotiations
with Mercedes-Benz, it had failed to find a partner to share the much more
onerous product development burden on its truck side.
At the same time it has lacked the depth of financial resources to allow it
to emerge unscathed from the horrors that have beset its sales operations in
the UK, which became its single biggest market after the merger with
Leyland.
In 1989 the UK was still Europe's biggest truck market, but by the first
half of 1992 the heavy toll taken by recession had pushed it into fourth
place behind Germany, France and Italy.
DAF has tried to reduce its dependence on the UK by pushing hard to build up
its dealer network and sales, particularly in Germany and in France. Its
endeavours are beginning to bear some fruit in those markets, but in 1991
the UK still accounted for 29.4 per cent of group turnover.
It was little consolation that DAF actually became the truck market leader
in the UK last year, narrowly overhauling its bitter local rival Iveco Ford,
when at the same time overall UK truck sales were suffering their steepest
slide since the second world war with demand at its lowest level since the
early 1950s. UK truck sales have fallen by 60 per cent in the past three
years.
DAF's fortunes have changed with alarming speed, reflecting the dramatic
volatility of the European truck market. It fell into net losses of Fl 228m
in 1990 and Fl 394m in 1991 - and failed to pay dividends - after achieving
a record net profit of Fl 172m in 1989.
It was forced to raise new equity with a Fl 250m (Dollars 135m) issue of
convertible preference shares last autumn to strengthen its balance sheet,
and is currently in negotiation with both the Dutch and Belgian governments
about further capital injections. It is understood to be close to agreement
on taking a Fl 100m subordinated loan from the Netherlands Investment Bank,
while at the same time it is hopeful that the Belgian government will
guarantee a Fl 110m long-term commercial bank loan.
Since the onset of the UK recession DAF has optimistically forecast that the
next six months would bring some relief to its profit and loss account. But
with no help from its markets it is now having to rely on its own tough
remedial measures to staunch the losses. With the release yesterday of
figures for DAF's financial performance in the first half of 1992, Mr Cor
Baan, chairman of DAF's management board, could at least point to a
considerable reduction in the scale of the group's first-half losses to Fl
97.4m (including Fl 18.5m of one-off restructuring costs) from Fl 179.1m in
the corresponding period a year ago.
The company's earlier forecast - conditional on various favourable market
developments - of a break-even for 1992 after a loss in the first half, was
modified yesterday to a break-even only in the second half of 1992. The
'delayed market recovery' in the UK and the 'continuous deterioration of the
other west European markets' mean that DAF will again have to lower its
production during the second half of 1992, after a modest upturn in the
first six months of 1991.
Mr Baan maintains that between the end of 1991 and the end of 1993
restructuring measures will have taken costs of about Fl 500m a year out of
the business. With manufacturing operations in the Netherlands, Belgium and
in the UK, the company will have cut its workforce to less than 12,000 by
the end of 1993 from 16,782 in 1989.
The statements made yesterday by DAF and Mercedes-Benz about the state of
their negotiations suggest that, for the moment, the two companies have
rather different aspirations. DAF has constructed fairly elaborate takeover
defences to ward off any unwelcome bid, but its best protection in the short
term will come from the success of its own restructuring measures.
Volvo, its much bigger rival, provided little comfort yesterday with the
announcement that its truck operations had also plunged into loss in the
first half of 1992 in the face of a 7 per cent drop in the European heavy
truck market. It blamed lower capacity utilisation at its European
components and assembly plants and substantially higher product development
costs.
Mr Sten Langenius, president and chief executive of Volvo Truck, warned last
year that 'the outlook for the truck industry is very dark, if we continue
in the same old tracks as in the 1980s'. Volvo has sought its salvation in
alliance with Renault, and it appears now that DAF would value some similar
help from Daimler-Benz. It remains to be seen what the world's leading truck
maker is ready to offer.
 ------------------------------------
        1991 WEST EUROPEAN
           TRUCK MARKET*
 ------------------------------------
                Volume   (percent)
 ------------------------------------
Mercedes-Benz
                103,994    (32.8)
 ------------------------------------
Renault/Volvo
                 57,896    (18.3)
of which
Renault          31,481     (9.9)
Volvo            26,415     (8.3)
 ------------------------------------
Iveco-Fiat
                 56,321    (17.8)
(Includes Pegaso &amp; Seddon Atkinson)
 ------------------------------------
MAN (includes Steyr)
                 31,132    (12.0)
 ------------------------------------
DAF (includes Leyland DAF)
                 22,815     (7.2)
 ------------------------------------
Scania           18,963     (6.0)
 ------------------------------------
Others           19,055     (6.0)
 ------------------------------------
Total           316,891   (100.0)
 ------------------------------------
*Includes East Germany
Source: DAF
 ------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 12
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5737</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAEGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Leading Article: Fragile success of the Gatt
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE GENERAL Agreement on Tariffs and Trade is not the catchiest of titles.
European Community subsidies to oilseeds, Canadian restrictions on imports
of ice-cream and US customs user fees are not the most newsworthy of
disputes. No wonder the Gatt, though among the most successful, is neither
the best known nor the best loved of international economic institutions.
Unfortunately, it is loved too little by those whose love it needs most and
may, as a result, cease to be successful too.
Many, particularly in the US, will pour scorn on the notion that the
'general agreement to talk and talk' has ever been successful. Such American
denigration is surprising since the Gatt is largely a US creation. It is
also misguided. The Gatt has achieved all its founders could have reasonably
hoped.
The nature of that success - and the dangers to its survival - are brought
out in the report on Gatt activities in 1991 published this morning. The
foremost success is simply the growth of world trade, which has continued to
increase faster than world output in virtually every year.
The growth of world merchandise trade, to reach Dollars 3.5bn in 1991,
reflects 45 years of trade liberalisation, most of it achieved in the seven
previous rounds of multilateral liberalisation within the Gatt. The
international monetary system agreed at Bretton Woods has gone the way of
the dodo, but the Gatt has continued to exist, sometimes disregarded and
often denigrated, because it is an inter-governmental contract that
governments have known they need.
Powerful reason
Ever more countries know they need it. Eleven countries have joined the Gatt
since the start of the Uruguay Round of trade negotiations alone. More want
to join. The Gatt is becoming a universal trade organisation for a very
powerful reason. Its underlying principles - trade liberalisation and the
regulation of trade by internationally agreed rules - are now almost
universally accepted.
The report gives a startling sign of this acceptance: since the start of the
Uruguay Round 63 countries have liberalised their trade policies
unilaterally. This represents little less than a revolution in global
economic policy. It is one the major trading powers long sought, but to
which they now seem indifferent.
If the major powers are to play their part in the global move to the market,
it must be through the Uruguay Round. Here too, notes Mr Arthur Dunkel, the
Gatt's director-general, there have been successes. Normally, he notes,
initial objectives are whittled away in the course of negotiations. Not so
this time, he says.
Disputes settlement
Important achievements were already made in the mid-term review in 1988: new
surveillance procedures, for example, including a national trade policy
review mechanism, as well as a streamlined disputes settlement procedure.
More is still to come.
The Draft Final Act of December 1991 offered benefits fully in keeping with
the initial objectives: integration of textiles into the Gatt; improved
rules on emergency protection; a proposed Multilateral Trade Organisation;
what Mr Dunkel calls 'probably the most comprehensive intellectual property
agreement ever'; the draft General Agreement on Trade in Services; a good
chance to lower tariffs by one-third, along with substantial reductions in
many high tariff peaks; and, not least, proposals for liberalisation of
trade in agriculture.
It is on the rock of agriculture that the ship is foundering. All those
hopes and all the successes - from the ones piled up before the Uruguay
Round began to those embodied in its draft conclusions - hang in the
balance, as the US and the EC haggle over whether, and how, to reduce the
billions of dollars they waste on their farmers.
As Mr Dunkel rightly remarks: 'The keys to a final conclusion are held in a
very few hands. It is now up to them to provide the momentum for us to
finalise the multilateral negotiations.' The leading industrial countries
alone act as if the fate of the institution they created and of the
negotiations they started matters little. They know better. Posterity may
well condemn failure to complete the round this autumn as the most important
lost economic opportunity for a generation.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 12
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5738</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAEFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Arts: Reactions to chaos
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LYNN MACRITCHIE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ARRIVING in Kassel to attend Documenta IX so long after the heavily hyped
opening which drove the critics to paroxysms of spleen, what does one find?
Patient queues of art-lovers waiting hours for admission to the main
exhibition halls, and taking part with passion in debates about the works
they see there.
More than half a million visitors are expected to have come to Documenta
before it closes on September 20. As the self-proclaimed showcase for
contemporary art, the exhibition succeeds, and succeeds magnificently. The
audience, though required to possess stamina and patience, is never
short-changed: the amount of work on offer is huge - 190 artists from more
than 30 countries - and the show is undeniably comprehensive.
What seems to have bothered the critics so much, and also some of the
viewers who have come in their wake, is the refusal of the show to make
things easy. There are no pathways around this exhibition, no hierarchies to
help with identification of the great and the good: they are here - but they
need to be sought out.
The sense of confounded expectation which some have expressed about the
present show is partly due to the exhibition's historical legacy. Set up
after the war on the initiative of art historians Arnold Bode and Werner
Haftmann to make amends for the Nazi persecution of progressive art and
artists, Documenta was intended to bring to Germany the best art by those
leaders of the modern movement whose position was established before the
war. As well as a recognition and reconciliation, the first show was also a
triumph.
That opening exhibition included Picasso, Matisse, Braque, Leger, Max Ernst
and more, whose work had already set the style and standard of the other
exhibitors, and several of whom continued to be represented in subsequent
exhibitions (which are held every four or five years).
As the decades advanced and stylistic certainties crumbled, the sense of a
great presence, a unifying force, came to be centred in the work and persona
of Joseph Beuys, who put his stamp upon the event from Documenta 3 in 1964
until he died the year before Documenta 8 in 1987. That year, there was talk
of the exhibition having outlived its usefulness.
This year's show has no overwhelming individual presence (if that of guest
curator Jan Hoet, from the Museum van Hedendaagse Kunst in Ghent, is
discounted). It offers instead a cornucopia of the present, and seems to
have recovered enough confidence to carry through into the next decade,
despite the Cassandra cries of those who have characterised this year's show
as a descent into chaos. It spreads before us the myriad reactions of
artists to a world which is indeed in chaos, a globe in which certainties
have collapsed and the future in unclear.
The desperate need manifested in the piece by Bruce Naumann in which a
videotaped head repeats the commands 'Feed me, eat me, anthropology' and
'Help me, hurt me, sociology,' meets no answer. Next door, the three works
by Francis Bacon which were selected for the exhibition before his death
show how a lifetime's contemplation of the human condition may give no balm.
These bleak canvases make plain, as did the late works of Picasso, that we
are as driven by need, and as awkward in its satisfaction, at 80 as at 18.
To say, as many have, that there are no politics at this Documenta is wrong.
There are plenty, but they are as varied as the experiences which have
brought about the artistic responses they represent.
They are there in the shanty town which Tadashi Kawamata has erected by the
banks of the Fulda. They are there in the piano bar built by Vera Frenkel,
which is a metaphor for the fragility of human communication and the pain of
displacement. They are there in the torture chamber of Mike Kelley and the
car crash litter of Cady Noland. They are there because they are
inescapable. In a world of individuals, of difference - which this
exhibition so forcefully exemplifies - we all have the freedom of choice, to
care or not to care. And people do care, very much.
That is demonstrated clearly at the open discussion session which Jan Hoet,
no faint-heart, holds every day. Here he answers questions and argues with
visitors, stating his case, defending the show's determined variety and the
responsibility it places on the viewer. This is not popular. The loudest
voices in the discussion session I attended were those pleading for beauty,
demanding order, upset by the lack of stylistic coherence. When confronted
with work about which no line has yet been laid down, the exhibition-goer is
forced to be self-reliant. This delights Hoet, who has proclaimed that this
Documenta has no heroes.
What he means is that this time, the heroes must muck in with the rest.
Bacon, for example, is hung next to a series of photopieces by the young
French artist Suzanne Lafont which hold up well in their sense of dark
unease. There are no hierarchies of form, either. Paintings must struggle
against installations, some of which include loud soundtracks as part of the
work. Installations, too, compete against each other. Mario Merz, alloted
one of the largest spaces (filled with a piece which disappoints in its
empty grandiosity) is next to a clangorous bellows by Ulf Rollof and around
the corner from one of a series of clever videos by Tony Conrad.
Rose Finn Kelcey, one of five British artists, has a choice small space,
with one glass wall giving a vista of trees and a high ceiling, on which she
has placed, with a wry eye to the spectacular gestures around her, a small
familiar structure; this kennel, however, is for a god.
Documenta does not lack beauty: those for whom art and beauty are synonymous
need not despair - but perhaps they need to be more flexible in their
definitions. There is a beautiful video installation by Bill Viola, for
example, and a beautiful and thought-provoking installation by Joseph Kosuth
in the Neue Galerie. Perhaps most beautiful of all, in an unusual and
inspiring way, are the pieces by Marina Abramovic, best known as a
performance artist and a regular Documenta exhibitor.
This time she is not performing, but showing a series of pieces made from
amethyst crystals. One, called 'Inner Sky, for departure' set outside the
Documenta Halle, consists of a row of amethyst geodes, cut in half and
raised on metal tripods above head height. We are instructed to stand
beneath them and to look up. Doing so, one sees, like a vista of infinite
space, the perfection of the crystalline forms which the hollow centre of
each geode contains.
Beauty exists, order is made manifest, both in the natural world and in the
continuing struggles of artists to relate to the world we have created and
to help us do so: it may take effort, and trust, but the rewards are still
there.
Documenta IX, Kassel, Germany, until September 20
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 11
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5739</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAEEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Arts: Dreams from a Summer House
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Alan Ayckbourn the playwright reminds one of Ian Botham the cricketer. Their
great days may be over, but they are not finished yet and they retain the
capacity to surprise.
This is Ayckbourn's 45th full-length play in just over 30 years. The
surprise is that it is not really a play at all, but more a musical. Many of
the familiar ingredients are there: the none-too-happy family, a well-off,
but amiably stupid father, a mother who tends to lose her grip, a slightly
manic child, mismatches all over the place. This is Leatherhead, Surrey, and
a Home Counties summer party around the off-stage swimming pool.
There is also a less wordly strand. The piece is woven into the story of
Beauty and the Beast and, this being Ayckbourn, there is a twist. Both Belle
the Beauty and Baldemar the Beast (a splendid hulk of a man played by
Anthony Venditti) can communicate with ordinary mortals only by singing and
if the mortals reply in kind.
The start of the singing is the first surprise: the second is when it goes
on. At first, it seems a good Ayckbourn joke. Well before the interval,
however, we realise that this is quite an ambitious attempt at a musical in
its own right. What begins as pastiche develops a style of its own. Not even
the multi-talented Ayckbourn, who also directs, could write the music as
well. This is provided by John Pattison who has long produced musical
accompaniments for straight plays and now becomes at least an equal partner.
It would need a better musical ear than mine to detect every musical
allusion. South Pacific seems an initial and recurring theme, but that is
not the tenth of it. Sondheim, whose Into the Woods also relied on
fairytales, is there in the background. Yet one of the great pleasures of
the evening is trying to pick out the rest of them. There is a touch of Don
Giovanni and Rigoletto, Franz Lehar, Ivor Novello, Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber
and Leonard Bernstein.
The plot thins as the music goes on. Leatherhead diminishes into the
distance and the Ayckbourn text, although he wrote the words for the songs,
almost disappears. This is Ayckbourn having fun, and allowing others to do
it for him, but it is still Ayckbourn exploring new uses for his Scarborough
Theatre-in-the-Round. Whether Dreams would translate to the West End I
doubt. It may be too slight and too musically precious for a larger stage.
All the cast can sing, especially Jan Hartley as the Beauty.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 11
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5740</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAEDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Arts: The Nutcracker
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CLEMENT CRISP
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
IN HIS two late ballet scores, The Sleeping Beauty and The Nutcracker,
Tchaikovsky's art can be seen at its greatest. Beauty needs no further
bouquets here; Nutcracker is rather more problematic, since creative genius
was expended upon a flimsy tale - 'a ballet unworthy of our stage' was a
comment on the first performance.
But the chief numbers of the score - the marvellously vivid mouse-battle;
the snowflakes waltz; the grand pas de deux - are of such sublimity, and the
charm of the entire composition so irresistible, that the ballet has spread
into every corner of our dance world.
Fatuous productions - and we have had more than our fair share in this
country - have brought Nutcracker into some disrepute in the theatre, but
the current Covent Garden staging has helped rehabilitate the piece by
restoring much of the original Ivanov choreography, so that Nutcracker's
subtle view of a childhood world is realised.
Yet we have not known the resonances, intended by Tchaikovsky, that come
with the juxtaposition of the ballet with its operatic partner in
performance, and thus the importance of the Edinburgh Festival's decision to
recreate the original St Petersburg programming.
The choice of the post-modern troupe Adventures in Motion Pictures to
produce the ballet was a brave one. Matthew Bourne's small company (here
augmented to 17 dancers) has made a niche for itself with dance-theatre
pieces (more theatre than dance, too) which have commented upon ideas of
'Englishness' in Town and Country, upon Hitchcock's films in Deadly Serious,
and on social and sexual attitudes in various other shorter pieces.
With Nutcracker, Mr Bourne has been faced with the double problem of a
musical masterpiece which marvellously explores a very specific narrative.
He has, with some wit, triumphed over the matter of making a new story to
fit the score - or rather, of cunningly twisting the old tale to give it a
contemporary shape.
In rising to the choreographic challenges of music whose every bar speaks of
dancing, he has been at moments less felicitous, since the long spans of
movement implicit in the snowflakes ballabile and the grand pas de deux lie
outside the experience and potential of his brand of post-modernism.
The staging is, though, refreshing, good-humoured, well designed by Anthony
Ward. With a sly humour, the Biedermeier charms of the original are now
transformed into a dire Christmas in a Victorian orphanage presided over by
the grim Dr Dross. His companion in menace is the Matron; his children,
Fritz and Sugar, are the Squeers progeny, while the boy orphans have a
distinctly Smike-ish air.
Clara is the leader of the orphan girls. Their Christmas is of the most
depressing, but toys are provided, and Clara acquires a sailor-nutcracker,
on whom she lavishes her love. The mouse-battle is a dream in which the
orphans rebel against Dr Dross and his family, with the aid of the
Nutcracker, who becomes a handsome young man, leading hostilities that are a
pillow-fight worthy of Zero de conduite.
Clara is then led to a kingdom of snow, which is a skating rink owing
something to Ashton's Les Patineurs, where the very sugary Sugar turns into
a Sonja Henie and wins the Nutcracker as her beau. The disconsolate Clara
must watch their betrothal in the Kingdom of Sweets - Mr Bourne is very
amusing in devising sticky identities for his characters. Her love for the
Nutcracker is unrequited, it seems, but the choreographer has a heart (and a
dramatic sense that one might call Mills and Bourne) and as Clara awakens in
the orphanage again, she finds the Nutcracker in her bed. They escape down a
ladder of sheets to a happier, and plainly sexier, future.
This action is well founded - it has more dramatic force than the original -
and it sits without any awkwardness upon the score. The performances from
the Adventures in Motion Pictures cast are very jolly, bright-edged with
feeling.
I thought Etta Murfitt touching and true as Clara, and Andrew George
suitably heroic as her beloved. (There is a nice joke in partnering when,
instead of the conventional premier danseur elegancies, this Nutcracker
strikes some beef-cake poses). I salute Scott Ambler as a frightful Fritz,
and Anton Skzypiciel in the sweetmeats divertissement as a Dago-ish
ice-cream who might have strayed from Ashton's Facade.
The score is, in the main, cleverly handled by Mr Bourne: it is, as I have
noted, the grand and elegiac span of the second act adagio and the snowflake
ballabile that look minimised. The production is otherwise an amusing gloss
upon one of ballet's best - and least understood - texts. But as a companion
to Yolanta - and balance to the opera's lyric effusions - its interest is
far outweighed by the length of any evening which features the works in
tandem.
Sponsored by the Bank of Scotland and Kobler Trust
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 11
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5741</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAECFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Arts: Today's Television
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANTONY THORNCROFT
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
There is always room on the schedules for a soap based in a hospital and
Nurses could provide another hit for Channel 4 and its policy of buying the
best of American soaps. The first of 22 episodes goes out at 10 pm and in
its favour is a script by the undisputed Queen of the genre, Susan Harris,
whose previous credits include the eponymous Soap and The Golden Girls. This
one is set in the casualty ward of a Miami hospital and its success depends
upon whether you get hooked on the well-differentiated, slightly oddball,
characters.
Tax concessions have covered much of northern Britain with conifer trees.
Survival Special (ITV, 8 pm) penetrates these new forests to track one of
the rarest of our indigenous birds, and the largest true hawk, the goshawk,
which in its protected environment successfully swoops down and eats other
animals. So rare is the goshawk that the producer keeps the site of the
filming secret.
Edinburgh Nights on BBC2 at 11.30 pm should boost the Fringe takings of
Louise Rennison whose show is a witty monologue about her 1960s' youth in
Leeds, New Zealand, and swinging London.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 11
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5742</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAEBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Arts: Iolanta - Edinburgh International Festival
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD FAIRMAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
AT Christmas 1892, Tchaikovsky's present to the world was a unique
double-bill: one half opera, the other half ballet. The idea met with public
success at the time, but since then the two parts have followed separate and
very different paths: The Nutcracker has risen to become one of the
favourite ballets of the world, while the opera Iolanta (or Yolande) has
sunk into obscurity, at least outside Russia.
What better idea than to re-unite these long-lost siblings? The Edinburgh
festival has taken Tchaikovsky as its central theme this year and the
programming of both opera and ballet on the same evening promised certainly
novelty, probably education, and hopefully enjoyment. Opera North, with its
fine track-record of reviving neglected operas, was entrusted with Iolanta.
That started the evening, as Tchaikovsky intended.
The story was one with which the composer had long been enchanted. In
Iolanta, the blind princess kept from the truth about her lack of sight, he
had found an ideal person on whom to lavish his artistic affection. Like
Tatyana in Eugene Onegin, his most vital operatic creation, she is again a
blameless young woman, who has yet to discover the realities of the adult
world.
Whenever Iolanta is on stage, the music pulses with inspiration, welling up
to those insistently-repetitive Tchaikovsky climaxes that set the heart
racing. Though not in her best voice right through the evening, Joan Rodgers
easily made her portrayal the shining virtue of the performance. Clad in
virginal white, she played Iolanta not as a fey creature of myth, but as a
human being in embryo, facing the beginnings of real emotion.
Unfortunately, her appearances are interspersed with substantial sections in
which the pace falters. Each of the subsidiary characters is allowed his or
her aria. The opera moves disjointedly from one to the next and, despite the
advocacy of David Lloyd-Jones in the pit, there was no disguising
Tchaikovsky's inability to breathe life into the other shadowy fairy-tale
figures.
The most strongly-felt is the king and father, played by Norman Bailey,
whose voice no longer takes kindly to the stretching, angst-ridden vocal
lines that the role is allotted. The hero Vaudemont was fearlessly sung by
Kim Begley, but he was so stiff physically that he greeted ecstasy and
tragedy alike with the same lack of interest.
Robert Hayward turned his travelling companion into the archetypal Victorian
cad, full of his own bravado singing. The smaller roles were not generally
well taken.
The production by Martin Duncan dipped its toe into stylisation, but wisely
withdrew it to present the main characters with a semblance of realism. The
visual setting, comprising an all-white tree dropping multi-coloured leaves
over the stage, courtesy of the designer Anthony Ward, was already
self-consciously arty enough.
Altogether, a lesser achievement on the part of all concerned than one might
have hoped. It was after the interval that the eyes really were to be
opened.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 11
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5743</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAEAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Management: Holidays in hell - How Thomson copes when a
tourist spot becomes a disaster area
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
When Hurricane Andrew beat its ruinous path through the Caribbean and
America's southern states this week, managers at Thomson, Britain's biggest
holiday company, reckoned they would be spared their usual problem of
persuading tourists of the seriousness of the situation.
If radio and television warnings did not convince holidaymakers that they
should leave the area, Thomson executives thought the sight of locals
boarding up their windows and abandoning their homes probably would.
Chernobyl, the Gulf War and the civil conflict in Yugoslavia have given
Thomson skills which go beyond booking hotels and printing holiday
brochures. The company, which takes more than 3m Britons abroad on holiday
every year, has had to learn to cultivate foreign politicians, negotiate
roadblocks and evacuate holidaymakers when airports are closed.
Rivals in the travel industry complain about Thomson's arrogance and scoff
at its perceived inability to react quickly to shifts in holidaymakers'
tastes. They give the company high marks, however, for its skill in
extracting its customers from uncomfortable holiday spots. On a single day
last year, the company successfully evacuated over 500 holidaymakers from
Yugoslavia.
Thomson was spared the need to carry out a full-scale evacuation from the US
this week because Hurricane Andrew passed south of Orlando, site of Walt
Disney World, where the company had 2,500 holidaymakers. It did have 114
customers in the Bahamas, directly in the hurricane's path. Of those, 104
were flown home last weekend and 10 were evacuated to Orlando. An additional
135 tourists in Fort Lauderdale, north of Miami, were also flown to Orlando.
The company reported little resistance by holidaymakers to being moved out
of danger. Tourists at the centre of previous disasters have not been so
amenable.
At the time of the Chernobyl nuclear accident in 1986, Thomson had 192
tourists in the Soviet Union, some in Leningrad and others travelling from
Kiev to Moscow. The company flew a Boeing 767 to Moscow, but found that many
of the travellers, assured by their Soviet guides that they were in no
danger, were reluctant to leave.
Martin Brackenbury, who was then deputy managing director of Thomson
Holidays, says the company sent a large supply of British newspapers,
complete with lurid headlines about the nuclear catastrophe, with the
aircraft. The tourists boarded the aircraft grumbling, picked up the papers,
fell silent and buckled their seat belts.
Thomson has had to ensure that, in coping with disaster, managers do what
they know best. After some confusion of roles during previous emergencies,
Thomson has now established the rule that policy-makers decide on such
matters as when to stop sending tourists to troubled areas, leaving
operations managers to deal with the mechanics of getting customers home.
Sally Jennings, Thomson's operations manager, says reviews after each large
evacuation have led the company's management to divide itself into
'thinkers' and 'doers'. 'Responsible managers always think they should be
there doing things, but a director may not be the best person to arrange the
aeroplanes,' she says.
Central to Thomson's disaster management is a glass-walled 24-hour duty room
at the company's north London headquarters. Two staff members scan computer
screens, noting such humdrum problems as aircraft delays and runway
closures. Above the screens is a board of emergency numbers of senior
Thomson staff. In the corner is a black telephone, capable of handling a
conference call involving up to 12 people, which Thomson resorts ring in
case of emergency.
The company is constantly on the alert for news of widespread civil unrest
or impending war. Its travel representatives abroad are one source of
information. They are usually British, however, and might not be aware of
local political undercurrents.
More useful in the gathering of intelligence are Thomson agents abroad.
These are usually successful local entrepreneurs who have worked as Thomson
contractors, selling day trips to customers or providing coach services.
It was Thomson's agent in Tunisia who alerted the company to the
anti-American demonstrations taking place in the run-up to the Gulf War and
warned that anti-British feelings were likely to develop too.
The company also maintains frequent contact with the Foreign Office,
although Thomson, along with other travel companies, believes that British
diplomats sometimes understate the danger to tourists. 'The Foreign Office
can be quite conservative,' says Jennings. 'We have to push them into making
a statement.'
If it appears to the duty room staff that a crisis is brewing, they contact
one of the managers delegated to deal with disasters, who decides whether to
set the company's emergency procedure in train.
This involves the marshalling of three teams: the information team, which
keeps communications open to the site of the emergency; the client welfare
team, which fields calls and visits from concerned relatives; and the
support services team, which books flight tickets and carries out whatever
changes need to be made to the office arrangements in the Thomson building.
If the incident is sufficiently serious, the latter would include turning
the staff canteen into a reception area for relatives and installing banks
of press phones. Bill Ridley, the aviation manager, would turn his office
over to the Kentish Town police, who would arrange for officers to visit
next-of-kin to inform them of any fatalities.
The final part of Thomson's disaster management is arranging evacuation
transport. The company owns a charter airline, Britannia, but it is not
always possible to fly to the disaster area. For example, at the time of the
Chernobyl disaster, the Soviet authorities refused to give Thomson
permission to land until the May Day parade was over.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 9
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5744</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAD9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Management: Cut the dividend not the development -
Christopher Lorenz urges companies to improve the quality of their spending
on R&amp;D
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTOPHER LORENZ
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
As Britain plunged into recession two years ago, a waggish Australian
colleague quipped that 'short-termism' might turn out to be the only growth
industry for the next few years.
He was half-right, but he may also prove half-wrong.
There are some indications that companies stinted on long-term investment in
1991 to bolster their dividends; such suspicions are always hard to prove,
but the Bank of England hinted as much in its quarterly statement last week.
More predictably, the dying National Economic Development Office said last
month that cash which should have been spent on innovation has been diverted
into dividend payments over a number of years.
On the other hand, leading companies have certainly created another growth
industry over the past few months: dividend cutting. Investment institutions
are divided over its pros and cons, but the signs are that there is plenty
more of it to come.
This is not the first time that top British companies have slashed their
dividends in a profits or cash squeeze. In the last recession, ICI and
several others did so. But various things are different this time:
First, with the recession worse and more prolonged than in 1980-81, the
number of dividend-cutters looks like being far larger. Second, the ignominy
associated with the practice is likely to be less. And third, the nature of
the 'short-termism' debate has shifted. Last time, most critics of those
companies which maintained (or increased) their payouts in the face of
falling profits were worried that this was at the expense of capital
investment; now the concern is over research and development.
In financial theory, well expounded recently by Professor Paul Marsh of the
London Business School*, companies never need to face a choice between
dividend and investment levels; if they are short of retained earnings for
investment, they can raise outside finance.
Yet this is not the way that many companies, and even some investment
institutions, perceive the situation. Instead they complain about the
unbalanced trade-off that tends to be made in the UK between dividends and
investment.
There are several reasons why more concern is being shown this time about
research and development than capital investment. Firstly, Marsh's own
studies have shown that few sophisticated companies take capital expenditure
decisions on financial grounds alone; long-term strategic factors also weigh
heavily.
Research and development - or R&amp;D, as the two activities are often
misleadingly bracketed - is quite another matter. There have been few
academic studies of how 'R' and 'D' decisions are made. My general
impression is that they are still too often treated as dispensable items of
annual expenditure, to be trimmed or slashed the moment profits slide.
Another reason for the emergence of R and D as such an issue has been the
belated realisation that human knowledge nowadays often adds greater
competitive value and advantage than do mere machines and mortar. The
government-backed Innovation Advisory Board has banged the 'R&amp;D' drum
especially noisily.
Its most useful act has been to initiate the compilation of an annual 'UK
R&amp;D Scoreboard' for over 300 companies, complete with (mostly damning)
international comparisons. This year's list, published in June, contained
for the first time each company's dividend payout - revealing some
fascinating cases where R&amp;D expenditure and dividend outlays were almost
identical. Needless to say, the total value of dividends grew rather faster
in 1991-92 than did that of R&amp;D.
The third reason for the new focus on 'R&amp;D' has been this summer's attempts
by the Institutional Shareholders Committee and the Accounting Standards
Board to persuade companies to disclose more information to the stock
market.
The ISC's proposals are especially sensible. First, they propose that
disclosed expenditure should be divided clearly between pure research,
applied research, and product or process development. This overdue splitting
of 'R' from 'D' would, as the ISC says, be helpful since each's time
horizons, risks and potential returns differ. Moreover, it is in development
rather than research, that UK industry needs to put much more effort.
Second, the ISC's 'development' category would be much wider than the
current official accounting standard for R&amp;D, and would include all
development of existing products and processes, no matter how minor.
The all-important question of expenditure definitions has yet to be
resolved. But if companies want stock market support, they should applaud
the ISC's initiative, and not - as some have done - turn coy about making
further disclosures.
Rather than merely complaining about continued pressure for unrealistic
dividends, they should put their own house in order. The best way to do that
is not to cut R, and certainly not D, but to increase the productivity of
both. This is neither a short nor an easy task, but many Japanese and a few
US companies have shown it can be done.
* FT August 12. See also LBS paper on Dividend Announcements and Stock Price
Performance.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 9
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5745</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAD8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / The Property Market: Uncertain times
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Economic uncertainty prevented the emergence of any clear-cut trend in the
property industry in July, according to the Investment Property Databank, an
independent research group.
Its monthly index showed a slight shortening of yields to 9.7 per cent,
which resulted in a positive total return in July of 0.1 per cent. This was
an improvement on the June figure but it lagged behind the previous two
months.
The longer-term figures appeared more optimistic, largely because this
summer's results have been better than those of last summer. In the year to
July, total returns improved by half a percentage point to 2.2 per cent, the
highest level for more than two years. In spite of a further decline in
rental values, year-on-year capital depreciation showed some sign of slowing
with an improvement of nearly half a point over the June figure.
The retail sector posted a slight fall in total return in July to 0.5 per
cent. The office sector improved with nearly half a point rise in returns to
 0.4 per cent. For the year to July, returns reached -5.4 per cent, nearly a
point higher than last month and the highest 12-month return since October
1990.
Total returns for the industrial sector also improved by nearly half a
point. At 6.2 per cent, the year-on-year total return has fallen to its
lowest level since November.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5746</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAD7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / The Property Market: Ain't no cure for the summertime blues
 -There is no seasonal respite
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By VANESSA HOULDER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
The property industry's summer lull was deceptive. While its movers and
shakers escaped to the Cote d'Azur, the heat was still on in London.
Market commentators have stopped talking about recovery in 1993 and,
instead, wonder if forecasts of a recovery in 1994 are too optimistic. The
anxiety is shared by the equity market, where property shares have plumbed
record depths.
At the start of the summer property analysts believed that rents might
stabilise over the next year as the economic recovery took hold. Yields had
stopped rising and seemed likely to harden in line with falling bond yields.
Optimists suggested that the recovery in the values of property such as
retail warehouses and supermarkets were harbingers of a broadly-based
improvement. In early June, Mr John Ritblat of British Land, one of the UK's
largest property companies, cheered the market by declaring that 'for the
first time since 1989 we think we have seen the worst'.
But over the summer, support for the market has been dragged down by
increasing concern about the economy as a whole. As prospects for a reversal
in employment trends deteriorate, so does the likelihood of a stabilisation
of rents. Concern too over ratification of European Monetary Union and the
recent volatility of leading currencies has discouraged those who believed
that yields will come down with interest rates.
Even those who do not believe in a link between property yields and interest
rates remain pessimistic. Mr Chris Turner of stockbroker BZW, for example,
says that yields will remain high because there has been a 'fundamental
shift in investors' perceptions of the value of rental streams', as a result
of oversupply, the shortage of credit, decline of the institutional lease
and the fall in inflation.
A lack of market confidence has been widespread. A recent poll by Gallup for
Chartered Surveyor Weekly found that fewer than half the country's senior
property directors and fund managers believe there will be any meaningful
recovery in the market before the second half of 1994; a quarter believe
recovery will not take place until 1995 or later. In a separate poll, fewer
than half the bankers surveyed by Chesterton, the chartered surveyors,
believe there could be a recovery in the next year.
Commentators have also downgraded their market forecasts. UBS Phillips &amp;
Drew, the securities house, expects further falls in average capital values
of 11 per cent this year and 4 per cent in 1993. BZW, another broker,
reckons capital values will fall by 10 per cent this year and 6 per cent the
following year.
But capital values for different types of property will tumble by different
rates. BZW forecasts that office values will decline by 14 per cent and 7
per cent in 1992 and 1993 respectively, while retail property values will
fall by 6 per cent in both years and industrial property by 6 per cent and 5
per cent over the same period.
Just as variations exist in different sectors of the market, so it is a
mistake to generalise about locations and quality of property. For instance,
the provincial office market is relatively robust, according to St Quintin,
a chartered surveyor. With the exception of Glasgow, the largest regional
office centres have a relatively small supply of new space. Rental growth
averaged 7.7 per cent in Bristol, Birmingham, Leeds, Manchester, Edinburgh
and Glasgow in 1990 and 1991.
Some analysts believe there is even a case to be made for the central London
market. Applied Property Research (APR), an independent research group which
has been pessimistic about the central London office market since 1987, has
changed its view. APR's Mr Geoff Marsh suggests that supply and demand for
the relatively small number of large high quality buildings in the West End
has already balanced out.
Even in the City, Mr Marsh says that well-located, modern buildings could be
taken up much faster than analysts suggest. 'My instinct is that things have
hit bottom,' he says.
This belief that the top end of the market is nearing recovery is not shared
by all. Kleinwort Benson, a broker, says a shortage of modern office space
in the City is unlikely to arise till well into 1995. In any case, the
outlook for the market as a whole is still poor, with a particularly dismal
outlook for old buildings, in the Docklands or on the City fringes.
The dominant role played by the central London market in the portfolios of
the large property companies explains in part the abysmal performance of the
companies' share prices. With the largest property companies valued at half
their prospective asset values and on average yields of more than 9 per
cent, the market is in uncharted territory.
'The buyers for recovery have burned their fingers too many times and there
are no buyers left to take over the running,' said Kleinwort Benson earlier
this month in a company bulletin.
At some stage, the property share market will see a sharp correction.
However, given the stock market's traditional ability to anticipate a
recovery in property values by at least 18 months, its present condition is
hardly encouraging for the underlying property market. The message from the
economy and the stock market is clear: all bets are off for a recovery in
the property market for well over a year.
 ------------------------------------------------------------------
IPD MONTHLY INDEX
 ------------------------------------------------------------------
Monthly change (Index based at Dec 1986 = 100)
 ------------------------------------------------------------------
                Jul 1992      Jun 1992      Changes
IPD             167.85         167.68         0.18
Retail          155.61         154.81         0.80
Office          159.55         160.17        -0.62
Industrial      233.28         233.01        -0.27
 ------------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5747</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAD6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / French government rule our realignment of currencies
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE French government yesterday ruled out a realignment of currencies in the
European monetary system, saying that there was a 'common political will'
among member countries to maintain present parities.
Mr Michel Sapin, finance minister, said realignment was 'not on the agenda'.
He also ruled out devaluation. 'If the franc did move within EMS, it would
not go down, but in the opposite direction,' he said.
He said the G7 countries had already taken 'technical steps' to arrest the
decline of the US dollar and would continue to do so. The turmoil in the
currency markets is being discussed at a meeting of G7 deputy finance
ministers in Paris, ending today.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5748</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAD5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / First light in bitter Yugoslav imbroglio: The war in Bosnia
goes on, but the London conference has made headway
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JUDY DEMPSEY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE London conference has achieved a measure of success in winning the
agreement of all parties to participate in long-term negotiations on the
future of the Balkan peninsula, in spite of being unable to stop the
fighting in Bosnia.
The conference yesterday adopted a three-pronged strategy aimed initially at
resolving the crisis in Bosnia. But each precarious step has to contend with
the same obstacle that has hampered western efforts all along: the
reluctance to back up threats with action, most notably the use of force.
The first part of the strategy is to beef up the United Nations presence in
Bosnia in order to protect the humanitarian aid convoys. The UN's mandate in
Bosnia does not allow it to do that, as witnessed when the UN came under
fire while delivering relief supplies to the Serb-besieged eastern Bosnian
city of Gorazde.
The London conference's draft document on Bosnia envisages establishing a
much enlarged international peacekeeping force under UN auspices to maintain
the ceasefire and control movements by military forces on the ground. If the
UN's mandate is amended in this way, as proposed by Mr Boutros Boutros
Ghali, the UN secretary general, the danger is that its forces on the ground
will be forced to defend themselves, thus jeopardising their impartiality.
'This was exactly the argument recently used by Britain as a reason for not
changing the UN's mandate,' said an EC diplomat. 'Yet now we are trying to
change the UN's role so that Nato can avoid taking any military decisions
about becoming involved in Bosnia.'
This first strategy is supposed to run in parallel with the second prong
aimed at increasing diplomatic, political and economic pressure on Serbia so
that Belgrade will stop supporting the Bosnian Serb fighters.
Mr Milan Panic, prime minister of the new, unrecognised Yugoslavia, has
already asked the London conference to monitor the borders between Serbia
and Bosnia.
'That's a sincere gesture. But Bosnia's Serb forces are loaded with weapons.
Disarming these people is what we should be addressing,' an EC foreign
minister said. This will take a long time and will again involve risk to
those international forces monitoring the process.
Moreover, as Mr Haris Silajdzic, Bosnia's foreign minister has repeatedly
said, sanctions against Serbia will not stop the war, they will not allow
any future Bosnian government to claw back territory seized by Croatia and
Serbia, and they do not provide for the rebuilding of bombed homes from
which Bosnia's Moslems were expelled.
The threat of more sanctions is also designed to apply pressure on Belgrade
to negotiate the restoration of autonomy to the Serb-controlled southern
province of Kosovo so as to prevent the war from spreading to this part of
the Balkans.
Mr Alois Mock, Austria's foreign minister, pointed to the obstructive
tactics of Mr Slobodan Milosevic, the Serbian president. 'Time and again
throughout this conference, we have seen Milosevic refusing to accept
international mediators to negotiate the future status of Kosovo on the
grounds that the conference is interfering in the internal affairs of
Serbia,' he said.
The third part of the strategy is designed to tackle all these complex
problems. Six permanent committees based in Geneva will be set up in the
wake of the conference.
These will negotiate the future constitutional status of Bosnia, the status
of ethnic minorities throughout the region, and the restoration of economic
ties between the republics.
UN and EC diplomats admit that the committees cannot hope to stop the
fighting immediately. 'We said from the outset that this conference would
not stop the fighting,' said Mr John Major, the British prime minister. His
advisers say addressing the issues of ethnicity, nationalism, and identity
throughout the Balkans is a long term process.
Geneva is a long way from Sarajevo and Kosovo, from the fighting and the
tension on the ground. Many of the ethnic communities in the former
Yugoslavia are looking for a clearer sign of help from the west than is
likely to be provided by another round of negotiations in a distant capital.
The conference has given momentum to the search for peace. But there is
widespread fear that if the three-pronged strategy has no military force to
underpin it, the roar of Balkan mortar could again devour the western
diplomatic effort.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5749</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAD4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Rostock rushes in extra riot police
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LESLIE COLITT
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BERLIN
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
AUTHORITIES in east Germany's riot-torn city of Rostock are working
desperately to prevent clashes this weekend between right-wing extremists
and thousands of left-wing counter-protesters, following a fifth night of
violent attacks on asylum seekers and the police.
Thousands of police reinforcements are being rushed in from northern Germany
to head off a confrontation when more than 10,000 left-wingers from all over
Germany are expected to stage a counter-demonstration against the right in
Rostock tomorrow.
Last night, some 2,000 people marched in silence through the city in protest
at the violence. 'If we capitulate to violence, we have lost democracy,'
said Mr Christoph Kleermann, president of the city council.
However, although the mood among ordinary Rostockers has changed, they
remain adamant that a hostel for asylum seekers should not have been located
in the middle of a housing estate.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl yesterday called the riots a disgrace which damaged
Germany's reputation.
The riots on Wednesday night spread to Eberswalde near Berlin, scene of a
recent trial of five skinheads who killed an Angolan asylum seeker in 1990.
Neo-Nazi demonstrators marched from the town centre to a freshly evacuated
hostel for asylum seekers shouting 'Sieg Heil' and 'solidarity with
Rostock.' In clashes with the police 32 demonstrators were arrested.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5750</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAD3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Paris gets the jitters as more say 'Non' to Maastricht:
Mitterrand is battling public hostility to the socialists in next month's
French referendum
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By Our Foreign Staff
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
TO persuade the French electorate to vote 'Yes' to the Maastricht treaty in
the September 20 referendum, President Francois Mitterrand's administration
is urging them to overcome their antipathy to the ruling Socialists - and
keep their eyes fixed on the hostile world outside France's borders.
But voters appear ill-disposed to respond positively to this appeal. One
opinion poll this week showing growing opposition to the treaty indicated
that 20 per cent of the French saw their vote as a reflection of their views
of Mr Mitterrand. A total of 45 per cent thought he should resign if the
result was 'No'.
The government has one standard response to these signs of popular
moroseness: if the 'No' vote wins, then things will get even worse.
'A 'No' would be unimaginable,' declares Mr Jack Lang, the minister assigned
to co-ordinate the government's campaign. 'It would destroy the collective
work of Charles de Gaulle, Georges Pompidou, Valery Giscard d'Estaing and
Francois Mitterrand.'
Rejection of the treaty, said Mr Lang, would unleash a 'catastrophic
scenario. . . It would mean Washington and Tokyo would rub their hands, the
yen and the dollar would triumph, and the D-Mark would become Europe's
definitive single currency.' For good measure, he added that a 'No' would
spark 'a bourse crisis, a crisis of confidence, a depression which would hit
the whole of Europe'.
Mr Lang's words of warning, though overblown, seem not entirely fanciful.
Concern about French rejection of the treaty has been an important factor
behind the unrest on European financial markets this week.
Mr Lang's sentiments seem also to have struck a chord with the right-wing
opposition. One of the main reasons behind Mr Mitterrand's June decision to
call the referendum was to expose splits on the right on its attitude to the
treaty. The president seems to be having some limited success.
Much to their discomfort, leaders of the establishment right, by asking the
electorate to put France's overall European interests ahead of their
distaste for Mr Mitterrand, are being forced to back the government's line.
Mr Jacques Chirac, the former prime minister and leader of the RPR
neo-Gaullist party, yesterday broke a political silence of nearly two months
to give reluctant support to the treaty. His intervention in the wake of the
anti-Maastricht findings of this week's opinion polls, could prove a
milestone.
'I shall vote 'yes'. . . I ask those who have trusted me to trust me again
on this,' Mr Chirac told an interviewer. Mr Chirac called the Maastricht
Treaty mediocre and poorly negotiated by President Mitterrand. But he added:
'My conviction is that we do not have the right to stop the construction of
Europe. . . to isolate France and make it in some way the black sheep of
Europe.'
It remains to be seen whether Mr Chirac's exhortation will be followed by
the Gaullist rank-and file. Opinion polls indicate that 73 per cent of
Gaullist supporters oppose Maastricht - above all because of fears that the
project for European union would dilute France's standing and power in
Europe.
Given the traditional support of French governments for the goal of European
union, Mr Chirac clearly believes that the opposite is true. His declaration
came hard on the heels of a statement by Mr Edouard Balladur, the former
finance minister and Mr Chirac's right-hand-man, pointing out that, for
France's international standing, 'the dangers of refusal (of the treaty)
appear greater than those stemming from its approval.'
As campaigning gets under way, the government will have to fight off not
only the diatribes of Mr Jean-Marie Le Pen, head of the extreme right wing
and anti-Maastricht National Front, but also the arguments of other
anti-Maastricht campaigners such as Mr Jean-Pierre Chevenement, the former
Socialist defence minister, and Mr Philippe Seguin, the nationalist RPR
politician.
Mr Mitterrand will also have an uphill struggle to convince the voters that
the treaty is not, as the pro-communist CGT trade union put it this week, 'a
mechanism of the banks and forces of finance' designed to 'crush' the
interests of ordinary employees.
The paradox is many voters fear that, under the Maastricht treaty, France
will automatically lose power in the new Europe - above all, to renascent
Germany.
Mr Mitterrand and Mr Chirac argue precisely the opposite: that the treaty,
particularly through economic and monetary union, is the only way to
constrain German power, above all by taking monetary policy out of the hands
of the Bundesbank, and investing it in the hands of a European central bank.
The politicians now have less than a month in which - as Mr Mitterrand put
it - to 'explain, explain, explain' what the treaty is all about. Even if
the explanations flow fast and furious, the fog of confusion, by September
20, may be only a little less dense.
 --------------------------------------------------------------
            FRENCH PUBLIC OPINION POLLS (PERCENT)
 --------------------------------------------------------------
Pollster            Date         Yes  No   Abstain  No Idea
 --------------------------------------------------------------
Le Monde/Sofres     15 May        40  19     21       20
Le Parisien/CSA     04 June       40  18     42
TF1/Sofres          21 June       51  18     13       18
Le Figaro/Sofres    01 July       37  23              17
Liberation/FOP      02 August     44  34              22
Paris-Match/BVA     05 August     28  22     14       36
L'Evenement/CSA     19 August     32  28     40
VSD/Louis Harris    25 August     33  31     39        7
Paris-Match/BVA     25 August     27  30     10       33
 --------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Salomon Brothers
 --------------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5751</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAD2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Spivs in the sights of Russian spy-catchers
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOHN THORNHILL and LEYLA BOULTON
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MOSCOW
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
RUSSIA'S new security ministry, heir to the sinister KGB, is turning its
attention from spies to spivs in an attempt to stem a flood of illegal
exports of precious natural resources.
At a press conference at the infamous Lubyanka building, one-time prison and
KGB headquarters, security officers said they had unearthed systematic theft
from key state enterprises in central Russia and the Urals on an
'astounding' scale.
'Our data prove there is a well-structured network of criminal groups
specialising specifically in taking strategic resources out of the Russian
Federation,' said Mr Andrei Chernenko, the ministry spokesman.
A recent operation, codenamed 'Trawl', had prevented the smuggling of 9m
tonnes of metals, 604,000 tonnes of petrol and oil products, 2,000 cubic
metres of lumber, and chemicals worth Dollars 20m (Pounds 10m).
Officers described how some gangs operated convoys of trucks protected by
armed guards to ship smuggled goods. One bogus trading company had even dug
up 52km of railway lines to smuggle out of the country.
The ministry said there was evidence that many of the smuggled goods were
being channelled through the Baltic states with the collusion of government
officials. Russia has so far failed to create proper borders with other
former Soviet republics. The rouble tumbled on Russia's fledgling currency
exchange yesterday to Rbs205 to the dollar from Rbs168, close to its lowest
level this year, Leyla Boulton writes. The government blamed inflation, but
the slide was also prompted by expectations that the government and central
bank will loosen monetary policy.
It was also announced yesterday that Mr Vladimir Shumeiko, the new first
deputy prime minister, will be responsible for the country's industrial
policy.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5752</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAD1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UN urged to consider military action
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID BARCHARD
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE UN should be prepared to consider military intervention to halt the
fighting in Bosnia Hercegovina, Turkey said yesterday, adding it would be
willing to contribute troops if asked to do so.
Mr Hikmet Cetin, the Turkish foreign minister attending the London
conference, said it was difficult to explain to the Turkish public why the
west wanted Turkey's help for military intervention in Iraq if it was not
also willing to intervene in Bosnia.
He said feelings in Turkey were running high because there were 3m people in
Turkey of Bosnian origin and an estimated 30,000 Bosnian refugees had fled
there.
Mr Cetin said Turkey would not be drawn into any regional conflicts in the
Balkans, whether in Bosnia or in Kosovo or Macedonia. 'Turkey will not act
alone.'
However, he criticised the EC for not recognising Macedonia because of Greek
objections to its name.
He also denied reports that Turkey had put its application for full
membership of the European Community, originally made in 1987, on the
backburner.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5753</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAD0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Czechs and Slovaks set divorce terms: Two prime ministers
finally see eye-to-eye over ending a 74-year-old union
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ARIANE GENILLARD
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   PRAGUE
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
CZECHOSLOVAKIA will be divided into two separate republics linked by a
customs and currency union when the federal state is dissolved at the end of
this year. This was agreed by Czech and Slovak leaders after their sixth
round of constitutional talks in Brno this week.
Mr Vaclav Klaus, the Czech prime minister and Mr Vladimir Meciar, his Slovak
counterpart, also outlined the constitutional steps needed to prepare the
Czech and Slovak republics for formal independence by January 1,1993.
The agreement in principle to create a customs union and a currency zone in
which future Czech and Slovak currencies would be linked by a fixed exchange
rate, is aimed at reducing the economic dislocation involved in dividing the
74-year-old Czechoslovak state. No timetable has been fixed for introducing
separate currencies which would be issued at a one-to-one exchange rate.
'For the time being, we will effectively maintain one currency, but at the
same time put in place a mechanism which allows for realignments if they
prove necessary,' Mr Karel Dyba, Czech industry minister, told the FT.
In Bratislava, the Slovak capital, Mr Ludovit Cernak, Slovak economics and
industry minister, said 'the Slovak government is prepared to co-ordinate
its economic policies with its Czech neigbour to ensure that the one-to-one
exchange rate is maintained indefinitely.'
Negotiators have been discussing ways to resolve the fate of the
Czechoslovak federation since last June's elections brought nationalist
leaders to power in the smaller Slovak republic. While seeking international
recognition for their republic, Slovak leaders have insisted that some form
of economic union be maintained with the wealthier Czech republic which
traditionally takes the bulk of their semi-finished products.
The exact details of the custom and currency agreements will be contained in
two documents which are being prepared by the federal government. The
documents will then be passed to each republic for approval.
Monetary co-ordination is expected to be managed by the existing Financial
Council which includes finance ministers from both republics and the
governor of the central bank. The institution met occasionally over the past
two years to discuss significant economic policies affecting both republics.
The formation of a customs union reflects the desire to ensure that
dissolution of the federation does not jeopardise the country's obligations
towards the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the trade association
agreement signed with the European Community last year.
The constitutional divorce, meanwhile, will be achieved through a law being
prepared by the federal government for approval by the federal assembly by
the end of the year. It provides four alternative methods of legitimising
the dissolution: through an agreement between the two republican
parliaments, through a vote in the federal assembly, by means of a
referendum, or unilateral secession.
The latter option now appears unlikely. The Slovak constitution, due to be
voted on in the republic's parliament next week, and which could have
brought an early de facto end to the federation, is now expected to have a
clause suspending its introduction until January 1, 1993.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5754</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UN troops in former Yugoslavia should expand human rights
mandate
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By FRANCES WILLIAMS
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   GENEVA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
UNITED NATIONS troops in the former Yugoslavia should have an expanded human
rights mandate, Mr Tadeusz Mazowiecki, said yesterday, writes Frances
Williams in Geneva. The former Polish premier, appointed UN special human
rights investigator this month, said he would also recommend the setting up
of an international commission to investigate atrocities.
Human rights were 'totally non-existent' in Bosnia, he said after a five-day
tour which took in Zagreb and Vukovar in Croatia, Banja Luka, Bihac and
Sarajevo in Bosnia, and Belgrade, the Serbian capital. Citing world inaction
after earlier reports of gross human rights abuses, he told reporters in
Geneva that what mattered was ending the war and the atrocities. The
international community had to provide 'effective help and effective
remedies'.
His preliminary report to the UN Human Rights Commission, due to be sent to
the 53 members today, would include a recommendation to enlarge the mandate
of UN forces to report, and perhaps act to prevent, human rights abuses,
which they cannot now do.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5755</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Venomous twist in Milan scandal
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HAIG SIMONIAN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MILAN
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
SHARP differences have emerged within Italy's Socialist party following a
number of bitter attacks in Avanti, the party newspaper, on the Milanese
judges investigating the city's corruption scandal.
It is widely believed that the attacks have been inspired by Mr Bettino
Craxi, the Socialist party leader.
The Socialists have held sway in Milan, Mr Craxi's personal power-base,
almost uninterruptedly since the war, and have been badly tainted by the
scandal.
Leaked extracts from statements by some local politicians under
investigation have dented Mr Craxi's claims to have been unaware of the
widespread practice of kickbacks and undercover funding for the city's main
political parties.
The increasingly personal broadsides, written anonymously, have focused on
Mr Antonio Di Pietro, the best-known of the magistrates conducting the
inquiries. Amid veiled allusions to a less than honourable past, the paper
has suggested that, in time, Mr Di Pietro would be revealed to be 'very
different from the hero talked about'.
The personal tone and insinuations of the Avanti articles could prove
counter-productive. This week, Mr Carlo Ripa di Meana, Italy's Socialist
environment minister and a former European Commissioner, wrote an open
letter to Mr Di Pietro, dissociating himself from the articles. Mr Giacomo
Mancini, a veteran party leader, has also come out strongly against the
paper, as have a number of prominent Socialist mayors.
More than 70 people, mainly politicians, have so far been arrested. But
rumours of the impending arrest of leading businessmen and politicians
continue to grip the city.
On Wednesday, shares in Mediobanca, the powerful merchant bank, were marked
down sharply after conflicting reports of the death, or arrest, of Mr Enrico
Cuccia, its octogenarian honorary chairman, though the rumour was swiftly
denied. On the same day Italy's constitutional court turned down an appeal
for the release of Mr Salvatore Ligresti, the Sicilian-born property magnate
in Milan's San Vittore prison for over a month.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 2
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5756</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Technology (Worth Watching): Fingerprints on the plant pot
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LOUISE KEHOE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
DNA fingerprinting is most commonly associated with forensic investigations
and paternity suits, but researchers at the CSIRO division of horticulture
in South Australia are using it to identify plants.
Their work may lead to the establishment of a commercial facility for
growers who want to guarantee the identity of their products and protect
their rights to plant varieties.
If, for example, a winery has produced a successful wine from a new grape
variety, it can be positively identified using DNA fingerprinting.
CSIRO has isolated small pieces of DNA, called microsatellites, which are
characteristic of grapevines but which show minor differences in length
between different varieties. CSIRO: Australia, 08 274 9244.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5757</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Technology (Worth Watching): Speedy scanner devours
documents
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LOUISE KEHOE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Transferring mountains of paper on to a computer system so that they can be
indexed, filed and searched is a time-consuming and labour-intensive
process. Either the documents must be re-typed or slowly fed into an optical
scanner.
Software from Ymijs (pronounced images) Ltd makes the job faster and more
accurate. The intelligent character recognition system can process text at
less than three seconds per page. Thus documents can be fed through a
scanner non-stop.
With almost human cunning, the Iciris system can decipher text that is
skewed, enclosed in form-style boxes, shaded, inverse or imperfectly
printed. Ymijs Ltd: UK, 081 518 1414.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5758</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Technology (Worth Watching): Cables stand up to the strain
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LOUISE KEHOE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
American Superconductor has announced an advance in the quest for
superconducting transmission lines, that can conduct electricity with little
energy loss.
The Watertown, Massachusetts company has produced prototype multi-stranded
conductors that can withstand the rigours of bending and strain that would
be faced in commercial use. Previous prototype cables degraded when the
cables were bent or coiled.
Special characteristics of the wires making up the cable provide resistance
to strain. Each wire is a composite of up to 10,000 internal filaments -
microscopic superconducting elements- which run through the wire.
In addition to saving energy, superconducting cables promise to enable
electrical utilities companies to transmit larger amounts of electricity
than on conventional cables, providing big cost and performance
improvements. American Superconductor: US, 617 923 1122.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5759</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Technology (Worth Watching): Antidote for paracetamol
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LOUISE KEHOE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
The British Technology Group has licensed Penn Pharmaceuticals, a
manufacturer of products used for the prevention and treatment of poisoning,
to manufacture and distribute tablets combining paracetamol with its
antidote, methionine, which helps to prevent liver damage if large doses of
paracetamol are taken.
Although paracetamol, known in many places by the brand name Tylenol, is a
widely used an effective pain reliever, an overdose can be fatal because it
leads to irreversible liver damage unless the patient receives swift
treatment.
Methionine is an amino acid that increases the level in the liver of a
substance called glutathione, which protects the liver from paracetamol
poisoning.
The combination of methionine with paracetamol in a single tablet or capsule
provides a safer painkiller with built-in protection against liver damage.
BTG holds patents on the combination. British Technology Group: UK, 071 403
6666. Penn Pharmaceuticals: UK, 0495 711711.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5760</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADTFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Technology: Paint by number - Researchers have found a
simple method of detecting disease
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By EVELYN BRODIE and CLIVE COOKSON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A rapid new technique for showing up genetic abnormalities, known as
chromosome painting, promises to make the diagnosis of cancer and certain
genetic diseases faster and cheaper.
The first chromosomal paint to reach the market is the result of a joint
venture between the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California and
Imagenetics, a medical diagnostics company based in Illinois.
They have developed fluorescent tags which can specifically label each of
the 23 pairs of chromosomes present in normal human cells. Each tag is a
pool of between 10,000 to 100,000 fragments of DNA that will identify only
the chromosome from which they have been made.
Another chromosome painting kit has been developed in the UK at Cambridge
University's department of pathology and is being commercialised in
collaboration with Cambio, a biological reagents supplier also based in
Cambridge.
The products were developed initially for scientific research. Doctors are
now hoping they receive quick approval from the regulatory authorities in
the US and Europe for use in routine clinical diagnosis.
The technology enables scientists quickly and accurately to spot defects
within cells, such as missing or extra chromosomes, or genetic material
exchanged incorrectly between two chromosomes. The ability to identify
genetic changes in evolving cancer cells should help doctors both to direct
therapy to specific targets and to analyse the effectiveness of treatment.
Last October Imagenetics began commercial production of orange paints for
nine chromosomes. Each paint kit can perform 20 tests and sells for Dollars
400 (Pounds 200). Sales took off much more quickly than expected for a
product sold for research purposes only, and according to the marketing
company Life Technologies, the paint has generated record telephone
inquiries.
The initial success recently led Imagenetics to offer the original nine
chromosomal paints in an additional green colour, which will allow two
chromosomes to be identified simultaneously within any cell. A second set,
containing nine more chromosomal paints, will become available later this
year.
Doctors using the paints appear to have no doubt about their usefulness. For
example, in patients with chronic myeloid leukaemia, genetic material from
chromosomes 9 and 22 is mixed together - which can be identified using the
paints.
If the leukaemia is progressing rapidly, several additional copies of
chromosome 8 may be present within a cell. 'Painting is proving to be very
important as a specific indicator of chromosome 8,' says Robert Jenkins,
co-director of the cytogenetics laboratory at the Mayo Clinic. 'This enables
us to monitor the progress of leukaemia patients and to diagnose the
effectiveness of treatment much more cheaply and more accurately than with
conventional methods.'
It costs Dollars 500-Dollars 600 for each normal bone marrow sample, but
only Dollars 20 plus labour costs for each paint probe. 'I would love the
paints to be FDA (Food and Drug Administration) approved for clinical use -
we have patients we could use them on tomorrow,' says Jenkins.
In addition to the leukaemia research, scientists are developing specific
chromosome probes to diagnose and track the aberrations associated with
congenital abnormalities. Joe Gray and Dan Pinkel, who first developed the
staining techniques at Livermore, left last year to head a team at the
University of California Medical Centre in San Francisco, working on such
probes for clinical application.
For example, they now have a probe comprising part of Chromosome 21 which
can determine whether a foetus has Downs Syndrome. And they are making
progress with probes to identify solid tumours including breast and prostate
cancers.
Tom Mozer, project manager at Imagenetics, is hopeful that second-generation
forms of chromosomal paints will achieve widespread clinical use. 'The
company and its clients are working very closely with the FDA to get
approval for the clinical use of the second-generation probes. Any
application is a test case, however, as the FDA has never approved a
specific cell stain of this type, and has only approved one genetic test for
leukaemia.'
A separate line of research is continuing at Livermore, where senior
biomedical scientist James Tucker is using the staining to examine the
genetic consequences for people who have been exposed to radiation. He is
working with both Chernobyl victims and workers at British Nuclear Fuel's
Sellafield plant.
So far blood samples from 14 Sellafield workers have been 'painted' over the
course of a year to quantify the damage that has accumulated to their white
blood cells from long-term occupational exposure to radiation. British
Nuclear Fuels says that up to 170 Sellafield workers will have been tested
by the time the project is finished in 1994. Results will be published then.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5761</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADSFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Technology: Beethoven and the PC orchestra
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By GEOF WHEELWRIGHT
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Speech is coming to the personal computer. After more than a decade of being
unable to produce anything more than a bong or boom to accompany computer
games, full-blown stereo sound, speech and a wide variety of sound effects
are now being included with the modern PC.
Compaq Computer is the latest PC manufacturer to join the 'sound' trend,
with the launch of its 'Business Audio' feature - building a microphone and
sound technology into a number of its new desktop PCs.
According to Compaq chairman Ben Rosen, the audio capabilities were a way of
'adding customer benefit at no extra cost'.
Compaq's idea was by no means original. Apple, NeXT and several other
non-PC-compatible computer manufacturers have offered microphones and sound
capabilities on their systems for several years and hundreds of local
'store-brand' PCs have for some months been offered with third-party sound
add-ons and CD-Rom players in special 'multimedia bundles'.
Still the question remains whether people can be convinced of the value of
this technology.
Proponents of PC sound claim that a direct, spoken comment is more powerful
and more personal than a typed text message on-screen - and that if you can
incorporate spoken comments into your desktop presentations, spreadsheet
models and word-processed documents, they will be more effective in getting
your message across.
As with many such innovations, the first big manufacturer to offer this
capability in full was Apple Computer, which included a microphone and
built-in sound capabilities with the systems it introduced in October 1990.
Since then, sound has become a natural partner to many Apple Macintosh
applications - particularly when used with CD-Rom digital storage technology
(based on CD audio technology and offering the ability to play CD audio
disks as well as specialised multimedia CD-Rom software).
Sound is also an integral part of multimedia applications - which mix sound,
graphics, text and on-screen animation together using sound in partnership
with CD-Rom technology. Sound add-ons are often sold with CD-Rom systems as
part of a complete multimedia upgrade kit - which in the US typically sells
for less than Dollars 800 (Pounds 400).
Given that CD-Rom storage systems can store more than 10 times the amount of
information held on the average PC hard disk - and that this is all
contained on a slim, inexpensive, removable plastic disk - the medium is
ideal for producing computer-based educational and reference materials. That
is why encyclopedias, several world atlases, dictionaries, children's books
and even film guides are now being offered on CD-Rom.
Microsoft, for example, offers a CD-Rom application about composer Ludwig
van Beethoven. Not only does it offer on-screen representations of Beethoven
scores, pictures of the composer and scenes from his life - but also many
digital recordings of his classic works that can be played in full stereo
from the computer. There is also a spoken 'narration' that is offered
throughout this guide.
While all these applications are interesting, at the moment they are hardly
mainstream business requirements. That is why hardware companies such as
Compaq and Apple - and software firms like Microsoft and Lotus Development -
are trying so hard to sell users on the idea of business audio.
Rosen says he is optimistic about it. 'As people start annotating documents
with audio, it will really catch on,' he predicts, although he admits that
you cannot force a technology on people who see no use for it. 'You can
produce the dog food, but you have to get the dogs to eat it,' he concludes.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5762</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / People: Charitable theory . . .
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Adrian Randall (left) finance director of the Cancer Research Campaign, has
been named the first visiting professor in charity finance at South Bank
University, where a new postgraduate diploma (MSc) in charity finance - the
only one of its kind in the UK - begins next month.
The idea for the course grew out of the Charity Finance Directors Group, of
which Randall, new to the sector and struck by the lack of self-help groups,
was a co-founder. Another member was Paul Palmer, who is now the course
director and Moores Rowland reader in charity finance at South Bank, the
former polytechnic turned university.
'The idea is to create the future finance directors of the charity world'
says Palmer, who, with Randall and others, has been formulating the course
for the last three years. Charitable income in Britain is estimated to
account for around 4 per cent of GDP, but there is very little information
as to what is 'best practice' and how to attain it. While the LSE and Open
University run general charity management courses, this is the first
dedicated specifically to finance. There will be 20 students, most already
employed in charities, for the first year.
Randall, a qualified chartered accountant who subsequently used a legacy to
read economics at Hull University, is a self-taught expert on charity
taxation. He says he got into the field not because of he was 'one of these
crusading people who decide to leave the business world' but because he lost
his job.
He had spent 12 years with Tate &amp; Lyle, ending up as finance director of a
small chemical distributor which was sold off in 1985 to Hays, where he was
made redundant two years later. He heard of the Cancer Research vacancy -
and is relieved he took it, rather than accept one of the other posts on
offer at the time, a job at BCCI.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5763</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / People: . . . and advice
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Elsewhere, Allan Hargreaves (below) has been appointed as the first director
of charity taxation and head of the Charities Unit at KPMG Peat Marwick, the
accountancy firm, based in the Leeds office.
The unit, which serves Peat's offices around the country, specialises in
providing tax advice to charities and other voluntary organisations.
Hargreaves joined the firm in 1986, having worked for the Inland Revenue
since 1969, where he spent eight years as a charity specialist.
He says he hopes to operate the unit as a central referral point for
professionals in the firm around the country, in much the same way as the
Inland Revenue operated a specialist unit for that purpose.
Like a number of tax practitioners, he often sports a bow-tie. 'It's a
little bit out of the ordinary. But there again, so is the voluntary
sector.'
Kleinwort Benson Charities, a division of Kleinwort Benson Investment
Management, has appointed 54-year-old former army Lieutenant Colonel Russell
Wright as marketing consultant. He left the army in 1989, and then, as
managing director, set up the direct dealing arm of a Lloyd's underwriting
agency, which he subsequently left after a disagreement.
Rupert Marlow, director of KB Charities, points out that trustees of many
charities are developing increasingly high standards about the kind of
service they demand of their professional investment managers.
*****
Robert Morton, formerly head of conglomerates at BZW, has been appointed a
director specialising in conglomerates and business services at CHARTERHOUSE
TILNEY.
*****
Peter Hunt and Nick Brown have been appointed directors of R P MARTIN
Sterling. Richard Gardner-Brown has been appointed a director of R P MARTIN
Exchange.
*****
David Martin, from County NatWest Ventures, is appointed regional director
for Yorkshire of GRANVILLE DEVELOPMENT CAPITAL.
*****
Stuart Bell, md of Personal Pension Management, has also been appointed md
of GMBC Financial Services; both are part of GUINNESS MAHON.
*****
Peter Johnson, finance director, and Michael Robinson, personnel director,
have been appointed to the board of HENDERSON ADMINISTRATION Ltd.
*****
The City was not short of analysts who, with a nudge and a wink, professed
close links with the Labour party shortly before the general election in
April. Strangely enough, many have since fallen silent.
By contrast, Neil MacKinnon, chief economist at Yamaichi International, has
long been a staunch Labour supporter.
Renowned for the accuracy of his gloomy economic forecasts as much as for
his left-leanings, MacKinnon is to join Citibank as chief currency
strategist for Europe, effectively replacing Paul Chertkow who left earlier
this year for UBS.
Born and educated in Liverpool, MacKinnon started out as an economist at the
Treasury. After intervals at Nomura and Chase, he moved to Yamaichi, where
The Times voted him best UK economic forecaster.
Julian Simmonds, head of foreign exchange at Citibank, said he was
'delighted' with MacKinnon's appointment.
'He has an outstanding reputation in the City and he will be a tremendous
asset,' he said. As for advising the leader of the Labour party on economic
matters, Simmonds said: 'I believe that people's political views are their
business. It doesn't worry me in the slightest what people's tendencies
are.'
The recession is hitting the City hard and economists can no longer be as
choosy about their salaries as they used to be. MacKinnon, 37, said: 'The
excess demand for economists is pretty small because of market conditions.
That puts a squeeze on salaries. It's very tight.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5764</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Nikkei surges ahead on hopes of package
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By GORDON CRAMB
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
HOPES that a Japanese government package of stimulatory measures, due to be
unveiled today, will inject as much as Y9,000bn (Pounds 36bn) into the
country's anaemic economy sent Tokyo share prices soaring 6.1 per cent
yesterday.
The Nikkei average of the market's 225 leading issues, in its first
thousand-point gain since April, finished 1,013.35 higher at 17,555.00. Some
620m shares changed hands in the busiest session for two-and-a-half months.
This left the market 3,245 points, or 22.7 per cent, above the six-year low
it plumbed just 10 days ago.
In initial trading early today - before the package was to be announced -
the Nikkei was down about 150 points as profit-taking eroded some of the
previous day's gains.
The more hopeful mood accompanied increased expectations of the size of
today's package, which officials and politicians in the ruling Liberal
Democratic Party had earlier suggested would be at most Y8,000bn.
Measures thought likely include a boost in spending on public works, and aid
to lift property prices through the purchase of land for government use. But
LDP members were quoted yesterday as saying that a proposal to set aside
funds to assist the country's big banks - by buying land held as collateral
for loans which have gone sour - had lost favour.
Instead, the banking sector would reportedly be offered tax incentives to
make writing off bad loans less painful. Tax credits for industry, taking
effect from October, were also said to be in prospect to encourage capital
spending.
As a more direct help to the stock market - still nearly 55 per cent below
its December 1989 peak - state-administered institutions such as the postal
savings system may also be steered into investing more surplus funds in
equities.
The package will be formalised in an autumn supplementary budget. The
authorities harbour residual hopes that it will allow the country to meet
its 3.5 per cent growth forecast for the current year to next March, in the
face of private sector belief that growth may emerge at little more than
half that rate.
The market was encouraged by signs that the government, after lengthy
indecision, had set aside Finance Ministry qualms that extra spending would
erode Japan's budget surplus. Mr Russell Jones, economist at UBS Phillips
and Drew, described the delay in substantial official response to the
slowdown as 'the economic policy equivalent of Emperor Nero'.
Cautious recovery in demand would probably already be under way by the time
today's measures came into force, he said, while the macroeconomic effect of
the package would be rather less than the Y9,000bn headline figure.
Economic data yesterday indicated that the Japanese economy continues to
consolidate. The Ministry of International Trade and Industry said
industrial production for July was a bare 0.3 per cent ahead of the previous
month and 6.2 per cent below the level of a year earlier.
Destocking by manufacturers made no headway, with inventories up 0.6 per
cent in the month and 5.1 per cent higher than July 1991. As a proportion of
sales they rose 0.1 per cent on the month and 8.3 per cent year-on-year.
But Miti's forecast for manufacturing activity did show a 5.5 per cent rise
in September from this month, when output is expected to fall 4.5 per cent.
The Japan Automobile Manufacturers' Association said, meanwhile, that July
vehicle production was down 7.2 per cent from the year before in unit terms,
with passenger car output off 5.6 per cent.
Cautious consumer spending was reflected in Miti figures for sales at the
country's large retail chains in July. Total sales were 0.6 per cent down
from the same month of last year, although clothing showed a 0.5 per cent
rise, joining foods and beverages which were up 1.6 per cent.
World Stock Markets, Page 29
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5765</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Iraq warns Arabs of retaliation over 'no-fly' zone
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TONY WALKER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   CAIRO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
IRAQ yesterday warned its Arab neighbours they would face reprisals if they
helped the allies to impose a 'no-fly zone' south of the 32nd parallel.
Employing language reminiscent of the Gulf conflict, Iraq's ruling
Revolution Command Council said that Baghdad would pick the best moment to
retaliate, indicating that it wanted to avoid an early clash.
'We shall choose the proper way and the proper time to confront this
outrageous aggression,' the RCC statement said.
The RCC meeting, presided over by President Saddam Hussein, demanded 'clear
and firm' Arab opposition to the air exclusion zone which came into force
yesterday.
Warplanes from the US Britain and France began patrolling the skies over
southern Iraq to prevent aerial activity by Iraqi fixed-wing aircraft and
helicopters.
The allied aircraft will be operating from air bases in Saudi Arabia, and
from the carrier USS Independence in the Gulf.
France has committed 10 Mirage fighter-bombers and Britain six Tornados to
police the exclusion zone.
The US reportedly has about 200 aircraft in the region, including Stealth
fighter-bombers. Among sophisticated 'offensive' aircraft on the
Independence are F-14 and F-15 Phantoms and A-6 Intruder bombers.
US naval commanders in the Gulf have said they will not hesitate to shoot
down Iraqi aircraft that violate the 'no fly zone' rules.
Iraq, meanwhile, was reported to have withdrawn its aircraft to positions
north of the 32nd parallel.
However, Iraqi ground forces, including some Republican Guard divisions, are
continuing operations against Shia Moslem rebels in southern Iraq, many of
whom have taken refuge in the marshland that straddles the Tigris and
Euphrates rivers.
Arab states, including members of the US-led alliance, which expelled Iraq
from Kuwait, reacted nervously to yesterday's implementation of the
exclusion zone.
Saudi Arabia added its voice to concerns about the possible dismemberment of
Iraq. Saudi radio, quoting what it described as a 'responsible source,'
reaffirmed the kingdom's 'constant desire for the territorial integrity and
non-partitioning of Iraq.'
In Baghdad, the RCC statement heaped particular scorn on countries such as
Saudi Arabia which are providing facilities for aircraft policing the
exclusion zone - although no Arab air forces will take part in the operation
itself.
The Iraqi leadership said it would hold Arab countries supporting the west
'fully responsible. . .before God, history, the Arab and Islamic nation and
their own people.'
'Tomorrow is not far away,' the RCC statement warned. It added that US
leaders had become 'so cheap to the extent that they turned the aggression
against Iraq into an electioneering ploy.'
'US claims to protect the Iraqi people are false. Most Arab countries have
rejected the plan. . .because it threatens Arab national security,' the
statement said.
Further afield, Malaysia added to criticism of western actions in Iraq,
accusing the allies of double standards by enforcing a 'no-fly zone in
southern Iraq while being cautious over Serbian attacks on Bosnia.
'It is a double standard, something which makes us all very unhappy,'
Malaysian Foreign Minister Abdullah Ahmad Badawi told a news conference at
the end of a visit to Bangladesh.
In Beijing, Mr Abdullah Bishara, secretary general of the Gulf Co-operation
Council, yesterday said Chinese leaders were concerned about the
fragmentation of Iraq; but they fully supported UN resolutions against
Baghdad.
He said China, one of five permanent members of the UN Security Council, was
forceful in demanding Baghdad comply with all council resolutions. Mr
Bishara was speaking at a news conference after meeting China's premier,
foreign minister and other officials.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5766</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Fleeing investors force Taiwan to rethink economic
blueprint: The KMT's need to show results this year see it curbing both its
ambitions and its regulations
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LUISETTA MUDIE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
FOREIGN investment in Taiwan fell by 43 per cent in the first half of this
year, while domestic investment was down to just 20 per cent of GNP, much
lower than in South Korea or Japan.
An overloaded infrastructure and high cost of living can be blamed in part
for the falls. But the government may also have been caught between
political over-ambition and over-rigidity in its regulation of the economy.
Only 15 per cent of investment in Taiwan in 1991 was in manufacturing, while
the service sector expanded rapidly. The trend is disturbing for the
island's Nationalist Kuomintang (KMT) government, which has relied on a
Dollars 300bn (Pounds 150.7bn) infrastructure plan and new legislation to
attract investment and maintain economic growth - currently just below 7 per
cent.
But rising costs and the appreciation of the Taiwan dollar are damaging
Taiwan's low-cost manufacturing industries, whose exports fuel the island's
economic growth. Many companies are moving to mainland China and south-east
Asia, where development is less stringently regulated and labour is cheap.
The exodus has resulted in the increasing movement of capital overseas - up
to Dollars 5bn is estimated to have flowed into China since Taiwan eased
restrictions in early 1991. It has also affected export growth, which has
slowed in recent months.
Mr Lee Kao-chao, director of research at the cabinet's Council for Economic
Planning and Development (CEPD) admits there is a problem. But the CEPD's
blueprint for economic growth, the six-year development plan, has failed to
be the panacea the government promised.
Delays and insufficient budgeting are already forcing the government to cut
back the plan's 770 projects and related bond issues.
Economic analysts criticise the plan as an exercise in propaganda, while a
recent report from the Chung Hua Institute for Economic Research estimated
that without a re-think, the government would have to issue Dollars 252bn in
debt by the year 2000.
Apart from the financial burden, the risk of triggering further inflation
would be high.
'If the government attempts improvements on this scale all in one jump it
will be as big a flop as the Great Leap Forward was on the mainland,' said
one senior member of the Institute. He added that until Taiwan's economy
becomes more efficient, with fewer government-made obstacles to the flow of
capital, resources such as the island's Dollars 86.6bn in foreign exchange
reserves will remain untapped.
In an attempt to break the vicious circle between overloaded infrastructure
and a poor investment environment, the government is extending low interest
loans and tax holidays to almost any company that is in the black, while
helping businesses with problems such as land acquisition for development
projects.
The cabinet's development fund has an apparently flexible budget of billions
of US dollars, but observers say too much of this money is finding its way
into property speculation and mainland China's stock market.
Mr Wu Ruo-yu, of the independently funded Institute for National Policy
Research, says that tighter legislation is the only way to prevent this kind
of abuse.
The framework for financial liberalisation has moved on apace in the past
year: 15 new private commercial banks have begun operating in what was once
a public-sector domain; new financial instruments, including a futures
market, have been authorised, and investment by foreign individuals in
Taiwan's stock market came one step closer with the first issue of global
depository receipts in May.
Liberalisation has put many of Taiwan's underground operations out of
business, but many foreign investors have criticised the government for
shooting itself in the foot with over-zealous regulation.
In a crackdown on illegal foreign labour, quotas were imposed and new rules
set in an apparently arbitrary manner. 'The only thing investors have to
watch out for in Taiwan is the government,' said one foreign businessman
affected by the new rules.
With another construction bond issue to be cancelled in September, it seems
that the KMT's political vision has in some measure given way to economic
reality. But with parliamentary elections looming at the end of the year,
the KMT cannot afford to have nothing to show for its economic promises,
either.
Taiwan's exports to mainland China leaped 38.9 per cent to Dollars 2.84bn in
the first half of 1992, and two-way trade through Hong Kong totalled Dollars
3.4bn (Pounds 1.7bn), a rise of 34 per cent over the same period of last
year, writes Luisetta Mudie.
Raw materials and textiles accounted for 36.4 per cent of exports and
industrial machinery and electronic goods 11 and 10 per cent respectively.
The growth in trade is causing alarm in Taiwan's government, which fears
economic dependence on the rival Beijing regime. Direct trade links have yet
to be established across the Taiwan Strait, but already 7.13 per cent of the
island's exports reach the mainland.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5767</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Court quashes Bond's conviction
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN BROWN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   SYDNEY
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
MR Alan Bond, the bankrupt Australian entrepreneur, was yesterday released
after 90 days in jail, when the Western Australian Court of Criminal Appeal
quashed a fraud conviction against him.
Mr Bond, former chairman of Bond Corporation, was jailed for 2 1/2 years in
May after being convicted of acting dishonestly during the ADollars 370m
(Pounds 133m) rescue of Mr Laurie Connell's Rothwells merchant bank, five
years ago. The charge alleged he persuaded a Perth businessman to contribute
to the rescue, while concealing the existence of a ADollars 16m success fee
to be paid by Rothwells to Bond Corporation.
His release follows fresh evidence given to the appeal court by Mr Maxwell
Healy, a former Perth building contractor. Mr Healy said Mr Connell had told
him he would lie at Mr Bond's trial to ensure a conviction which would
divert attention from his own forthcoming trial on Rothwells related
charges.
The appeal court dismissed five other grounds for appeal and Mr Bond was
remanded on ADollars 100,000 bail until October 5, when the Perth district
court will set a date for a new trial.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5768</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Pretoria purges police leadership
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PATTI WALDMEIR
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   JOHANNESBURG
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE South African government yesterday announced sweeping changes in its
police, including purging top ranks, introducing civilian review of police
actions, retraining officers in community policing and appointing blacks to
senior posts.
The measures represent Pretoria's most determined effort yet to reduce the
township violence which has left 7,000 people dead since 1990, and has been
exacerbated by poor policing.
They could help smooth the way to resumption of talks on a post-apartheid
constitution, suspended by the African National Congress (ANC) two months
ago in protest at the violence.
An ANC spokesman described the moves as 'window dressing' saying that the
ANC opposed any measures to restructure the police before an interim
government is in place. 'What Kriel has announced is a facelift, not a
substantial change,' the ANC said.
The movement said none of the generals named in allegations of police
excesses and assassination squads was among those due to retire.
Mr Hernus Kriel, minister of law and order, yesterday announced that 13
police generals were to be retired, nearly a quarter of the general staff,
to try to restore the force's damaged credibility.
An independent body is to be set up to investigate 'serious crimes allegedly
committed by members of the South African police', he said.
This body, which would be headed by a judge, would have 35 inspectors
including attorneys general, lawyers, policemen and possibly 'foreign
experts'.
It would give South African civilians the right of review over police
actions for the first time, introducing a principle of accountability never
before respected by the police.
Mr Kriel, who is the minister responsible for the police, said the force had
discriminated against blacks in the past and would now adopt an affirmative
action policy aimed at promoting non-whites quickly to top ranks.
There would be further retirements at lower levels of the force, and
officers would be retrained to 'sensitise all serving members on an urgent
basis about the changed environment in which policing must take place'.
The measures appear to have been prompted by international criticism,
including a report by British experts last month which found the force to be
incompetent.
It is understood that the leader of the British team, Mr Peter Waddington,
director of criminal justice studies at Reading University, had privately
urged Mr de Klerk to carry out the purge.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5769</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Iraq holds second Briton for illegal entry
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By AGENCIES
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BRITAIN last night vowed to exert all possible pressure on Iraq to secure
the release of a second Briton being held on a charge of entering the
country illegally, agencies report.
The Foreign Office confirmed that the Baghdad regime was holding Mr Michael
Wainwright, 41, who was arrested in Mosul, northern Iraq. He was reported to
have been cycling from Britain to Australia.
A week ago, Iraq imposed a seven-year jail sentence on Mr Paul Ride, 33, a
British caterer who, diplomats believe, strayed across the desert from
Kuwait.
The detentions have further heightened tension between Iraq and Britain,
just as UK forces have joined the US and France in enforcing a 'no-fly' zone
in southern Iraq.
The Foreign Office said that Mr Wainwright, from West Yorkshire, had been
held in Iraq since May. His plight emerged in a letter received last week by
his parents. He said in the letter he was arrested for not having a visa.
The Russian embassy, which looks after British interests in Iraq, said it
had asked the Iraqis for permission to see Mr Wainwright. The Iraqis had yet
to respond to the request, but it was likely to be one or two weeks before
the Russians would be allowed to see him, they said. However, they had been
promised a visit to Mr Ride, possibly in two to five days.
Diplomats in Baghdad said Mr Wainwright was reported to have crossed into
Iraq from Turkey. The Russian embassy said that, a few days ago, Mr
Wainwright was being held in a police station in Baghdad, but it did not
know what happened to him before or since then.
Mr Wainwright's uncle in West Yorkshire said his nephew had set off on his
cycling trip 'about last Christmas'.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5770</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Afghanistan ceasefire hopes are raised
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By FARHAN BOKHARI
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   ISLAMABAD
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
PAKISTAN was yesterday awaiting confirmation that a temporary ceasefire
between rival Afghan mujahideen factions had come into effect before a
high-level government delegation left for Kabul to negotiate a settlement.
The delegation, led by the Pakistani minister of state for foreign affairs,
Mr Siddique Khan Kanjo, will be part of Islamabad's latest effort to end
three weeks of fighting, which left at least 2,000 dead.
A government announcement in Islamabad said the rival factions led by
dissident leader Mr Gulbuddin Hekmatyar and the government of President
Burhanuddin Rabbani had agreed to a 72-hour ceasefire, after Pakistani
contacts with both sides. Pakistan hopes to use the temporary lull to begin
negotiations on peace talks.
However, bitter rivalries remain in the war-torn country.
Mr Hekmatyar has been demanding the expulsion of Uzbek militiamen from Kabul
as a pre-condition to peace talks, on the grounds that the militia leader
General Rashid Dostum is closely allied to former communist-backed President
Najibullah.
But Mr Rabbani's government has refused to accept that demand, which
triggered the latest fighting on August 6.
The Afghan government is widely believed to fear that the expulsion of the
Uzbeks would tilt the balance of power strongly in favour of Mr Hekmatyar,
allowing him to send his troops to take over the capital.
On the other hand, Mr Hekmatyar is also pressed for time. His fighters,
deployed on hill-tops outside Kabul will have to move when the winter snows
begin.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5771</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / De Klerk grasps a dangerous nettle: A cultural change for
working-class Afrikaner policemen
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PATTI WALDMEIR
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ASK ALMOST any black South African: who is responsible for the violence that
has destroyed so many lives since political reform began in South Africa?
The answer will be: the police.
Even members of the Zulu Inkatha Freedom Party, who are alleged to enjoy
close links with police, often accuse them of complicity in the violence.
Such charges are at best exaggerated, at worst completely false. But the
fact remains that most black South Africans believe police are directly
involved in township violence.
Now President F W de Klerk has decided to face this problem head-on. He has
forcibly retired fully one-quarter of the force's top generals, and agreed
to set up an independent, largely civilian, body to investigate alleged
police crimes. Officers are to be retrained in the art of community
policing, and a vigorous affirmative action policy adopted to promote
non-white officers quickly to top ranks.
The South African Police is to be made accountable to the public, after
decades in which policemen enjoyed a freedom of action which would not be
tolerated in any civilised country. Those who resist the new mood of
co-operation with blacks will be sacked or retired; white officers will find
themselves reporting to senior blacks for the first time.
Most white officers come from the section of the white population most at
risk from political reform: working class Afrikaners, for whom black rule
means an end to guaranteed employment in the public sector. Understaffed and
poorly trained in riot control, many genuinely fear for their lives when the
stones begin to fly.
Black policemen - some 56 per cent of the force is non-white, including the
bulk of officers assigned to township duty - suffer more immediate fears of
political change. They have been the target of the African National
Congress, which called on its supporters to kill policemen and their
families as part of its campaign to make South Africa ungovernable.
Changing their attitudes will be difficult: but Mr de Klerk has finally
decided - at considerable political risk to himself - to try. After months
in which he appeared unable or unwilling to confront his own security
forces, he has opened the police to public scrutiny and implicitly admitted
its weaknesses.
He has taken to heart the criticisms voiced by British investigators who
last month found that the police were incompetent and the lower ranks out of
control. Since then, pressure has mounted with allegations by a prominent
pathologist that 90 per cent of deaths in detention were caused by police.
These measures alone will not stop the violence: they do not affect the
military, which is alleged to be involved in a continuing campaign of 'dirty
tricks' against the ANC, nor the so-called 'Third Force', the secret network
of former and serving security force and intelligence officers alleged to be
behind much of the violence. But they could help prevent the large number of
deaths which can be attributed to poor policing.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5772</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Patten to visit China
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By SIMON DAVIES
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   HONG KONG
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Mr Chris Patten, governor of Hong Kong, is to visit China in October. The
trip, his first since taking up his post, is viewed as part of consultations
following his key policy speech to the Hong Kong legislative council on
October 7, writes Simon Davies in Hong Kong.
He is expected to see Chinese Premier Li Peng and Lu Ping, the director of
the Chinese State Council's Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5773</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Bombay broker granted bail
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By SHIRAZ SIDVHA
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BOMBAY
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Mr Harshad Mehta, the stockbroker at the heart of the Rs35bn (Pounds 627m)
Bombay stock market scandal, was released on bail by a special court
yesterday, only to be rearrested for alleged violations of the Foreign
Exchange Regulation Act, writes Shiraz Sidvha from Bombay.
In the streets outside the Bombay stock exchange, brokers celebrated the
release of Mr Mehta, who had artificially bolstered exchange prices earlier
this year before being arrested for fraud.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5774</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Chemical arms step
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   GENEVA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
A treaty banning the use, possession and manufacture of chemical weapons has
passed one of its final hurdles on the way to adoption by the United
Nations, Reuter reports from Geneva. After 24 years of talks, it has been
agreed by a committee of the 39-nation Conference on Disarmament.
The draft treaty is contained in a report that will be examined by a plenary
session of the UN-sponsored conference next week.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5775</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Hizbollah victory
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   BAALBEK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Hizbollah, the Shia Moslem fundamentalist group won a landslide victory in
parliamentary elections for the east Lebanon district of Baalbek, according
to results announced yesterday, Reuter reports from Baalbek.
The victory means that the pro-Iranian Hizbollah (Party of God) group will
join the Lebanese assembly for the first time. The group took Lebanon's
political community by surprise when it said it would participate in the
election, which is being boycotted by most Christians.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 3
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5776</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Stock &amp; Currency Markets
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
 ----------------------------------------------------------
STOCK MARKET INDICES
 ----------------------------------------------------------
FT-SE 100: 2,311.6 (+26.6)
Yield  5.23
FT-SE Eurotrack 100 1,017.14 (+19.16)
FT-A All-Share 1,097.40 (+0.9%)
Nikkei  17,555.00 (+1013.35)
New York:
Dow Jones Ind Ave 3,254.64 (+ 7.83)
S&amp;P Composite 413.56 (+0.05)
 ----------------------------------------------------------
US CLOSING RATES
 ----------------------------------------------------------
Federal Funds: 3 5/16% (3 5/16%)
3-mo Treas Bills: Yld 3.220%  (3.209%)
Long Bond  98 1/16  (97 29/32) Yield 7.406% (7.42%)
 ----------------------------------------------------------
LONDON MONEY
 ----------------------------------------------------------
3-mo Interbank 10 5/8% (10 13/16%)
Liffe long gilt future: Sep 94 5/8 (Sep 95 1/8)
 ----------------------------------------------------------
NORTH SEA OIL (Argus)
 ----------------------------------------------------------
Brent 15-day (Oct) Dollars 19.675 (19.85)
 ----------------------------------------------------------
Gold
 ----------------------------------------------------------
New York Comex (Aug) Dollars 339.2 (338.3)
London  Dollars 339.4 (338.65)
 ----------------------------------------------------------
STERLING
 ----------------------------------------------------------
New York:
Dollars 1.9803 (1.9845)
London:
Dollars 1.978 (1.987)
DM  2.79 (2.795)
FFr  9.51 (9.5275)
SFr  2.5 (2.5025)
Y  247.0 (248.25)
Pounds Index 92.1 (92.3)
 ----------------------------------------------------------
DOLLAR
 ----------------------------------------------------------
New York:
DM 1.4085 (1.4067)
FFr 4.8015 (4.7975)
SFr 1.2610 (1.2588)
Y 124.78 (125.0)
London:
DM 1.4105 (1.4065)
FFr 4.808 (4.795)
SFr 1.264 (1.259)
Y 124.85 (124.9)
Dollars Index 58.9 (58.8)
Tokyo open: Y 124.82
 ----------------------------------------------------------
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5777</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Conference agrees basis for Bosnian peace deal
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JUDY DEMPSEY and IVO DAWNAY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A TENTATIVE first step towards a long-term solution of the Yugoslav conflict
came yesterday, when the London peace conference ended with agreement by all
combatants on a framework for a negotiated settlement.
But there was still deep scepticism about whether the bitter war waged by
Bosnia's Serbs against the Moslem community would allow the survival of an
independent Bosnian state.
The conference, sponsored by the United Nations and the European Community,
agreed on an end to violence and sieges of towns, recognition of current
borders, speedier delivery of humanitarian aid, and closing of detention
camps. There is to be tighter enforcement of existing sanctions against
Serbia.
It was also confirmed that Lord Owen - once Labour foreign secretary and
former leader of the Social Democrats - would head the EC's Yugoslavia peace
effort. He will succeed Lord Carrington, who gave up the role on the eve of
the conference.
Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN secretary-general, said a lengthy period of
negotiations lay ahead. They will start in Geneva on September 3, when six
committees will start work on the future constitutional status of Bosnia,
the role of ethnic minorities in the republics of the former Yugoslavia, and
other issues.
Mr John Major, the prime minister and co-chairman of the conference,
insisted that while there would be 'setbacks', the two days of negotiations
had brought closer a peaceful solution of the conflict.
But he warned that pressure would continue to be brought to bear on all the
warring factions, including tougher sanctions, to press the case for peace.
'We cannot rely on the goodwill of the parties,' he said.
Mr Lawrence Eagleburger, the acting US secretary of state, attempted to
reassure Bosnia's Moslems after he delivered a tough message to Bosnia's
Serbs, led by Mr Radovan Karadzic.
'We will never accept any of the (territorial) gains by Bosnia's Serbs,' Mr
Eagleburger said.
Earlier in the day, Mr Karadzic had said he was prepared to give back 20 per
cent of the land seized by his forces.
By threatening tougher sanctions against Serbia, the conference appeared to
have made progress despite the fighting in Bosnia. In the latest outbreak,
nine people were reported killed when a mortar shell exploded into a queue
in a residential part of Sarajevo, the capital.
Pressure against the Serbs will be maintained when the nine-nation Western
European Union meets in London today. It is expected to impose a naval
blockade of Serbia.
The agreement reached at the London conference includes:
The cessation of violence in Bosnia. This includes the early lifting of
sieges of towns and cities; international supervision of heavy weapons; a
ban on all military flights and identification of all headquarters and
commanders of all armed units, including paramilitaries in the republic.
The conference has already asked Mr Boutros Ghali to recommend that the
security council posts observers on the Bosnia-Serbian borders and deploys
observers in Bosnia to monitor the withdrawal of all heavy weapons.
Humanitarian aid. Delivery of aid is to be speeded up by using more
international monitors. In addition, refugees should be 'progressively
returned' to their homes.
Detention camps. All detention camps are to be dismantled and closed
immediately. Aid organisations will look at ways of providing temporary
accommodation for those released but whose homes have been destroyed.
Sanctions. Trade sanctions against Serbia are to be more tightly enforced by
monitoring traffic on the river Danube and sending international experts to
Serbia's neighbours. The security council will be asked to prevent illegal
transfers of financial assets to Serbia and Montenegro and eliminate
diversion of goods in transit.
First light in bitter imbroglio, Page 2
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5778</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / World News In Brief: Beatles song steals show
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The handwritten lyrics by former Beatle Paul McCartney for She's Leaving
Home were sold for Pounds 41,000 at Sotheby's.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5779</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCADAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / World News In Brief: Ulster toll reaches 3,000
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
A 19-year-old man was shot dead outside a social club near Belfast last
night - the 3,000th victim of sectarian violence in Northern Ireland since
the 'troubles' erupted in mid-1969. The Irish People's Liberation
Organisation claimed responsibility.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5780</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAC9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Markets pick up as worries over D-Mark ease: 1,000-point
rise in Tokyo helps rebound
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER MARSH and JAMES BLITZ
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
EQUITIES and bonds recovered across Europe yesterday as worries diminished
slightly about the effects of the strong D-Mark on the faltering European
economy.
The rebound in prices was especially marked in London, Paris and Frankfurt,
and was helped by a big rise early yesterday on the Tokyo stock market,
triggered by hopes of government action to buoy Japanese growth.
Mr Michel Sapin, the French finance minister, sought to calm worries about
currency strains with a statement in Paris that a realignment of the
European exchange rate mechanism was 'not on the agenda'.
He also hinted at further concerted central bank intervention to depress the
D-Mark against the dollar. Such action might be expected to reduce pressures
on the weaker currencies in the ERM, which have raised the possibility of
rises in interest rates across the Continent.
Amid nervous trading in most financial markets, Mr Sapin's remarks helped
persuade more investors to switch funds into the dollar and out of the
D-Mark. In London, the dollar closed below the day's highs at DM1.4105, up
slightly under half a pfennig, but eased back slightly in New York where it
finished at DM1.4095. Early today in Tokyo it was quoted at DM1.4057.
But the firmer dollar failed to give more than a slight lift to the pound
and the lira, the two weakest ERM currencies. Both slipped against the
D-Mark to close in London near their ERM floors, stoking speculation that
the UK and Italian governments might be forced to raise interest rates.
Sterling at one point yesterday brushed DM2.80 before falling back in late
trading to close in London, and later in New York, down  1/2 pfennig at
DM2.79, less than 2 pfennigs above its DM2.778 limit. Against the dollar,
sterling lost just under 1 cent in London, closing at Dollars 1.978. In late
New York trading, it reached Dollars 1.9803, and early in Tokyo it was
quoted at Dollars 1.9855.
The lira hit a record low of 764.7 against the D-Mark, compared with its ERM
floor of L765.4.
In London, the FT-SE 100 index gained 26.6, closing at 2,311.6, while
bourses in Paris and Frankfurt rose 1.5 per cent and 2.6 per cent
respectively. In Italy, however, investors continued to take a gloomy view,
with shares setting a new low for the year.
European bond markets were generally firm, although UK gilts lost up to half
a point.
The markets took heart from a 6.1 per cent rise in the Tokyo market, where
the Nikkei average closed 1,013.35 higher at 17,555.0. It was the first
1,000-point gain since April. Measures thought likely to be adopted by the
government to buoy the economy include an increase in public sector
investment and aid to lift property prices. However, by mid-morning today
share prices had drifted downwards after profit-taking and futures-linked
selling, with the Nikkei shedding about 150 points.
On Wall Street yesterday, stocks gained an early boost from gains on
overseas markets but late program selling left the Dow Jones Industrial
Average just 7.83 higher at 3,254.64.
Even though the currency markets were steadier yesterday after the strains
of earlier in the week, the central banks in Portugal and Spain were both
forced to buy their currencies to stop them weakening against the D-Mark.
After the strong rise in the German currency, it finished yesterday as the
second strongest after the Belgian franc in the 10-currency grid, up from
fourth strongest three weeks ago.
The market strains were discussed in Paris yesterday by finance ministry
officials from the main industrialised countries in a meeting which ends
today.
Nikkei soars on hopes for spending plan Page 3
Japanese powerbroker resigns in scandal Page 14
Bonds markets Page 21
Currencies Page 23
World stocks Page 29
London stocks Page 32
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5781</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAC8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Daf in 'strategic alliance' talks with Mercedes-Benz
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN DONE, Motor Industry Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
DAF, the Dutch commercial vehicle maker in which British Aerospace holds a
16 per cent stake, has begun talks on forming a 'strategic alliance' with
Mercedes-Benz, the world's leading truck manufacturerr.
Daf refused to name Mercedes-Benz as its potential partner yesterday,
although Dutch trade union officials have confirmed the talks. However, Daf
and Mercedes-Benz, the automotive subsidiary of Daimler-Benz, Germany's
biggest industrial corporation, issued contrasting versions of the talks.
The Dutch company, which is suffering its third year of heavy losses, said
discussions were 'taking place on a strategic alliance' with an unnamed
party which could lead to a 'structural strengthening' of the group.
An equity stake was under consideration and the negotiations included talks
on exchanging products, co-operation in new product development and sharing
of production.
Mercedes-Benz, which on Wednesday had denied that any talks were taking
place, yesterday admitted that discussions were under way following an
approach from Daf.
The German company insisted that there was no question of 'concrete
negotiations' with the aim of Mercedes-Benz either acquiring a minority
shareholding or even taking over Daf.
It said that the talks, which had been initiated by Daf and which had been
under way 'for some time', concerned the creation of a 'customer-supplier
relationship' between the two companies.
Mercedes-Benz dominates the European truck industry and accounted for 32.8
per cent of new truck sales (above 3.5 tonnes) in west Europe last year,
compared with the 7.2 per cent taken by Daf.
Its main rivals in Europe are the Franco-Swedish alliance of Renault and
Volvo, and Iveco, the commercial vehicles subsidiary of Fiat.
Despite the two versions of the nature of the negotiations, the disclosure
of the talks helped to boost the Daf share price, which has been trading at
an all-time low in recent days. The price gained Fl 2.3 to close at Fl 18.1
last night.
The share price was also helped by Daf's announcement that it had cut net
losses in the first half of the year to Fl 97.4m (Pounds 30.9m) from Fl
179.1m in the corresponding period a year ago.
Mr Cor Baan, who took over as chairman of the Daf management board earlier
this year, forecast that the group would break even in the second half of
1992.
Daf is also understood to be close to reaching agreement with the Dutch and
Belgian governments on raising Fl 210m of new finance.
Tough times to keep on trucking, Page 12
Lex, Page 14
Carmakers warn of fresh downturn, Page 15
VW, Renault, Daimler-Benz and Volvo results, Page 18
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 1
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5782</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAC7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Individuals' shareholdings fall
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE GOVERNMENT is further than ever from achieving its goal of creating a
nation of individual shareholders, according to figures released yesterday
by the Central Statistics Office.
In its August Economics Trends Bulletin, the CSO says the percentage of UK
quoted company shares held by individuals and unincorporated businesses fell
for the third successive year to just 20 per cent in January. The figure was
20.5 per cent in January 1991 and, in 1981, before most of the privatisation
programme had got under way, 37.5 per cent.
More than half UK company shares are in the hands of financial institutions.
Pension funds hold 31.1 per cent of the total, down marginally from 31.4 per
cent the year before, while insurance companies increased their percentage
by 0.3 per cent to 20.7 per cent.
The CSO noted that the latest drop in individual holdings comes despite the
privatisation of the electricity industry. Privatisation has been advocated
as a means of promoting wider share ownership.
However, the percentage held by individuals and unincorporated businesses of
the shares of the 10 largest privatised companies increased over the past
year to 22 per cent of outstanding shares, largely reflecting the sale of
the second tranche of the government's British Telecom stake.
Without the effects of that sale, however, individuals' holdings in
privatised companies fell to 17 per cent of the total from 17.9 per cent.
The CSO noted that its data was hampered by the existence of nominee
accounts, which obscure the ownership of a large portion of shares.
Holdings by the overseas sector rose by 1 percentage point to 12.8 per cent,
about level with the 1989 figure. In 1981 overseas shareholders owned just
3.6 per cent of the shares in UK companies.
Overseas shareholders now have 10 per cent of shares in privatised
companies. Thirty seven per cent of the overseas owners have holdings valued
at Pounds 100m or more.
The number of UK companies with ordinary shares listed on the London Stock
Exchange fell from 1,946 in December 31, 1990 to 1,852 in January this year.
Market capitalisation rose to Pounds 530.2bn from Pounds 445bn, primarily
because of higher share prices.
The UK spent Pounds 12.1bn on research and development in 1990 - 2.2 per
cent of gross domestic product, the same as in 1989. This was an increase in
real terms of 12 per cent since 1985.
Economic Trends No. 466, August 1992, HMSO Pounds 11.50
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5783</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAC6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Abuses threaten to undermine construction industry: How a
proposed review of contract managementmay help improve the sector's image
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW TAYLOR
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
CONSTRUCTION lawyers like to tell stories about builders who come to them
seeking loopholes in tender contracts even before they bid for a job.
The companies want to know whether the contract has been so poorly worded
they will be able to claim extra payments from customers once work is under
way. There have been many tales of contractors that bid for contracts at a
loss, only to make a profit from claims. Developers anxious to finish
projects often find it cheaper to agree claims rather than try to re-let the
work.
Just as big a problem - particularly in the recession - has been late
payment of bills by main contractors, which sub-contractors say has forced
many medium-sized and small companies into receivership.
It is against this background that the government last week proposed a
review of contract arrangements in the construction industry. The
independent review, to be financed jointly by the government and the
industry, will examine the excessive reliance of companies on claims and
other contract abuses which sour the sector's image.
The last time the government examined the award and management of
construction contracts was in 1962. Three decades later customers are still
complaining of a 'claims culture' among contractors and sub-contractors who,
they say, use more energy protecting their individual financial and legal
positions than working together.
The Department of the Environment, which proposed the latest review, says
there is profound dissatisfaction with the adversarial nature of contractual
relationships on building sites.
Olympia &amp; York, when building the failed Canary Wharf in London's Docklands,
estimated the cost of construction in the UK was twice that in the US. Mr
Richard Griffiths, a senior vice-president at O&amp;Y, blamed this on a
confrontational approach adopted by the large numbers of separate,
independently controlled contractors that work on large developments. 'If
something goes wrong, the first thing you get is a claim rather than an
attempt to find a common solution to the problem,' he said.
The fragmented nature of construction work involving a range of specialist
skills means the industry will always be prone to contract disagreements.
The biggest area for claims is design changes, or variation orders, as they
are sometimes called. Anybody involved in domestic building work who has
asked for a radiator to be moved or a doorway enlarged once plans have been
completed will recognise the response: 'It can be done . . . but it will
cost you.'
Contractors building the Channel tunnel have claimed more than Pounds 1bn in
additional payments for fitting out rail tunnels and building passenger
terminals at Folkestone in Kent and Sangatte in northern France. Much of the
claim is to meet changes in design specifications which contractors say have
been made to satisfy improved safety requirements.
The review will also consider complaints that main contractors seek to boost
their cashflow by delaying payment of bills to sub-contractors who do most
of the actual work.
In a move to encourage faster payment to sub-contractors, ministers said
earlier this year that companies winning government construction contracts
would be expected to pay sub-contractors within 30 days of receiving a valid
invoice. Sub-contractors say the move so far has received a lukewarm
response from main contractors.
The British Constructional Steelwork Association says more than 100 members
and their subsidiaries have ceased trading since 1989 - some pushed over the
brink because main contractors have delayed payments.
The association says slow payments have been caused by delays in certifying
that work has been completed correctly. Main contractors may also query
bills knowing that sub-contractors will accept a lower payment rather than
risk long delays and potentially high legal costs pursuing additional money.
Serious problems have also arisen over retention money, held back by
developers and main contractors under the terms of a contract as insurance
against defects emerging after a job has been completed.
This money, normally between 3 per cent and 5 per cent of the total contract
value, can mean the difference between breaking even and making a loss in
the current depressed market.
This money should be repaid within 12 months of work finishing but disputes
can arise over what constitutes legal completion. Is it, for example, after
the last tree has been planted during landscaping? According to the
association one structural steel company waited five years after it
completed a project for retention money to be released.
Retention money technically belongs to the sub-contractor, but it can be
lost altogether if a developer or main contractor ceases trading. A number
of contractors that worked on Canary Wharf are threatened in this way,
including Graham Wood, the structural steel company which recently went into
receivership.
Practices like these, which have always gone on in the construction
industry, tend to get worse in recession. Construction lawyers can expect a
lot more work yet.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5784</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAC5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Doubters of 'cold fusion' confronted: British Association
for the Advancement of Science
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CLIVE COOKSON, Science Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
PROFESSOR Martin Fleisch-mann confronted those who doubt his controversial
'cold fusion' discovery on his home territory, Southampton University, at
the British Association meeting last night.
Prof Fleischmann showed a video of a cold-fusion cell, containing a
palladium electrode about 1 inch in diameter and 6in high, immersed in heavy
water. The cell was bubbling intensely and, he said, emitting 1 kilowatt of
excess heat per cubic centimetre - similar to the output of a fast breeder
nuclear reactor.
The experiment was filmed at the laboratory in the south of France where he
and Prof Stan Pons, his American collaborator, are working for a
Japanese-funded think tank.
Prof Fleischmann said technical factors made it impossible for him to
demonstrate a live cell at Southampton. 'It takes about a week to initiate
the process and then you have about 15 minutes to observe the phenomenon,'
he said. 'All we can really do at this stage is to make a video recording.'
Fleischmann-Pons cells have never been run for more than an hour, he said.
They are always shut down then 'for safety reasons' to avoid uncontrollable
boiling and a possible explosion. A cold-fusion researcher at SRI
International in California was killed early this year when a cell blew up.
Earlier, Prof Fleischmann said that the process needed to be made more
controllable and sustainable before anyone could think of building practical
cold-fusion devices to generate energy.
Most physicists have dismissed cold fusion as a delusion. But Prof
Fleischmann said: 'There are hundreds of people working on the topic and I
would say they are spending tens of millions of pounds on it.'
Japan is making a particular effort to pursue the dream of cold fusion as a
clean source of cheap energy for the next century. Early this year Dr Akito
Takahashi of Osaka University published evidence that his fusion cell was
generating considerable amounts of heat.
Prof Fleischmann and Prof Pons have cut all links with the University of
Utah, where their original work was carried out.
The most prominent British critic of Fleischmann and Pons, Prof Frank Close
of the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, made clear yesterday he remained as
sceptical as ever.
Editorial comment, Page 12
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5785</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAC4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / QE2 to sail again from October
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JIMMY BURNS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE QUEEN Elizabeth 2, the cruise liner which hit a submerged object off
Cape Cod, Massachusetts on August 7, is to resume service on October 4,
Cunard, its owner, said yesterday.
It will sail from Southampton on a scheduled Iberian cruise after
substantial repair work at the Hamburg yard of Blohm and Voss.
The German shipyard won the contract, believed to be worth about Pounds 15m,
in the face of competition from eight US and European shipyards.
Cunard, Blohm and Voss, and Commercial Union, the liner's main insurer,
yesterday refused to release any figures, but marine sources said the
combined cost of repairs, including about Pounds 2.5m of initial repair work
and interruption of business, could total more than Pounds 40m.
Initial repair work carried out in Boston by the General Ship Corporation
has included welding sheets of steel to the centre line of the hull and
parts of the keel which were damaged.
The temporary work is due to be completed on September 1. The QE2 is due to
arrive in Hamburg on September 7.
Cunard originally forecast a return to service by early September, but has
had to cancel nine transatlantic crossings, one cruise off the east coast of
the US and one cruise in southern Europe.
Trips on the QE2 cost from Pounds 800 to Pounds 2,000 for transatlantic
crossings and up to Pounds 5,000 for cruises. The liner can carry more than
1,800 passengers.
Customers affected by cancelled sailings in August and September have been
offered a choice of refunds or rebooking at a discount.
The company said yesterday Blohm and Voss had been chosen to carry out the
main repair work on the grounds of cost and speed. The shipyard won a
contract two years ago for a refit of the liner.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5786</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAC3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Colleges face strike action
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
WHITE-COLLAR staff in polytechnics and colleges of further education said
yesterday they would strike over pay for two days at the end of next month.
National employers have offered staff a 4.3 per cent pay rise. Nalgo, the
local-government union, claimed a 10 per cent rise, a 35-hour week and
improved leave.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5787</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAC2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Acorn seeks move to wider market
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
ACORN, the Cambridge-based personal-computer manufacturer which dominates
the UK schools market, is seeking to break out of its educational niche with
products aimed at the home and professionals.
Acorn, in which Olivetti of Italy has a majority stake, has had some
difficult years because of the recession and changes in schools' purchasing
policies. It hopes customers will be attracted by its ARM microprocessor, a
version of which is to be used by Apple Computer of the US in a pocket
computer called Newton.
Acorn's product list includes a home computer for Pounds 499, a 'home
office' system for Pounds 999 plus VAT, and a Pounds 250 electronic notebook
which is the first result of Acorn's collaboration with Psion, the UK
portable-computer manufacturer.
Last year Acorn recovered from a poor first half to record pre-tax profits
of Pounds 274,000, against Pounds 1.58m the year before.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5788</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAC1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Man cleared of conspiracy charge
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
A BUSINESSMAN alleged to have rifled the bank account of a firm of London
solicitors was yesterday cleared at Southwark Crown Court of conspiracy to
defraud.
It had been alleged that, with the help of an unknown accomplice, Mr Sean
O'Reilly, of Purley, Surrey, almost got away with more than Pounds 322,000
belonging to the solicitors, Asshetons, before the alleged fraud was
discovered.
The prosecution alleged that someone posing as a partner in Asshetons
instructed its bank to transfer money from its client account to one of Mr
O'Reilly's personal accounts.
The jury returned a unanimous not guilty verdict on the conspiracy charge.
Judge Geoffrey Rivlin QC ordered formal not guilty verdicts to be recorded
on charges of handling stolen goods and using a false instrument, both of
which Mr O'Reilly denied.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5789</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAC0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Fast ferry service for Channel Islands
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD TOMKINS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A HIGH-speed car ferry linking the Channel Islands with the British mainland
and France is to be launched in the spring next year, Richard Tomkins
writes.
It will halve the shortest journey time offered by the existing conventional
car ferry operated by British Channel Island Ferries, based in Poole,
Dorset, which currently has a monopoly on the route.
The service, to be launched by the Guernsey-based Condor ferry company, will
use car-carrying catamarans similar to the SeaCats operating on
cross-Channel routes.
The first catamaran, being built by International Catamarans in Tasmania,
Australia, will carry 600 passengers and 80 cars at a speed of 35 knots. It
will be joined by a second vessel with a passenger capacity of 450.
The catamarans will ply between Weymouth, Dorset, and Guernsey in 2hrs 15
mins; Weymouth and Jersey in 3 hrs; St Malo in France and Jersey in 1hr
10mins, and St Malo and Guernsey in 2hrs 40 mins.
Condor's parent, the Guernsey-based Commodore Shipping, will partly finance
the move by selling a 50 per cent stake in Condor to TNT, the Australian
transport group.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5790</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Enzymes will make food out of straw: British Association for
the Advancement of Science
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CLIVE COOKSON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SCIENTISTS will soon be able to turn straw into a health food, the British
Association meeting in Southampton heard, giving a possible use for stubble,
which farmers will not be allowed to burn from next year.
Scientists in France, Sweden and Finland have unravelled the structure of
natural enzymes that break down cellulose and hemicellulose, which humans
are unable to digest.
Dr Peter Goodenough, of the Institute of Food Science at Reading University,
is forming a European research consortium to develop improved versions of
the enzymes.
'The application of protein engineering opens up the possibility of
amalgamating the activity of these enzymes into an industrial super-enzyme,'
Dr Goodenough told the meeting. The consortium of 25 laboratories expects to
receive Pounds 2m from the European Community.
One aim is to convert wheat straw into a fibre-based food which would be a
dietary supplement - like wheat bran but more palatable.
Dr Goodenough said the western diet needed more fibre, which speeds up
digestion. Fibre could help prevent diseases such as bowel cancer, diabetes,
obesity and gallstones.
The European project also aims to develop enzymes to convert waste straw
into fuel for heating or transport.
Professor Guy Dodson, of York University, is working with Novo-Nordisk, the
Danish pharmaceutical group, to modify insulin, the protein that controls
sugar levels in blood, the association was told.
They are making a form of insulin that is absorbed more quickly than the
natural material, and may therefore be more suitable for use by diabetics.
Peat bogs are being destroyed by drainage and harvesting, the meeting heard.
Conservationists said that the bogs enable scientists to trace environmental
and archaeological changes over thousands of years because the acidic and
oxygen-free conditions preserve organic materials.
The meeting heard that harvesting particularly affected lowland raised bogs
 -those which grow above the mineral water table.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5791</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Rethink on energy policy urged
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NEIL BUCKLEY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE REMOVAL of distortions in the energy market could cut emissions of
carbon dioxide in the UK by 40 per cent and put money back into the economy,
says a study published today by environmental pressure group Friends of the
Earth.
The report says failure to take action would mean market distortions
continuing to misdirect Pounds 2bn a year on investment in uneconomic and
carbon-intensive technologies.
Friends of the Earth's proposals include linking mortgage tax relief to
energy efficiency in the home and a carbon tax.
Efficiency Without Tears. Friends of the Earth, 26-28 Underwood St, London
N1. Pounds 10.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5792</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Watchdog criticises new Scots enterprise bodies
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL CASSELL, Business Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A NUMBER of Scotland's newly created local-enterprise companies failed in
their first year of operation to install proper control systems for the
distribution of training funds, according to the National Audit Office.
Last month the NAO, the government's spending watchdog, qualified the
accounts of Scottish Enterprise, the body that last year replaced the
Scottish Development Agency, because the required systems were not in place
for all the 13 local-enterprise companies under its control.
The watchdog yesterday repeated similar concerns in a statement included in
the first annual report of Highlands and Islands Enterprise, successor to
the Highlands and Islands Development Board, which provides economic
development and training services to northern Scotland.
In the Highlands body report for 1991-92 Mr John Bourne, comptroller and
auditor-general, said that half of the 10 local-enterprise companies in the
north of Scotland had not implemented the financial controls associated with
training funds.
Last year Highlands and Islands Enterprise paid a total of Pounds 23m for
training purposes to the enterprise companies.
Mr Bourne added that the monitoring deficiencies gave rise to uncertainty
about the propriety of some training budget payments. He said: 'Consequently
there is a risk of error which could be material.'
Both Mr Bourne and the Highlands body said they recognised that small,
remote enterprise companies in their first year of operation had been unable
to establish the high standards that were required for control of public
expenditure.
The Highlands body said yesterday there was no evidence of any financial
impropriety involving the distribution of funds. Action had been taken to
overcome any earlier shortcomings in financial control systems.
Highlands and Islands Enterprise yesterday pledged itself to fight
suggestions from the Scottish Tourist Board which it claims would remove
responsibility for tourism from local control. Tourism is regarded as an
integral plank of the local economy.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5793</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Economic theory comes under fire: British Association for
the Advancement of Science
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
ECONOMIC THEORY has failed to answer important questions about how some
countries' economies expand while others contract, Professor Paul Ormerod of
Manchester University told the association.
Prof Ormerod, the chief economist of the Henley forecasting group, said
economic thinking was out of touch with the real world and in a 'true
crisis'. Little in the standard economics textbooks was known to be true,
while forecasters made serious errors.
In particular, economics had failed to explain the main factors behind
long-term economic growth, and why unemployment has risen in many western
nations since the 1970s. He also criticised the way western economists
pressed east European nations to move to free-market economies as soon as
possible.
The association welcomed this week's GCSE results, the main examination for
16-year-olds in England and Wales.
The association said it was particularly pleased about the rapid increase in
entries to the broadly based science exams, which had risen from 145,000 in
1991 to 240,000 this year.
Professor Jeff Thompson, association chairman, said the switch from
individual science subjects - biology, chemistry and physics - to 'broad and
balanced' science was good news because 'it will provide a better
understanding of science as part of a general education for the majority of
students'.
Observer, Page 13
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5794</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Scientists enter race to find gravitational waves: British
Association for the Advancement of Science
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JENNIE LYNCH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SCIENTISTS around the world are competing to be first to measure nature's
most elusive radiation - gravitational waves - and so validate some of
Einstein's last predictions.
The competition has already brought some industrial spin-offs. A new
physical principle called 'squeezing light' has been discovered by Glasgow
researchers and is now used to reduce background noise in communication
systems.
Gravitational waves are ripples in the gravitational field around stars.
They travel at the speed of light. Since gravity is a weak force the tiny
disturbances caused by the ripples are hard to detect.
Indirect experimental evidence indicates that gravitational waves do exist,
as Einstein predicted in 1916. Direct experimental evidence is more
difficult to acquire.
Two forms of detector are being developed to measure gravitational waves.
Bar detectors - 2 metre cylinders of pure aluminium cooled to almost
absolute zero - oscillate naturally along their length. This effect should
be enhanced when the cylinders are hit by gravitational waves.
Professor David Schutz, of Cardiff University's physics department, said:
'The coldest object in the universe is sitting in a physics lab in Rome. All
physicists need now is an event with sufficient energy, such as a supernova
 -the calamitous death of a large star - to produce the waves.'
The second approach, in a joint British-German project, is the development
of giant interferometer detectors which do not need supernovae to produce
results. Interferometry is the measurement of small changes in length using
very pure light.
The detector's design involves simultaneously bouncing laser light off two
pairs of perfect mirrors, suspended at right angles to one another, and
looking for differences in the time taken for the light to reflect back.
If a gravitational wave hits, the mirrors will move slightly apart and the
return time will change. The distance between the mirrors is 3km to 4km and
the mirror movement is a million million millionth of a metre.
The whole interferometer is kept in a vacuum to isolate it from background
noise.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 5
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5795</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / World Trade News: Clothes factories 'more modern than in
west'
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DANIEL GREEN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SOME RUSSIAN garment factories are more modern than their western
counterparts, thanks to heavy investment until two years ago, said a report
yesterday, writes Daniel Green.
German, French and Italian clothing companies are using the factories to
manufacture for their home markets, attracted by modern technology and low
labour costs. However, poor supplies of raw materials meant the plants were
assembling clothes from imported cloth, thread and accessories.
Three of the five factories visited by researchers from Strathclyde Graduate
Business School were making clothes for German, French, UK and Finnish
markets. Labels included C&amp;A, Dutch-owned retail chain, and Littlewoods of
the UK.
They have been attracted both by labour costs of less than Dollars 25 a
month and by the presence of machinery bought two or three years ago with
export credits at artificially good exchange rates. Such credits are no
longer available.
'Companies have very new and sophisticated western design and production
equipment sourced from Italian, German or American manufacturers,' says the
report. 'Some computerised design and layout systems would be the envy of
many western companies.'
Russian exports to the west are not subject to quotas under the multifibre
arrangement, agreements between clothes importing and exporting countries
designed to protect manufacturing in high cost countries. Furthermore, joint
ventures with more than 30 per cent western ownership get favourable tax
breaks.
However, inflation and costs were very variable and therefore 'it is not
surprising that all agreements (between western and Russian companies) we
saw in action were for one to three month periods.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5796</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACTFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Bush attacks Clinton over trade policy
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JUREK MARTIN, US Editor, and Agencies
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
PRESIDENT George Bush yesterday shifted the focus of his attack on Mr Bill
Clinton, accusing his Democratic rival for the presidency of being a closet
protectionist who was trying to exploit 'fear of foreigners' in his
campaign.
At the same time, it was announced that Mr Robert Mosbacher, former commerce
secretary, had quit as general chairman of Mr Bush's re-election effort. His
switch to fund-raising for the Republican party came just days after Mr
James Baker had arrived to try to breathe new life into Mr Bush's campaign.
In his latest broadside at Mr Clinton, the president specifically attacked
his proposals to raise the transfer taxes on foreign investment in the US.
This, Mr Bush charged, was tantamount to 'an eviction notice' to US workers
and should be seen in contrast to his own commitment to freer trade and
greater investment.
'By attacking the bogeymen of foreign investors,' the president told a rally
in St Louis, 'Governor Clinton hopes to exploit the darker impulses of this
uncertain age: fear of the future, fear of the unknown, fear of foreigners.'
The president's speech contained no reference to his opponent's character,
nor did it invoke the 'family values' that featured in the Republican
campaign during the last week.
This fits comments on Wednesday by Mr Charles Black, a senior campaign
official, who dismissed as 'wild rumours, gossip and red herrings' the
personal vitriol poured recently on Mr and Mrs Clinton by assorted
presidential surrogates.
Even so, both Mr Bush and Mr Black said they would continue to stress
traditional family values in the campaign, implying at least a modified
continuation of the present 'high road, low road' tactic, whereby the
president can distance himself from any personal attacks on the Clintons.
The polls have found that many voters want to hear more about concrete
economic and social policy proposals.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5797</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACSFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Cleaning up after Andrew
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By AGENCIES
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   FLORIDA, NEW ORLEANS
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
SQUADS of workers fanned out across storm-battered Louisiana yesterday to
begin a massive rebuilding effort after Hurricane Andrew had flattened whole
districts, killing two people and injuring dozens more, agencies report from
Florida and New Orleans.
However, local officials in Florida, hit earlier in the week by the
hurricane, were critical of what they called a delay in supplying food,
drinking water and other supplies for thousands of people in need.
Federal emergency officials acknowledged distribution problems,
Transportation Secretary Andrew Card yesterday promised 'dramatic'
improvements within 24 hours and President George Bush last night ordered
troops to Florida, without specifying a number.
The government estimated it would cost Dollars 20bn-Dollars 30bn to tidy and
rebuild in Florida, and to care for residents displaced by the storm.
Louisiana state officials said they had no overall count of storm-related
injuries but initial estimates reckoned fewer than 100. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency said it was setting aside Dollars 77m to help
Louisiana recover.
Most of the storm's fury was spent against sparsely populated farming
communities and swampland in the state, sparing it the widespread
destruction caused in Florida, where 15 people died.
Official estimates in Miami reported that the hurricane had wiped out the
homes of one Dade County resident in eight - a quarter of a million people.
Andrew had become little more than a strong rainstorm early yesterday,
moving across Mississippi state and heading for the north-eastern US.
Several of Louisiana's main industries were affected, including those of
oysters and alligators. Wildlife and fisheries secretary Joe Herring
estimated a 50 per cent decline in the alligator industry. The cotton and
sugar-cane crops were threatened, the state agriculture department said.
Most Louisiana oil refineries, however, were barely affected and deliveries
of crude oil were expected to resume yesterday.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5798</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / World Trade News: Dunkel urges accord over Gatt differences
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By FRANCES WILLIAMS
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   GENEVA
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
MR ARTHUR DUNKEL, director-general of the 104-member General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (Gatt), has again called on those nations blocking
conclusion of the Uruguay Round of trade talks to settle their differences
so that 'results from which every trading nation will gain' can be speedily
implemented.
The six-year-old round has been stalled since last spring by the failure of
the US and the European Community to reach an accord on cutting farm
subsidies.
In his introduction to the world trade body's annual report, Gatt activities
1991, published today, Mr Dunkel says the draft agreements which are already
on the table from the Uruguay Round negotiations are 'relevant, precise,
balanced and urgently needed answers to some of the biggest economic
challenges of the day.'
The round, the most ambitious ever attempted, would reduce tariff and
non-tariff barriers, strengthen Gatt rules, extend them for the first time
to textiles and agriculture, and devise new international rules for trade in
services and intellectual property such as patents, trademarks and
copyrights.
In contrast to most international negotiations, the round's ambitions have
risen rather than fallen, over time, Mr Dunkel says, citing examples where
negotiators have gone well beyond the original objectives.
The report itself draws attention to the sharp drop in growth rates of world
output and trade since 1988, to which uncertainty over future trading rules
has contributed.
It also notes increasing reluctance of countries to implement in full the
judgments of Gatt disputes panels, often on the grounds that this must await
the round's conclusion.
'The keys to a conclusion are held in a very few hands,' Mr Dunkel says in
his introduction, without naming names.
Trade officials said yesterday that talks on farm trade between the US and
EC were expected to shift into high gear once the French referendum on the
Maastricht treaty on September 20 was out of the way.
The two sides must reach agreement before the end of the year if the Uruguay
Round package is to be finalised in time to meet the March 1993 deadline for
expiry of the US administration's 'fast-track' negotiating authority.
Both Mrs Carla Hills, the US trade representative, and Mr James Baker, now
President Bush's chief of staff, have recently stressed the importance of
finishing the round.
US officials said yesterday they did not think the upcoming presidential
election would inhibit the negotiations.
Mr Dunkel has already begun to take soundings to ensure that if and when the
bilateral deal is reached the round can be swiftly concluded between all 108
participants.
See Editorial Comment
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5799</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / World Trade News: Mobil in Qatar LNG project
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NEIL BUCKLEY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Mobil, the US oil company, yesterday signed heads of agreement with the
Qatar General Petroleum Corporation to participate in two significant
liquefied natural gas (LNG) projects in Qatar, involving investment of
Dollars 3bn, writes Neil Buckley.
Mobil has taken a 10 per cent interest in the Qatargas project of 6m tonnes
of LNG a year, with likely investment of Dollars 350m on development, and
the possibility of further investment in tankers.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5800</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / World Trade News: Pemex in US refinery deal
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By STEPHEN FIDLER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Petroleos Mexicanos, the Mexican state oil company, and Shell Oil of the US
have signed a memorandum of understanding under which Pemex would take a 50
per cent share in a Shell refinery in Texas, writes Stephen Fidler.
The outline agreement, over a 225,000 barrels-per-day refinery in operation
at Deer Park, Texas, also envisages long-term agreements over deliveries of
Pemex crude to the refinery and deliveries of unleaded petrol to Mexico,
where there is a shortage.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5801</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / World Trade News: Peru quits trade bloc
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By Our Foreign Staff
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
PERU has temporarily withdrawn from the Andean Pact, the five-nation trade
bloc which groups it with Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador and Venezuela, adding
further confusion to the patchwork of trading arrangements developing among
the Andean countries, writes our Foreign Staff.
Peru will assume observer status until the end of 1993, when it is scheduled
to resume as a full member.
The Peruvian government blamed its current economic difficulties for its
decision to withdraw.
The pact has been in difficulty since Venezuela broke off relations with
Peru in April this year over the suspension of the Peruvian constitution by
President Alberto Fujimori.
However, the other four members finalised an agreement, reached last
December in Colombia, on common import duties for a series of products.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5802</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / World Trade News: Russia updates air traffic control - A
Dollars 10bn modernisation project
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOHN THORNHILL and DANIEL GREEN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
RUSSIA is considering a series of proposals to modernise its antiquated air
traffic control (ATC) network - a project which could cost Dollars 10bn
(Pounds 5bn) and take more than a decade to complete.
Thomson CSF, the French group, and a rival consortium of international
companies called Gatss (Global Aviation Transport Systems and Services),
have each submitted detailed feasibility studies to the Russian government.
A provisional decision is expected by the end of the year. It is likely to
be followed by other members of the Commonwealth of Independent States,
which in June signed a co-operation deal on regulating the use of airspace
in their countries.
The pressure for a new ATC system is growing. More than 60 airlines have
apparently emerged since the break-up of the old Soviet Union. Thirty have
already received licences for international carriage, and 20 are being
registered with the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) and the
International Air Transport Association (IATA), which assigns airline
designators and codes.
More capacity in ATC might also encourage western airlines travelling
between Europe and Asia to fly over Russia and pay it fees in hard
currencies.
Westinghouse of the US, part of the Gatss consortium, stresses a strategic
need. 'I do not think that the Russian economy will go anywhere until they
begin to implement this ATC system. You have to be able to move goods across
the country. It is a key element in stabilising this entire area,' says a
spokesman.
Russia has indeed named aviation as a strategic industry for development,
and improving ATC is part of the drive towards better civil aviation. The
government has identified the ATC network as a priority field for investment
 -although its ability to pay for the project is limited by budgetary
constraints.
Mr Anatolii Pyshyi, head of Russia's governmental commission on air traffic,
says western involvement is vital. 'This is a very urgent issue because the
ATC system is about to disintegrate and there is no other way to solve the
problem. Russia is not able to modernise the system on its own,' he said.
Although a big up-front capital investment will be needed to initiate the
modernisation project, western experts believe further development could be
largely self-funding.
At present, they argue, airspace over the former Soviet Union is wasted: for
historical security reasons commercial aircraft are still restricted to very
narrow corridors.
Gatss is widely seen as the front-runner among the competitors for the
contract, on technical grounds. It pools the skills of seven western
companies including Westinghouse, Hughes Aircraft, IBM, AT&amp;T, the Jerry
Thompson design company from the US, German's Daimler-Benz group, and C.
Itoh of Japan.
It has developed a five-stage plan to modernise ATC for the former Soviet
Union, involving up to 8,000 individual projects. The programme would take
until the year 2015 to complete.
However, a rival set of proposals from Thomson CSF, which has experience of
introducing regional ATC networks in the former Soviet Union, also has many
attractions, including financial backing from the French government.
Western aviation experts believe that unless the CIS countries move soon to
co-ordinate a development programme, some former Soviet republics will
introduce incompatible ATC systems.
The Baltic states, for example, have been more concerned to become
integrated with western European networks than with those operating in the
CIS.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5803</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / World Trade News: Eskom in R470m power deals
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PHILIP GAWITH
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   JOHANNESBURG
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
ESKOM, the South African power utility, has said it will be participating in
three projects costing about R470m (Pounds 86m) to help ease an energy
crisis in neighbouring states, writes Philip Gawith in Johannesburg.
Mr Ian McRae, Eskom's chief executive, told a news conference yesterday that
countries such as Zimbabwe and Zambia, which rely heavily on hydro-power,
had been badly affected by the very severe drought in the region.
Mr McRae gave details of three projects which could realise a vision he has
long had of creating an interlocking regional power grid hitherto impeded by
South Africa's pariah political status:
Linking the South African grid at Messina in Northern Transvaal with the
southern Zimbabwean grid at Beit Bridge. This will cost about R7m and should
allow 40MW of power to flow into Zimbabwe by November.
The second, costing about R145m, involves strengthening links between the
Spitskop power station in the north-western Transvaal and Gaborone, the
Botswana capital. From here the power will be transmitted northwards via
existing lines to Francistown, and from there to Bulawayo, a key link in the
Zimbabwean grid. This will allow 100MW to flow from Eskom into the Botswana
system from May next year and, if necessary, from there to Zimbabwe and
Zambia.
The most amibitious scheme, still not finalised, involves spending R315m
developing a line which runs from the Matimba station in Northern Transvaal,
across south-eastern Botswana, to Bulawayo. This would take 500MW of power
into the systems of these countries.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5804</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Defections from pro-government increasing in Brazil
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTINA LAMB and STEPHEN FIDLER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   RIO DE JANEIRO, LONDON
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
DEFECTIONS from the pro-government parties in Brazil are increasing after
the vote on Wednesday to approve a congressional report accusing President
Fernando Collor of massive corruption. A poll of Congress members by the
Folha de Sao Paulo newspaper shows support for impeachment doubled in the
last 10 days, reports Christina Lamb in Rio de Janeiro.
The opposition now has 300 of the 336 votes necessary to approve an
impeachment process, with a further 165 deputies still undecided.
Discussions on a transitional government are already under way. Senior
Brazilian government officials have begun admitting for the first time that
Mr Collor no longer has the Congressional support necessary to fend off the
impeachment process, now due to be initiated on Tuesday.
Dom Luciano Mendes, head of the Catholic Church in Brazil, was expected
yesterday to add his voice to those calling for Mr Collor's resignation. The
governors of the country's 12 largest states have all come out against the
president and leaders of the country's powerful business community will meet
in Rio de Janeiro on Monday to decide their position.
Stephen Fidler reports in London: Brazil is set to sign on September 10 an
agreement to issue about Dollars 7bn of 10-year bonds covering interest
arrears to international banks built up in 1989 and 1990.
Citibank, which heads the creditor banks negotiating with the Brazil, said
the bonds will be issued once banks holding 95 per cent of the debt have
signed the agreements. This should let the bonds be issued in the fourth
quarter.
In April 1991, Brazil and leading creditor banks agreed on the settlement of
Dollars 8bn of debt arrears - Dollars 2bn in cash and the rest in bonds.
Bonds are also being issued to cover interest on delayed interest. Banks
will be able to choose between two classes of bonds, each of which has a
three-year grace period before capital repayments start falling due.
The government is talking over with leading creditor banks a comprehensive
rescheduling of Dollars 44bn of bank debt, which Citibank expects will take
a further two weeks to complete.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5805</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Beating a path to the quiet man's door: Brazil's
vice-president, in line for the top job via a corruption scandal
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTINA LAMB
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MR Itamar Franco, Brazil's bespectacled vice-president and the man who would
take office if President Fernando Collor were ousted, was until recently
considered Mr Collor's best weapon in his struggle to stay in power.
Dogged by a reputation as negative as that of Mr Dan Quayle, his US
counterpart, Mr Franco has marked his 2 1/2 years in office by querulous
criticisms of the government and outspoken opposition to some of its
policies, causing him to quit Mr Collor's party. Since he tried to sack the
justice minister while Mr Collor was travelling, Mr Franco has not been
allowed to sign anything during the president's frequent foreign trips.
Today, though, senior politicians and businessmen are beating a path to the
vice-president's door. Mr Collor's position appears very shaky after the
approval on Wednesday by a congressional investigating commission of a
report accusing him of massive corruption. Mr Alexandre Barros, a political
consultant who prepared a detailed profile of Mr Franco in June, says:
'Initially we only sold a few copies. Now everyone is calling us.'
Inside his office, in an annexe to the presidential palace, Mr Franco is
lying low. He claims to have been 'praying for Mr Collor's survival', but is
said to be preparing behind the scenes for office. He has let it be known
that he recently read former US President Richard Nixon's biography.
Mr Franco could hardly be more different from his boss, a former playboy who
loves dangerous sports. The divorced and introverted vice-president likes
reading and cannot be imagined zipping about on a jet-ski, a Collor hobby.
Albeit not a man of vision or a great orator, the 61-year-old Mr Franco has
two important strengths. His reputation for honesty is impeccable and,
having been a senator for two eight-year terms and twice mayor of his home
town of Juiz de Fora, he knows the political system inside out. Thus he is
much better equipped to steer bills through Congress than the arrogant and
confrontational Mr Collor.
Among the business and financial community, the biggest doubts about Mr
Franco are on his economic policy views. He is a fervent nationalist. He
opposed the privatisation of the Usiminas steel mill and criticised Mr
Collor's modernisation policies. During the crafting of the 1988
constitution, he voted for protection of Brazilian companies.
However, analysts point out that Usiminas is based in Mr Franco's home state
of Minas Gerais, and they believe it would be difficult to alter the
direction of economic policy because most of Brazilian society backs the
move towards modernisation.
Mr Carlos Langoni, an economics professor at the Getulio Vargas Foundation,
says: 'Itamar will not change the agenda because there's no alternative -
simple as that. He might move more slowly, however, on trade liberalisation
and privatisation.'
This view is confirmed by Mr Franco's close friend, former vice-president
Aureliano Chaves: 'Current policy is in the right direction, but there could
be more attention to social needs.'
As a sign of his conversion, Mr Franco seems to have agreed to keep on Mr
Marclio Marques Moreira, the well-respected economy minister, in a national
unity government.
However, if the vice-president does step up a rung, he will be backed by a
broad political coalition, which, while facilitating the passage through
Congress of such bills as crucial fiscal reform, will also put pressure on
him to give key portfolios to political allies, particularly from the
Democratic Movement (PMDB), the largest party.
It could not have been easy for Mr Itamar to be deputy to a man who refused
to allow him into decision-making. In April, for example, when Mr Collor
abruptly sacked his whole cabinet, Mr Franco only found out from television.
Any sympathy he might have felt for the president was lost when he
discovered that the presidency was investigating his tax returns in an
apparent attempt to discredit him.
As the clamour grows for Mr Collor's resignation or impeachment, Mr Franco
sits and waits, while his aides make a concerted effort to improve his
image. After meeting Mr Franco this week, the influential Senator Fernando
Henrique Cardoso said the vice-president was reforming his ideas. 'The
Itamar of Usiminas will not be the Itamar of the presidency,' he said.
See feature
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5806</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / US second-quarter growth sharply lower
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JUREK MARTIN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   WASHINGTON
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE US Commerce Department confirmed yesterday that economic growth in the
second quarter of this year was less than half that recorded in the first
quarter.
Its revised figures for the expansion in gross domestic product in
April-June were unchanged from its estimates of a month ago, at 1.4 per cent
real annual rate. In the first quarter, the economy grew by 2.9 per cent.
There was some greater encouragement in the simultaneous report that the
number of Americans applying for unemployment benefits in the week ending
August 15 had dropped by 92,000 to 382,000 - the largest weekly decline
since records began in 1967.
But the Labour Department conceded that almost all the improvement was
attributable to the end of a two-week shutdown at General Motors car plants
in Michigan.
Given reports this week of another decline in durable goods orders and
diminishing consumer confidence, there remains little statistical evidence
of recovery. Business inventories in the second quarter, for example, rose
by a revised Dollars 9.2bn, having fallen by Dollars 12.6bn in the first
quarter.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 4
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5807</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: Lopez leads GM car parts crusade
 -A man whose warriors made an industry squeal
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MARTIN DICKSON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Mr J. Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua may be the most unpopular man in the US
automobile industry.
Mr Lopez, a Spaniard who shook up GM's supplier base in Europe in the
late-1980s, is trying to do the same in the US, and the American parts
industry is squealing.
Since taking over four months ago as GM's vice-president of worldwide
purchasing - a new position - his efforts to renegotiate contracts with US
suppliers and forge relationships with them have been half-jokingly dubbed
'the 100 days of terror.'
Supporters say he is making a much-needed shake-up in GM's over-cosy
relations with its parts suppliers, both internally from GM-owned parts
plants, and externally, from independent manufacturers.
Critics complain that he and his purchasing troops - whom Mr Lopez reputedly
calls 'warriors' - have been crusading with a ruthlessness which could
considerably damage the parts industry. The issue moved forward this week.
First, Mr Lopez broke his long silence and delivered a speech which sought
to explain his strategy and win support.
Second, the United Atuo Workers union yesterday went on strike at a GM plant
in Lordstown, Ohio, which makes parts for 14 GM models, including the
company's hot-selling Saturn compact model, which is in short supply.
A union official said a key problem was job security at the plant.
Unconfirmed reports said the company wanted to eliminate 240 jobs in
Lordstown's die-making operations.
The strike may not be directly connected with Mr Lopez's cost-reduction
drive, but it does represent a warning shot by the UAW, concerned that a GM
tilt away from favouring its in-house parts operations for new contracts
could mean a significant loss of union jobs.
GM certainly needs to slash its manufacturing costs across the board in
North America, where it is still losing money heavily on its automobile
operations.
Concern over the group's slow progress prompted a boardroom revolt last
April which saw Mr Jack Smith, who successfully turned round GM's European
operations in the 1980s, elevated to the presidency of the group with a
mandate to shake up North America. One of Mr Smith's most important
appointments was that of Mr Lopez.
Mr Lopez has sent parts manufacturers into apoplexy by re-negotiating supply
contracts and reportedly demanding huge cuts in prices of 20 per cent or
more over several years. And he has made clear that if US suppliers cannot
meet GM's price and quality specifications, the company is prepared to go to
other global suppliers who can.
The critics complain that, while such tactics may have been appropriate in
Europe, where there may have been fat on the parts industry, the US
suppliers have already been through years of cost-cutting initiatives and
GM's action may now simply drive the weakest companies to the wall.
The key to his drive is a management process with the brain-numbing title of
Purchased Input Concept Optimisation with Suppliers, or PICOS for short.
This involves selecting suppliers on how they meet three criteria - quality,
service and price - and working with them to improve all of these.
In his speech, Mr Lopez argued the world was in the throes of a third
industrial revolution which forced companies to change rapidly the
assumptions behind the way they did business. He then applied this idea to
manufacturers' prices. Under conventional business practices, companies
would determine their costs, add a reasonable profit, and thus fix a price.
But he said this method was obsolete. Manufacturers must reverse the process
 -first determine what price was acceptable to the customer, then fix their
profit margin and finally work out how they would achieve manufacturing
costs to reach these goals.
Mr Lopez said that in Europe GM had held PICOS workshops at 158 supplier
locations and on average had improved productivity 51 per cent, cut
materials in process by 51 per cent, reduced the factory lay-out by 26 per
cent and lead times by 51 per cent.
So far in North America its 45 workshops - both inside and outside GM - had
improved productivity 63 per cent, cut the materials figure by 56 per cent,
reduced layout 36 per cent and boosted lead times 61 per cent. 'And it's
clear there is still a lot of room for improvement,' he added.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5808</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: VNU sees 5% increase in year-end
net profits
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   AMSTERDAM
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
VNU, the Dutch publisher, said yesterday it expects full 1992 net profit to
be some 5 per cent higher than the Fl 117m (Dollars 73.8m) posted in 1991,
Reuter reports from Amsterdam.
For the first half of the year the group reported net profit ahead by 5.6
per cent to Fl 54.0m from FL 51.1m a year ago. Sales fell to Fl 1.22bn from
Fl 1.25bn last time, a decline of slightly more than 2 per cent.
The group said that expected the percentage rise in full-year net profit to
be of the same order as in the first half.
VNU said that first-half profits rose due to lower paper prices and
efficiency measures which were starting to bear fruit.
Profits were markedly improved at the Dutch and Belgian magazines group,
graphics operations and business information services in the US.
Higher advertising income at television station RTL4, in which it has a
minority stake, also helped earnings.
But lower magazine advertisements depressed results in the business press
group as well as the newspaper group.
In March VNU posted a 20 per cent decline in 1991 net profit to Fl 117m
which was in line with its forecasts.
The company then blamed the profit fall on a sharp decline in advertising
volume in the UK and the Netherlands, which hit its business press sector
and its Dutch daily newspaper businesses.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5809</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: Maple Leaf Foods rises 29% to
CDollars 20m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT GIBBENS and REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MONTREAL, PITTSBURGH
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
MAPLE LEAF FOODS, Canada's biggest food processor which is controlled by
Hillsdown of the UK, said second-quarter profits from continuing operations
were up 29 per cent to CDollars 20m (USDollars 17m) or 25 cents a share.
This compares with CDollars 15.6m,or 24 cents a share, last year.
Sales fell to CDollars 678m, against CDollars 808m last time, due mainly to
the sale of its edible oils business.
First-half earnings from continuing operations were CDollars 32m, or 40
cents a share, up from CDollars 24.7m, or 38 cents a share, a year earlier
on fewer shares outstanding. Sales were CDollars 1.3bn, against CDollars
1.55bn.
Maple Leaf, with operations across Canada and in the US and Europe, said
results for the second half would probably be affected by the weak economic
recovery and poor weather.
HJ Heinz, the US food group, and Hillsdown of the UK have formed a joint
venture to acquire a Hungarian state-owned canning company, Kecskemeti
Konzervgyar of Kecskemet, Reuter reports from Pittsburg.
The venture will be known as Magyar Foods.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5810</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: Jusco in link with Japanese suit
maker
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By EMIKO TERAZONO
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
JUSCO, the leading Japanese retailer, which also has ties with Body Shop,
the UK cosmetics chain, has forged a link with Taka-Q, a Japanese maker of
men's suits.
The move by the two companies, both listed on the first section of the Tokyo
stock exchange, comes as consumer spending plunges in Japan.
Industry analysts said the move amounted to a financial rescue for Taka-Q,
although both companies maintained the tie-up was on equal terms.
Taka-Q has been especially hard hit by the sharp decline and faces
redemption of a warrant bond worth Dollars 100m later this year.
It will allot 5.7m new shares to Jusco at Y560 (Dollars 4.48) per share. The
allotment will make Jusco the third largest shareholder of Taka-Q.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5811</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: Net income slides at Dutch paper
group
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID BROWN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   AMSTERDAM
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
BUEHRMANN-Tetterode, the Dutch packaging, paper and office products group,
reported a 31 per cent dive in first-half net income to Fl 62.6m (Dollars
39.5m) from Fl 90.9m
Graphics and business systems accounted for most of a 23 per cent fall in
operating profit to Fl 129.4m.
One of the big three Dutch paper groups, it said its turnover advanced 3.4
per cent to Fl 2.92bn, but when adjusted for new acquisitions revenues
actually fell by 7 per cent.
The group predicts second-half net profit will be less than last year's Fl
102m.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5812</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: P&amp;G in talks on Dollars 700m
disposal
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   PITTSBURGH
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
PROCTER &amp; Gamble, the US household products group, is reported to be
negotiating the sale of its two remaining pulp mills and adjacent timberland
to a group of former managers and a venture capital unit of First Chicago
for up to Dollars 700m, Reuters reports from Pittsburgh.
Mr Robert Cannon, former head of the company's pulp division, is leading a
leveraged buy-out of the assets.
Procter &amp; Gamble last year announced its intention to get out of the pulp
business and earlier this month announced a sale of some assets to
Weyerhauser of the US.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5813</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: Overseas operations help ABN
Amro climb 8.9%
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID BROWN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   AMSTERDAM
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
ABN AMRO, the largest bank in the Netherlands, reports first-half net
profits grew by 8.9 per cent from Fl 801m to Fl 872m (Dollars 550m), powered
by an expanding overseas operation. It also forecasts 'a slight increase' in
full-year earnings over the Fl 1.54bn achieved in 1991.
Mr Rob Hazelhoff, the chairman, said that a lower US dollar exchange rate
would adversely affect the earnings of the increasingly important US
operation in the second half.
Gross profit advanced 7.6 per cent to Fl 2.01bn. Overseas gross earnings
jumped sharply. In North America, profit soared by 68 per cent to Fl 413m.
This more than compensated for stagnant earnings on the home market, which
generated Fl 1.23bn of the gross, and a European decline, which was
concentrated in France and Germany. UK earnings were up 'substantially', the
bank said.
ABN Amro's income advanced by 7.8 per cent to Fl 6.18bn while costs rose a
similar rate to Fl 4.17bn, the result of overseas acquisitions. The cost
increase in Holland was contained at 3.2 per cent and the number of staff
was trimmed by 1,299 to 38,003.
Interest income was up by 12.1 per cent to Fl 4.07bn, the result of better
profit margins on guilder-denominated loans and higher overall lending
volume, which expanded by 3.3 per cent at home to Fl 156.7bn and by 3.9 per
cent abroad to Fl 104bn.
Commission income rose 11.1 per cent to Fl 1.55bn, primarily on the
international side. A decline in the contribution of its insurance business
was compensated by earnings on payment transfers and other fees, but income
from own-account securities trading was down sharply.
The bank's international network continues to grow in importance not least
through acquisitions in the US; it generated 38.4 per cent of the gross
result during the first six months, against 32.8 per cent during the
comparable period last year. Since last December, the balance sheet total
has climbed Fl 30.5bn to Fl 445.5bn. Of this, the consolidations of the
Chicago-based Talman Home Federal Savings and Loan and the London-based
stockbroker Hoare Govett accounted for some Fl 12bn.
ABN Amro has declared an unchanged interim dividend of Fl 1.40 per share,
payable partly in ordinary shares at the stockholder's option.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5814</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: Daf cuts operating loss
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN DONE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
DAF, the Dutch commercial vehicle maker in which British Aerospace holds a
16 per cent stake, cut its operating loss in the first half of 1992 to Fl
27.4m (Dollars 17.3m) from Fl 116.5m in the same period a year ago, writes
Kevin Done.
The operating loss for the first six months of this year included a charge
of Fl 24.3m for guaranteeing Daf Finance bad debts. Group turnover fell by
2.9 per cent to Fl 2.18bn largely due to lower component sales and reduced
defence turnover by Daf's special products division, which is to be
restructured.
Truck production rose by 15.9 per cent to 13,108 from 11,305 in the same
period a year ago, while truck deliveries increased by 6.5 per cent to
13,709. Daf said the west European truck market (above 3.5 tonnes) fell by a
further 3.7 per cent in the first half of the year. Daf captured a market
share of 7.7 per cent against 7.3 per cent in the first half a year ago.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5815</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCACAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: Air Canada offers investment
deal to Continental Airlines
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NIKKI TAIT and ROBERT GIBBENS
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK, MONTREAL
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
CONTINENTAL Airlines, the fifth largest US carrier but bankrupt since late
1990, yesterday received an investment proposal from Air Canada and a team
of Texan investors, which could give the bidders a majority stake in the
airline.
The new proposal - the third received by Continental in recent months - came
as the airline announced a breakthrough agreement with the Pension Benefit
Guaranty Corporation, the federal agency which underpins pension benefits.
The agency had been claiming that Continental was liable for Dollars 700m of
underfunding in the pension plans of Eastern Airlines, Continental's
now-defunct sister airline - a claim Continental disputed.
This wrangling was seen as a major obstacle to Continental's emergence from
bankruptcy. But, under yesterday's tentative agreement, the carrier said it
had agreed pay the agency Dollars 20m in cash and give the PGBC a Dollars
375m unsecured claim against its estate. There are various additional
concessions to the PGBC, plus a separate agreement with the Internal Revenue
Service.
The new investment interest comes from a consortium comprising Air Partners,
run by Texan investors, Mr David Bonderman and Mr James Coulter, and Air
Canada. It is offering to make a Dollars 400m cash investment in
Continental. In return, the investors would receive Dollars 100m in equity
securi ties and Dollars 300m in debt securities.
If the transaction went ahead as structured, Air Partners would get a 29 per
cent equity interest in the restructured Continental Airlines, but a 41 per
cent voting stake.
Air Canada, the nation's largest airline but heavily loss-making, would take
an initial 24 per cent voting interest and a 29 per cent equity interest.
The two partners would share the Dollars 400m investment equally, and be
allowed to appoint five members each to a 16-strong Continental board. Air
Canada, which has sizeable debts and lost CDollars 218m (USDollars 183.1m)
last year, said it had freed around CDollars 300m in cash recently, via a
variety of transactions.
Continental creditors would share in the remaining 42 per cent equity
interest, and 35 per cent of the voting rights.
Attempts to heave Continental out of bankruptcy have been gaining pace
recently. The bidding started when Maxxam, a conglomerate headed by Mr
Charles Hurwitz, a Houston financier, offered to invest Dollars 350m for a
72 per cent equity stake.
A second proposal, involving a Dollars 385m capital injection, was received
earlier this month from Mr Alfredo Brener, a Houston resident whose family
owns a sizeable stake in Mexicana Airlines.
Continental said the consortium was 'qualified to commence negotiations. .
.working towards an agreement which over-bid and superseded' the Maxxam
agreement.
Air Canada is lead by Mr Hollis Harris, Continental's former chief
executive. Yesterday, he claimed the deal would produce benefits in 'network
co-ordination, information systems and maintainence' and position the
carrier for 'further liberalisation of air travel in North America'.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5816</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAB9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: VW improves 3% to DM445m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW FISHER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
VOLKSWAGEN, the German car concern, yesterday reported a 3 per cent increase
in its net profits for the first half of 1992 to DM445m (Dollars 278m),
though turnover showed much stronger growth of 11 per cent to DM43.8bn.
The group said that the net figure still reflected the start-up costs of new
models such as the Golf and Vento family cars. These costs had continued
from last year into the first quarter. This particularly affected the parent
company, where earnings were 15 per cent lower at DM282m. The second quarter
was much better than the first as a result of greater availability of
vehicles.
At the pre-tax level, the VW group operating profit was down by 17 per cent
at DM987m. But taxes were much lower, leading to the higher net result.
Shares of VW moved up by DM10.50 on the result to close at DM324.50, though
some analysts had expected a rather better performance.
For the full year, VW repeated its forecast that sales would total some 3.5m
vehicles.
Last year, it increased sales by 3 per cent to 3.13m units. In the first
half of this year, unit sales were 6 per cent higher at 1.8bn vehicles. But
while foreign sales rose by 19 per cent to 1.14bn units, those in the
domestic market were 11 per cent lower at 656,000.
The company looked forward to a more positive world economic development in
1993 and hoped some of the improvement could start in the second half of
this year.
VW's new projects would then reduce strains on capacity and put the group in
a position to meet growing demand. But it said it was not ignoring the
warning signs about the domestic economy and the likelihood of a return to
normal after the impact on demand of unification.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5817</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAB8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: Five-fold increase at Renault
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALICE RAWSTHORN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   PARIS
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
RENAULT, the French state-owned motor group, saw its pre-tax profits rise
five-fold to FFr5.44bn (Dollars 1.13bn) in the first half of this year, from
FFr962m in same period of 1991, thanks to a strong performance from its car
division.
In spite of the depressed state of the European car market, Renault managed
to raise its market share from 9.9 per cent to 10.5 per cent in the first
half. It sold 767,000 cars during the period, its highest sales figure for
more than 10 years, bringing its share of the French market to 30 per cent,
the same as its arch-rival, Peugeot-Citroen.
However, Renault warned that the downward trend in the motor market could
accelerate in the second half. The group said it was confident of achieving
higher earnings in 1992 than in 1991, but cautioned that profits for the
second six months of the year, could be lower than in the first.
Overall sales rose by 14 per cent from FFr83.23bn to FFr94.83bn. The car
division showed the fastest growth, with an 18 per cent increase in interim
turnover from FFr67.17bn to FFr79.46bn. The commercial vehicles division
came under pressure in the difficult economic climate with sales falling by
4.2 per cent to FFr12.96bn from FFr13.52bn.
Renault managed to increase operating income to FFr5.32bn from FFr1.52bn and
to reduce financial charges, thanks to a decline in net debt, to FFr422m
from FFr685m. Exceptional charges fell to FFr5m from FFr518m. The
contribution from Renault's financial companies rose to FFr810m from
FFr582m. This includes Renault's share in Volvo, the Swedish motor group
with which it has formed a partnership, which represented a FFr307m loss.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5818</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAB7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: Daimler-Benz lifts German stock
market
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW FISHER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
DAIMLER-BENZ yesterday gave the German stock market a much-needed fillip by
reporting a 16 per cent rise in net profits for the first half to DM1.02bn
(Dollars 640m), reflecting lower taxes and the first-time inclusion of
earnings from Airbus.
However, Germany's biggest industrial concern was muted about prospects in
the second half, referring to a 'subsiding boom' in Germany and
uncertainties about export markets.
The company's shares, buoyed by the higher earnings, closed DM20 higher at
DM610.80.
Pre-tax operating profits were 3.25 per cent lower at DM2.02bn. The group
said that while export business and sales of the more expensive
Mercedes-Benz cars increased, car demand in Germany weakened.
It plans to reduce car output to 543,000 cars from 578,000 in 1991. In the
first half, production was 284,500 against 297,000 cars.
Group earnings benefited from the rise in financial profits to DM518m from
DM318m partly reflecting the first-time inclusion of Daimler's 80 per cent
share in Deutsche Airbus. Lower taxes, with Daimler now able to offset some
divisional losses against tax, also helped the net result.
Daimler-Benz said group net income in the whole of 1992 should reach last
year's level, and repeated its forecast that turnover should exceed DM100bn.
In 1991, after the group had also forecast same-again earnings at the
halfway stage, earnings were 8 per cent higher at DM1.9bn, with turnover up
by 11 per cent to DM95bn.
It raised its dividend for the first time since 1986 by DM1 a share to DM13.
Daimler, whose activities also include aerospace, electrical and electronics
products and systems, and financial services, said turnover in the first
half increased by 9 per cent to DM46.3bn.
Sales to the rest of the EC rose by 5 per cent to DM90bn, with a 20 per cent
jump in US business to DM6.6bn.
The Mercedes car and truck operations accounted for 74 per cent of turnover,
with a 9 per cent improvement to DM34.9bn.
Because Mercedes' new luxury S-class model was available for the whole
period, car revenues advanced by 11 per cent to DM21.2bn.
Unit sales were slightly down at 288,000 cars.
In Germany, car registrations of 138,400 were also down marginally on last
year's high level. Markets where unit sales showed marked gains were the UK,
Belgium, and Spain. In the US, volume was 23 per cent higher.
On the truck side, turnover was 7 per cent higher at DM13.7bn, with output 4
per cent higher at 150,500 units. New registrations rose by 7 per cent.
In North America, the Freightliner truck operation raised unit sales by 35
per cent. With a market share of 23 per cent, it became for the first time
the leading manufacturer in the US heavy duty truck market.
World stock markets, Page 29
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5819</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAB6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: Decline at BASF deepens gloom in
chemical sector
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW FISHER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   FRANKFURT
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
BASF's first-half figures yesterday showed that the trials of the German
chemical industry were continuing and likely to keep profits in the sector
under pressure for some time.
The result was the worst of the three big German chemical concerns. Hoechst
on Wednesday announced a poor performance while Bayer reported better than
expected, though still lower, figures.
BASF's interim pre-tax profits were 37 per cent lower at DM972m (Dollars
607m), with net income down by 33 per cent at DM465m.
Hoechst reported a 20 per cent drop in first-half pre-tax profits and Bayer
one of 10 per cent. Both said they saw little evidence of any improvement on
world markets. BASF yesterday echoed this comment. Noting that 1992 remained
a difficult year, it added: 'As yet, there are no reliable signs of any
improvement, especially in the US.'
It said rising labour costs, higher environmental protection costs, and the
slackening of business in the holiday period meant the second half was
unlikely to bring any marked improvement in earnings. Commenting on the poor
first-half figures, it said demand had not weakened but excess capacity in
the industry and low prices hampered performance.
BASF's group turnover was 0.6 per cent higher at DM23.6bn, but the company,
which has a large energy subsidiary, said the downward trend was concealed
by the increase in the mineral oil tax which added about DM500m.
BASF had to accept sharp price reductions over a wide range of products. The
lower dollar had added to this pressure, without providing adequate relief
on the raw materials side. In spite of lacklustre economic growth, volume
sales increased in all markets, partly due to new plants.
In the US, 'our business reflects the fact that the expected upturn has yet
to materialise,' the company said. The group is continuing with its
cost-cutting and labour reduction programmes, with the labour force down by
3 per cent to less than 127,000 people in the first six months.
Lex, Page 14
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5820</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAB5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: Volvo posts SKr103m deficit at
halfway
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT TAYLOR
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   STOCKHOLM
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
VOLVO of Sweden reported yesterday a SKr103m (Dollars 19.3m) loss after
financial items for the first half of the year, against a SKr1.16bn profit
for the same period of 1991.
Volvo said that viewed as a whole it did not anticipate any improvement in
performance in 'the immediate future'.
Volvo's sales rose by 9 per cent in the first half to SKr41.38bn from
SKr37.94bn. Its operating loss was SKr835m compared with an operating
deficit of SKr559m for the same period of last year. However, the cash flow
was positive due a reduction in working capital.
The loss came after rationalisation measures and lower product development
costs. The deficit continued in the second quarter because of weak margins
and non-recurring costs involved in taking over the British import company's
marketing operations. It said the loss was less than for the same period of
1991.
Car sales rose to SKr22.93bn for the first six months and Volvo sold 160,100
vehicles compared with 166,000 for the corresponding period last year.
The truck division made a financial loss in the first half and it suffered a
10 per cent decline in sales over the same period to SKr7.52bn.
Volvo said its cost-cutting programme was continuing and it had brought a
saving of SKr600m during the second quarter of the year.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 18
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5821</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAB4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Reduced costs help Church to Pounds 0.24m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER PEARSE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
LOWER INTEREST charges and sharply reduced exceptional costs helped Church,
the shoe maker and retailer, lift profits in the first half of 1992.
The Northampton-based group, which has 162 shops worldwide, made Pounds
244,000 pre-tax, against Pounds 14,000, on turnover of Pounds 29.9m (Pounds
31m).
Operating profits declined to Pounds 820,000 (Pounds 902,000) in 'extremely
challenging' trading conditions.
This resulted in small losses at A Jones, the UK retailing company, in the
Canadian and French operations and in Hong Kong, where the company has a 25
per cent stake in a shoe retailer. The remaining group companies were
profitable, including the 17-shop US operation, previously in loss.
However, because of lower rates, interest charges shrank to Pounds 549,000
(Pounds 703,000). Exceptional items, relating to redundancy and other
rationalisation costs, fell to Pounds 27,000 (Pounds 185,000).
The group was 'cautious on retail expansion', though in March it set up a
Japanese joint venture with Otsuka Shoe, Church's distributor, and Stock &amp;
Zenock, a men's clothing manufacturer, to promote the Church name on
non-footwear products. Church has a majority stake.
Earnings were 1.9p (0.4p) and the interim dividend is maintained at 3p,
again uncovered.
A Jones, which has 100 UK shops, reduced pre-tax losses to Pounds 26,000
(Pounds 117,000) on turnover of Pounds 13.7m (Pounds 13m).
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5822</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAB3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Struggle for control at Simpsons
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TIM BURT
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A BITTER struggle broke out yesterday for control of Simpsons of Cornhill,
owner of two of the City's most famous restaurants, following angry
exchanges at an extraordinary meeting of shareholders.
A group of dissident shareholders led by Mr Robert Klapp, former chairman of
Select Appointments, announced plans to oust the Nottingham-based management
team after the board decided a resolution calling for the appointment of two
new directors was ineligible.
Voting on a second resolution calling for the removal of Mr Alan
Crompton-Batt, an existing director who supports the rebel group, was
adjourned on a technicality.
Mr Klapp, who claims to command the support of 40 per cent of the
shareholders, said the meeting had been 'hijacked' and warned that a second
EGM would be called to remove the board.
The dispute centres on allegations that the management team led by Mr Roy
Ackerman, former deputy chairman of the Kennedy Brookes restaurant chain,
and Mr Paul Reece, former director of Midsummer Leisure, had embarked on an
over-ambitious strategy which threatened the future of the group's leading
assets - the Jamaica Inn and Simpsons.
Mr Ackerman, however, dismissed the dissidents' claims and said the EGM had
been properly conducted. An informal poll held at the meeting had shown more
than 80 per cent of the shareholders taking part opposed Mr Klapp's
resolution, he added.
The company's Pounds 2m flotation last year provided funds to buy Simpsons
and Jamaica Inn. It has since opened the Dell'Ugo bistro in Soho and the
Palio restaurant in west London.
Mr Reece, Simpsons managing director, said turnover had increased from
Pounds 500,000 in the first half of last year to Pounds 80,000 a week during
1992.
The rebel shareholders, meanwhile, claimed the company had spent excessively
on its new restaurants.
Both groups are confident of victory at a second EGM.
Simpsons' shares closed down 3p at 36p.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5823</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAB2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Interest costs depress Monument
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Higher interest payments and a provision for Australian taxes reduced net
interim profits from Pounds 3.65m to Pounds 1.89m at Monument Oil and Gas.
Sales of the independent UK oil and gas exploration company in the first
half of 1992 rose from Pounds 16.3m to Pounds 20.8m.
Interest paid was Pounds 198,000, against Pounds 1.97m received last time.
Overseas tax came to Pounds 209,000 (Pounds 3,000).
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5824</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAB1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Hambro Countrywide loses Pounds 4.64m -
Parent to inject Pounds 9m for 49% stake in legal insurance arm
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID BARCHARD
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
HAMBRO Countrywide, the loss-making estate agency chain and financial
services group, is to get Pounds 9m in fresh cash from the Hambro merchant
banking group through the sale of a 49 per cent stake in Hambro Legal
Protection, its legal insurance arm.
News of the purchase came as Hambro Countrywide, one of the UK's top three
chains, announced a pre-tax loss of Pounds 4.64m for the six months to June
30, 9 per cent up on last time's Pounds 4.25m.
The company has reported losses for the last three and half years and
incurred a pre-tax deficit of Pounds 6.48m last year.
With the housing market in recession, Hambro Legal Protection has been the
star performer in the group, with pre-tax profits of Pounds 1.8m in 1991.
Pre-tax profits in the half year to end-June were Pounds 1.1m, up from
Pounds 900,000 a year earlier.
The sale is conditional on the approval of Hambro Countrywide shareholders.
Under the terms of the deal, Hambro Group Investments will also acquire an
option to buy the remaining 51 per cent of Hambro Legal Protection for a
minimum contribution of Pounds 9.5m cash.
A statement from the banking group yesterday said the purchase this would
give the Hambro Group flexibility in the development of its future strategy
for its insurance services investments, including the eventual flotation of
an insurance services group.
The sale comes after seven successive bleak half years for Hambro
Countrywide because of the problems of the housing market. In the half year
to end-June turnover amounted to Pounds 45.3m, down from Pounds 46.6m.
Mr Christopher Sporborg, chairman, said that turnover was likely to remain
unsatisfactory until confidence returned to the economy, and especially to
the housing market.
He warned that a mild market recovery following the general election had
been brief and that new business was now dropping because of the end of
stamp duty exemption and the continuing recession.
'A government initiative to revive the housing market would greatly assist
this return to prosperity,' he said.
There was a slight reduction in the number of properties sold by the agency
chain and the average house value fell by 7.6 per cent to Pounds 65,600.
The chain arranged 7,372 mortgages with a total value of Pounds 339m on
total sales of 19,920 properties, and sold 9,045 life assurance policies.
Profits from life assurance activities rose from Pounds 2.89m to Pounds
4.43m.
Losses per share were 1.41p, (1.3p). As in 1991, a nominal interim dividend
of 0.05p is declared to preserve the company's trustee status.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5825</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAB0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Bid for Galerias with Mountleigh receiver
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TOM BURNS
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MADRID
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
A BID to acquire Galerias Preciados, the loss-making Spanish department
store chain, has been received by Peat Marwick, receiver of Mountleigh, the
UK property group which owns Galerias.
The bid, understood to be the first firm one to be made for Galerias, has
been launched jointly by Parques Urbanos, a company that has been associated
with Galerias in the past in the promotion of large shopping centres in
Madrid and elsewhere, and by Zara, a profitable textile manufacturer and
distributor with more than 200 retail outlets in Spain.
Mr Carlos Balabron, chairman of Aserinvest, Madrid consultants advising the
bid, said yesterday that the sooner it was accepted the better: 'Galerias
cannot remain in its present impasse.'
Mr Balabron, who did not disclose details of the offer, said, however, that
it was subject to an audit on Galerias, ordered by the receivers, which is
being completed by Price Waterhouse.
Peat Marwick is interested in a quick sale of Galerias. The chain of 29
large retail stores, with debts of some Pta20bn (Pounds 111m), is expected
to post substantial operating losses this year. It is estimated to represent
as much as 50 per cent of Mountleigh's assets.
Mountleigh went into receivership in May with debts of Pounds 590m after it
proved unable to meet obligations to bond holders. Its problems were blamed
on difficulties in selling UK property.
Mountleigh's creditors were told last week not to expect a swift realisation
of assets. The receiver said it was impossible to estimate how much the
assets would fetch, because the affairs of companies in the group were
closely interlinked. Unsecured creditors had little hope of payment.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5826</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Scottish Inv Trust asset value declines
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Net asset value per share of the Scottish Investment Trust stood at 190.6p
at the end of the nine months to July 31.
This represented an 8.5 per cent fall from the 208.3p reported at the
interim stage and a 6.5 per cent decline from the 203.8p of a year earlier.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5827</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Clondalkin up 10% despite weak dollar
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
In spite of the weak dollar, Clondalkin Group, the Dublin-based printing and
packaging company, lifted pre-tax profits 10 per cent to IPounds 6.17m
(Pounds 5.8m) in the half year to June 30.
Sales fell from IPounds 85.2m to IPounds 74.8m. Earnings worked through at
11.01p (10.47p) and the interim dividend is stepped up to 1.834p (1.698p).
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5828</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Legal &amp; General's US offshoot ahead
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Legal &amp; General America, the US arm of Legal &amp; General Group, the insurance
company, reported pre-tax profits for the six months to June 30 of Dollars
31m (Pounds 16.3m) compared with Dollars 3.9m.
The result was struck after substantial realised investment gains of Dollars
23.1m (Dollars 3.8m) following the restructuring of the investment
portfolios of Banner Life and William Penn.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5829</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: New Guernsey lower with Pounds 12,623
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
New Guernsey Securities Trust, an investment holding company, suffered a
fall in pre-tax profits from Pounds 19,759 to Pounds 12,623 in the six
months to June 30.
Net profits amounted to Pounds 9,817 (Pounds 15,366) for earnings per share
of 0.5p (0.8p). Net asset value per share stood at 91.2p against 89p a year
earlier.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5830</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Net assets down at Scottish Eastern
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Scottish Eastern Investment Trust had net assets, after deducting prior
charges at par, of 62.8p per share at July 31, down from 70.7p 12 months
earlier and 69.5p at the January year-end.
The trust reported attributable revenue of Pounds 5.51m (Pounds 4.51m) for
the six months to end-July, equivalent to earnings of 0.87p (0.71p) per
share.
The interim dividend goes up from 0.46p to 0.5p.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5831</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABTFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Murray Income net assets edge ahead
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The net asset value of Murray Income Trust showed a marginal rise - from
254.4p to 260.3p per share - over the 12 months to June 30.
Available revenue amounted to Pounds 8.83m, up from Pounds 8.59m, and
equivalent to earnings per share of 10.64p (10.37p) or 10.54p (10.25p)
assuming full conversion of the B capital.
A recommended final dividend of 4p brings the total to 10.6p (9.9p) for
1991-92.
The directors also forecast a final of not less than 4p for the current
year, which would bring the total to 10.75p.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5832</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABSFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Tough haulage rates restrict Seafield
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Intense competition in its transport division restricted the reduction in
pre-tax losses at Seafield, in the first half to June 30.
The Dublin-based company said activity had increased in the warehousing and
transport division and a careful disposal programme had cut property
division borrowings. However, poor economic conditions and competitive
haulage rates had restricted the reduction in pre-tax losses to Pounds 1.46m
(Pounds 1.58m) or 2.2p (2.4p) per share.
Turnover rose by 5 per cent from Pounds 10.9m to Pounds 11.4m.
The property disposal programme had achieved sales of more than Pounds 8m,
with further sales expected soon.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5833</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Acquisition lifts Mayflower
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
MAYFLOWER, the Surrey-based specialist engineer, reported profits markedly
ahead from Pounds 12,000 to Pounds 1.58m pre-tax in the six months to June
26. Turnover jumped from Pounds 5.62m to Pounds 32.6m.
The outcome partly reflected the inclusion of Motor Panels, acquired from
the administrators of CH Industrial last September.
The operation, based at Coventry and Wigan in the UK and Ohio and North
Carolina in the US, and famed for its body panels for certain Jensen and
Rolls-Royce models, saw sales from Wigan rise 16 per cent and US sales
advance 34 per cent.
Negotiations for the disposal of non-core businesses were at an advanced
stage, directors said.
An interim of 0.4p is declared - the first pay-out since 1987 - from
earnings of 1.34p (0.05p) per share.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5834</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Demand for credit behind 35% advance at
Cattle's
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROLAND RUDD
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A STRONG performance from its consumer credit business helped Cattle's
(Holdings) report a 35 per cent increase in pre-tax profits for the six
months to June 30.
Mr Eddie Cran, chief executive, said the pre-tax rise, from Pounds 3.9m to
Pounds 5.2m, showed the demand for short-term credit was as strong as ever.
'The are a significant number of people who cannot get loans from the banks
but are in need of credit.'
The rationalisation of Compass Credit with Shopacheck, pushed the new
division's pre-tax profits up Pounds 1.1m to Pounds 5.2m.
More than 60 shops were closed cutting the total to 155. The level of bad
debts continued to decline.
The insurance division increased profits to Pounds 400,000 (Pounds 300,000)
and losses at the hire purchase and leasing division were halved to Pounds
300,000.
Earlier this year the group floted 55 per cent of Rosebys. The net surplus
arising from the disposal amounted to more than Pounds 4m, of which Pounds
1.2m was credited to extraordinary profits.
Overall turnover fell from Pounds 113.9m to Pounds 102.2m. Earnings per
share rose to 3.16p (2.43p) and the interim dividend goes up to 1.6p (1.5p).
Net borrowings were reduced from Pounds 76m to Pounds 57m, representing
gearing of 150 per cent.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5835</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: GA says hurricane claims could reach 'up to
Dollars 40m'
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROBERT PESTON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
GENERAL ACCIDENT, the leading British insurer, said yesterday that insurance
claims arising from Hurricane Andrew could 'cost it as much as Dollars 40m.'
Lord Airlie, the chairman who was addressing an extraordinary shareholders'
meeting, said: 'On the basis of emerging information, General Accident
advise that the losses to their US operations arising from Hurricane Andrew,
which struck Florida and Louisiana, might in total reach the level at which
external catastrophe reinsurance covers would become exposed'.
What this means is that GA is able to pass on its losses to external
reinsurers once a certain claims threshold has been breached.
It believes this threshold may be breached in respect of Hurricane Andrew
claims.
However, if this happens, it would suffer a post-tax loss of Dollars 40m
(Pounds 20m).
Mr Nelson Robertson, GA's chief general manager, explained later that the
company has a  1/2 per cent share of the Florida market. It has a branch in
Orlando.
The company's loss adjusters are in the area trying to estimate the losses.
Their guess is that losses to be faced by all insurers may total more than
Dollars 8bn.
Not all damaged property in the area is insured and there have been
estimates that the storm caused more than Dollars 20bn of damage.
However, other insurers have estimated that losses could be as low as
Dollars 1bn in total.
Mr Robertson said: 'No one knows at this time what the exact loss is'.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5836</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Inspectorate sold to managers by Aida
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROLAND RUDD
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
INSPECTORATE, one of the largest international inspection companies, has
been sold to its managers by its parent Adia, the Swiss employment and
services group.
Electra, the investment management group which helped organise the buy-out,
has taken a large slice of the equity.
Mr Nigel McConnell, director of Electra, said Adia had requested that the
price paid remained confidential, although he added that it was a
'multi-million pound deal.'
An announcemnt is expected from Adia shortly about developments in its own
business.
Inspectorate, established in 1927, operates in more than 75 countries.
The bulk of its sales come from North America, the UK, continental Europe,
the Middle and Far East. Turnover last year was about Pounds 60m.
Three years ago there was an MBO of most of Inspectorate's non-UK inspection
business, which included its buildings and travel agencies.
At the same time Brompton Holdings, the inspection group, bought the
company's non-destructive testing and engineering inspection.
Mr Jeff Luesley, joint managing director of Inspectorate, said the
acquisition positioned the company to capitalise on opportunities.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5837</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABNFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: CSI seeks time to refocus after diving into
red
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PEGGY HOLLINGER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MR TOM Long, chairman of the highly-geared Cannon Street Investments,
yesterday pleaded for time to restore the troubled industrial holding
company's balance sheet and businesses.
'We need time and we need patience,' said the former BAT director who became
Cannon's chairman in March. 'The group . . . needs much tighter focusing and
you do not do that in five minutes.'
The plea came as Cannon Street unveiled a sharp drop into the red at the
operating level, with interim losses of Pounds 2.1m, compared with a profit
Pounds 9.78m last time. The dividend is omitted (3.3p).
Mr Long blamed the severity of recession for the sharp turnround. The
hardest hit businesses were building services and part of the electronics
division.
The pre-tax loss of Pounds 21.5m for the six months to June 30, against a
profit of Pounds 2.8m, had been caused by new accounting standards on
goodwill. The charge against profits for businesses sold in the first half
came to Pounds 23.4m. This led to losses per share of 21.8p, compared with
earnings of 2.4p.
Cannon Street took a net exceptional gain of Pounds 7.8m for profit on the
disposals.
Turnover fell by Pounds 14.5m to Pounds 127m. Mr Long said the three
businesses which had been sold accounted for some Pounds 19m in sales.
Disposals had also helped to reduce interest payments, which fell from
Pounds 6.2m to Pounds 3.8m. Net debt dropped from Pounds 92.4m at the
year-end to Pounds 55.3m. Gearing remained 'too high' at almost 200 per
cent.
Turnover of on-going operations was slightly ahead, Mr Long said. However,
the chairman was cautious about the immediate outlook: 'The rest of the
group is keeping its head above the water, but it is struggling.'
Mr Long, said Cannon intended to make further disposals.
Cannon's shares held steady at 4 1/4 p.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5838</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Plateau clarifies suspension request
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Plateau Mining said that it had requested suspension of its shares on August
6 because it was unable to pay the deferred consideration for Quay Minerals.
It is now selling Quay to Glaveport, controlled by Mr James Clark and Mr
Owen Eastwood, two of the original vendors.
Plateau will then have net assets of less than half the nominal value of its
called up share capital and will call an extraordinary meeting.
For the six months to March 31 Plateau's pre-tax losses were Pounds 10.5m
(Pounds 53,000 profits), after Pounds 9.9m mineral property and related
assets provisions.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5839</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: End of the road or separate route to
recovery? - As Cowie's bid for Henlys nears its close, Maggie Urry looks at
how it progressed
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MAGGIE URRY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BY LUNCHTIME next Tuesday the fate of Henlys Group, the motor trader and bus
and coach builder, will have been decided. It is facing a Pounds 32.1m
hostile bid from T Cowie, the Sunderland-based motor dealer.
Last night Cowie could claim support from holders of 28.4 per cent of Henlys
shares, and it looked a closer run fight than it had a week ago.
At 1.30pm yesterday Cowie owned or had acceptances in respect of 21.4 per
cent of Henlys shares. Of these, 3 per cent were shares Cowie had bought in
the market. Another 7 per cent were held by Mr David Matthews, the former
chairman and chief executive of Henlys who left last November before the
group announced a Pounds 6.8m loss. His associate, Mr Peter Cundill, with
4.9 per cent, is also thought to have accepted.
Yesterday afternoon Cowie's brokers again went into the market and took its
stake to 9.9 per cent.
Following an increase in the terms two weeks ago, Cowie's bid of 7 shares
for 10 Henlys, or 1 share plus 40p cash for two Henlys, is worth 84.7p or
80.5p with Cowie's shares closing yesterday at 121p, up 1p. Henlys closed at
66p, up 1p.
Throughout the offer period, Cowie shares have been falling, reducing the
value of the bid. Since the increase Henlys shares have stood below the
implied value. Some Henlys holders have said that a larger cash element
would have been more persuasive.
The conduct of the bid has also worked against Cowie. It employed Noble
Grossart, the Edinburgh merchant bank which is not often seen in the cut and
thrust of hostile bids. Cowie has been forced to make a series of
clarifications to remarks made and documents published.
Further, in meetings with key institutional investors, Mr Robert Wood, chief
executive of Henlys, seems to have come across well. Many institutions have
an inclination to side with existing management, so long as it seems
competent.
The bid came at a bad time for Henlys. On June 24 it had warned that
problems in its coach building business would cause an interim loss, an
announcement which sliced 22p off its share price that day, cutting it to
55p. Five days later Cowie launched its bid, then worth 73p a share.
Henlys current configuration is the result of a takeover in 1989 by Plaxton,
a bus and coach group, of the original Henlys, a motor trader. Although
Plaxton was the buyer, the name was changed back to Henlys earlier this
year. While the motor side has remained profitable, the bus and coach
business plunged into losses. The group lost Pounds 6.8m pre-tax in 1991. Mr
Matthews left in November, following two other directors, including the
finance director, who left earlier in the year.
Mr Robert Wood, now chief executive of Henlys, who had come from the
original Henlys business, has claimed throughout the bid that the board is
essentially new. Cowie has repeatedly called this a 'smokescreen' saying
that most of the directors had been with the group, if not in their current
positions, for longer.
It is this management which is attempting to tackle the severe overcapacity
in the coach and bus building business. Last year it cut its manufacturing
units from four to one, but even so there was not enough business to fill
the remaining plant in Scarborough, North Yorkshire.
At the same time, Henlys had introduced a new range of coaches, and teething
troubles made an impact on profits.
This looked a weak position from which to mount a defence. Henlys has,
however, put up a surprisingly spirited one. Having made a profits warning,
Henlys announced within a few weeks orders and deals which would keep the
Scarborough plant busy for the rest of this year and much of the next two.
Further, Henlys said it had identified and started making cost cuts which
would save Pounds 5m a year by early 1993. Suddenly, analysts could start
pencilling in profits next year from the bus and coach business, which
includes distribution.
Cowie has attacked these orders, saying they must have been won at lower
margins and criticising the use of expensive management consultants to
achieve the cost savings.
The discussions over the Scarborough plant have distracted the argument from
the issue of the merger of the two companies' motor businesses.
Cowie claims there would be significant benefits from putting the two motor
businesses together. Mr Wood doubts that these would be achieved and also
says that sales of dealerships would be forced on Cowie as the combined
group would have 11 Ford dealerships and Ford limits any one company to
eight. Cowie's response is that the industry is changing, following a
Monopolies Commission investigation, and that the Ford limit could loosen.
While Henlys is forecasting a loss of just under Pounds 1m for the current
year, analysts are looking for a jump into profits in 1993. They are
expecting Cowie to make Pounds 25m pre-tax in 1992, nearly regaining the
1988 level.
If Henlys remains independent it will be because shareholders have marked it
down as a recovery play. Indeed many bought shares earlier this year, at
prices up to 90p, on that hope. As one said, 'why accept the bid and have
that recovery diluted?'. If it does escape, Henlys will have to live up to
the faith invested in it.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5840</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: MacGregor ousted at HunterPrint
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JANE FULLER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SIR IAN MacGregor has been ousted as chairman of HunterPrint, the
loss-making specialist printer.
It is understood that there had been institutional pressure for him to go.
The issue had apparently been raised as the group sought to raise fresh
finance. In March, borrowings stood at Pounds 30m on shareholders' funds of
Pounds 3.5m.
Sir Ian, former chairman of British Coal and British Steel, was paid Pounds
236,000 by HunterPrint last year. He was on a two-year contract running
until December and held more than 5m shares. These were bought at 10p each
when he came in with new management, making his personal investment about
Pounds 500,000. That rescue share issue in December 1990 raised Pounds
13.6m.
Sir Ian is being replaced at HunterPrint by Sir John Wheeler, a
non-executive director, who was described by the company yesterday as an
interim chairman. The chief executive is Mr Tony Caplin, one of those who
came in with Sir Ian.
Sir John, MP for Westminster North and chairman of the Commons home affairs
committee, was reported by a wire service yesterday to have said of Sir Ian:
'He is nearly 80 and has had a heart by-pass operation. I don't think I need
go any further than that.'
However, Sir Ian's health did not seem to be in question at his Argyll home
yesterday, which he had just left to fly to Geneva.
He was due to meet Mr Eric Kohn, chief executive of Holmes Protection, the
US-based security company that is quoted in London.
Sir Ian is chairman of Holmes, which recently concluded a debt restructuring
exercise.
Mr Kohn reacted with surprise to Mr Wheeler's comment, which he described as
'extraordinary'.
'Sir Ian does not behave like a man of 80. He has all the faculties of
someone of 40 or 50. He has performed admirably at Holmes.'
Sir Ian's recent involvement in companies in need of resuscitation included
the chairmanship of Mountleigh, the property company which collapsed in May
with debts of Pounds 590m.
HunterPrint also announced yesterday the appointment as a non-executive
director of Mr Jeoff Samson, former managing director of Yale &amp; Valor.
The company's share price closed at 6p yesterday compared with a 12-month
high of 16 1/2 p.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 16
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5841</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Charterail signals poor outlook for BR sell-off: Collapse is
a setback for private-sector trains
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD TOMKINS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
LAST night's collapse of Charterail, the private company that set out to
pioneer the transfer of freight from Britain's roads to its railways, is
more than just bad news for the environment. It also paints a gloomy picture
of the prospects for railways after privatisation.
The root of the problem is the difference between the methods of charging
for use of roads and rail. For a lorry operator starting up a freight
service, the cost of using the roads - basically road tax and fuel duty - is
a relatively minor factor. For a train operator, payments for use of the
railway infrastructure typically represent more than half the costs.
When Charterail was formed in 1990 it looked an exciting way of getting
freight back on to the railways. Specially developed road and rail wagons
enabled road trailers to be hauled to the railhead and driven directly on to
swivel-action rail wagons without the need for costly lifting equipment.
The idea was to provide a door-to-door distribution service of the sort that
had become uneconomic for British Rail. Trailers could be collected from
customers, driven to railheads, transferred to rail for the long-distance
part of their journey, then delivered by road at the other end.
Charterail, owned 22 per cent by BR and 78 per cent by the private sector,
started by taking over a BR contract to deliver pet food from the Pedigree
Petfoods plant in Melton Mowbray, Leicestershire, to London.
This year it launched its first new service, a daily overnight train in each
direction between London and Scotland, serving more than a dozen customers.
Its costs, however, were largely out of its control. Locomotives, crews and
access to the railway tracks were all provided by BR, and had to be paid
for. Charterail says it had expected BR to reap productivity gains as
services grew and to pass them on to Charterail in the form of lower prices.
It did not. Nor, as recession deepened, was BR prepared to cut its rates to
preserve Charterail's competitive position against road hauliers.
In the end Charterail simply could not afford to go on. Some backers were
prepared to put more money into the business if BR would lower its rates and
put more money up as well. But yesterday BR refused to do either, and
Charterail's directors pulled the plug.
The question remaining is what this says about any private-sector rail
company's ability to run trains profitably. Under the privatisation plan
currently proposed, BR will remain in ownership of all Britain's railway
tracks after privatisation. It will also continue to employ most of the
drivers and own most of the trains, renting them out to prospective train
operators such as Mr Richard Branson's Virgin Group.
If, however, BR is convinced that the lowest commercial rates it can charge
for trains or tracks put the cost of operating them beyond the reach of the
private sector, it is hard to see where the private entrants are going to
come from.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5842</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Politics turns sour for the Greens: The latest division in
the party's leadership
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ALISON SMITH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE DECISION by Ms Sara Parkin not to stand for re-election as chair of the
Green party has exposed the party's position in no man's land between
pressure group and full-blown political movement.
Ms Parkin wrote to her fellow executive members: 'I have been forced to the
conclusion that the Green party has become a liability to 'green' politics.'
There are few in the party who would disagree. At the April general election
the average Green share of the vote in the 254 seats where the party had
candidates was 1.3 per cent - slightly lower than in 1987 and a far cry from
the 15 per cent of the popular vote it won in the 1989 European elections.
Explaining why she no longer felt able to continue in office, Ms Parkin
yesterday cited the fact that a local party had invited Mr David Icke,
formerly a leading party figure, to the party's conference in Wolverhampton
in two weeks. This was in spite of an overwhelming vote by the party
executive against his speaking at the conference.
The executive felt, not unreasonably, that the appearance of Mr Icke, who
shot to fame with his announcement that he was the 'son of God' on a mission
to save the world, would not help the environmental message. But it was
unable to block the invitation.
The distinction between the Green party and 'green' politics, which Ms
Parkin highlighted, comes partly from the organisation's success. Its
showing in the Euro-elections shocked the mainstream political parties into
raising the profile of their own, less radical, environmental policies.
That sharpening of the mainstream political act, combined with the
recession, took the Greens back to the political periphery.
The Greens are still determined that they are a party rather than a
single-issue organisation - the Wolverhampton conference will include
debates on Europe and the recession.
This approach may now, however, be part of the problem. Membership of the
Green party is still incompatible with membership of any other UK political
party, and thus the organisation is unable to exploit the numbers of Britons
who are concerned about the environment.
There are fewer than 10,000 members in England and Northern Ireland - there
are separate Scottish and Welsh parties - yet Friends of the Earth, the
pressure group, says 240,000 supporters regularly contribute to its work.
Ms Parkin's impending departure may not be the end of the Greens' upheavals,
there have been reports that more than half of the party's 12-strong
executive may stand down when she resigns.
An official said yesterday that Ms Parkin's decision was similar to the move
made several years ago by Mr Jonathon Porritt, a leading environmental
campaigner, to detach himself from Green party politics while continuing to
be an effective 'green' politician. Perhaps this is an area where party and
politics do not mix.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5843</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Exports rise for small companies
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHARLES BATCHELOR
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
JUST OVER half of Britain's smaller exporters increased overseas sales in
the 12 months to July, while a further 18 per cent maintained volumes.
This is one of the main findings of a quarterly survey of smaller exporters
published yesterday by the Small Business Research Trust for the Royal Bank
of Scotland.
Most exporters managed to maintain profit margins on export sales in spite
of increased competition and the government's commitment to keeping the
pound within its fluctuation range in the European exchange rate mechanism.
In recent months exporters have become slightly more optimistic about
overseas markets, the survey noted. There was some evidence that many small
companies had successfully switched from the UK market to export markets
with the expectation of improving their performance.
Small businesses employing 15 or more people were more successful in
increasing exports than companies employing fewer than 15.
The Netherlands, Spain, Portugal and the Middle East were regarded as the
most favourable overseas markets but prospects in North America had
deteriorated.
The main competition for smaller British exporters came not from other UK
exporters nor from local businesses in the export markets but from larger
companies in third countries. Many new companies, particularly those based
in Asia, had entered export markets.
One of the biggest problems facing smaller exporters was the widespread
copying by larger companies of products and techniques pioneered by small
companies.
The most common response to increased competition was for the British
exporter to cut prices (58 per cent) followed by improving the product or
service (53 per cent), switching to a new market (48 per cent) and
introducing new products or services (40 per cent).
The Royal Bank of Scotland Quarterly Survey of Exporters. Marketing
Department, Royal Bank of Scotland, Birchin Court, 20 Birchin Lane, London
EC3V 9DJ. Free.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5844</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Jobless rate 'has doubled' for young
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LISA WOOD and ALISON SMITH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
ABOUT one in six people aged 16 to 24 are out of work, and the age group's
rate of unemployment has nearly doubled in the past two years, according to
research published yesterday.
The analysis by the Unemployment Unit, an independent research organisation
for the unemployed, and the charity Youthaid showed that 888,700 people aged
under 25 were looking for jobs or waiting for a place on a Youth Training
(YT) scheme. This represents 16.5 per cent of the workforce of that age, the
highest proportion since January 1987.
The figures include what the organisations call the 'invisible unemployed',
an estimated 97,000 people aged 16 and 17 who are not on YT and do not have
jobs. Many do not receive benefits because these are dependent on them being
on training schemes.
A Labour party survey earlier this year suggested that up to 60,000 people
aged 16 and 17 were waiting for a YT place. The Department of Employment
disputed this although it provided no precise figures.
Mr Donald Dewar, the shadow social security secretary, said the latest
figures showed that the government's guarantee of a training or education
place for young people was a sham. He called on ministers to reverse the
withdrawal of income support for this age group.
'It cannot be right to deprive a section of the community of all income when
the government's own 'guarantee' of a training place has simply not been
delivered,' he said.
Ministers have privately expressed embarrassment at the way in which the
training pledge for 16 and 17-year-olds has not worked as planned.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5845</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Poll tax hits vote registration
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JOHN WILLMAN, Public Policy Editor
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
EVIDENCE that the poll tax caused fewer people to register as voters is
shown in a survey published yesterday.
The survey, by the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys for the Home
Office, found that the percentage of households returning a form for the
1991 electoral register was lower than in any of the previous annual
surveys. The forms would have been sent out in early autumn 1990, shortly
after the introduction of the poll tax.
Just over half the councils in England and Wales received a completed form
from at least 95 per cent of households. The response rate for a quarter of
the councils was less than 90 per cent, and less than 80 per cent for one in
11.
These figures reverse the improvement in response rates recorded since the
survey began in 1987. The biggest fall was recorded in London - where
poll-tax rates were among the highest - with the average response rate at 89
per cent, 3 per cent down from 1990.
About half of local authorities now leave the names of voters who registered
in earlier years on the register for up to three years, even if no
registration form is returned. More than half the authorities used the
poll-tax register to add names to the electoral register.
More than 90 per cent of councils believe their poll-tax backlogs will not
have a significant impact on their implementing the council tax, according
to a report by consultants CSL services for the Department of the
Environment.
Compiling the electoral register 1991. HMSO. Pounds 8.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5846</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / High activity forecast for N Sea
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NEIL BUCKLEY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE UK North Sea will be an area of substantial production and activity for
at least 25 years, although jobs will continue to be lost, according to a
report released yesterday by Grampian Regional Council.
The thirteenth Update of Oil and Gas Prospects, from the council's
department of economic development and planning, says more than 90 new
fields are likely to be developed in the next 20 years. This would support
nearly 50,000 jobs in the Grampian region, which includes Aberdeen,
throughout the 1990s.
About 15 new fields will come on stream in the next two and a half years.
A lower level of construction work and drilling in the next two years means,
however, there could be more redundancies to add to the 1,500 jobs lost in
Grampian in the past year. While 52,500 workers are employed in the oil and
gas sector, this is likely to fall below 50,000 by 2001 and 46,000 by 2006.
New fields will require less offshore labour, with increasing use of
automated and subsea structures, but Aberdeen should continue to attract
management functions onshore. This could lead to a higher quality of locally
based employment, which would boost the rest of the economy.
The positive outlook in the report contrasts with more gloomy forecasts
after recent lay-offs at construction yards.
Nearly 1,300 redundancies were announced at the McDermott Scotland yard in
Ardersier, near Inverness, last month. North Sea output jumped more than 16
per cent in July as offshore maintenance activity ended, according to the
Royal Bank of Scotland's monthly oil index.
Update of Oil and Gas Prospects. Grampian Regional Council, Woodhill House,
Westburn Road, Aberdeen AB9 2UJ. 0224-664740. Pounds 12.50.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5847</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABDFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Shots fired at policeman after City bank raid
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
ARMED bank robbers yesterday opened fire on a police officer during a chase
in the City of London.
It happened after two men armed with handguns escaped with a small amount of
cash from the Royal Bank of Scotland in Great Tower Street, near the Tower
of London, late yesterday morning. A passing police motor-cyclist saw the
robbers and chased them to Southwark Bridge, where they stopped their car
and opened fire. The car moved on before stopping halfway across the bridge
where the gunmen fired more shots.
The raiders' white Vauxhall Astra car, driven by a third man, was later
found abandoned near Hays Galleria at London Bridge.
Southwark Bridge was closed to traffic briefly while police officers
searched the area for spent cartridges.
City of London police said the unarmed PC, who was not named, was 'shaken
up' but uninjured. They added that the British Bankers' Association had put
up a Pounds 15,000 reward for information leading to the capture of the
gang.
They appealed for witnesses to the incident to contact Bishopsgate CID on
071-601 2670.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5848</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Patten moves on school surplus
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW ADONIS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
LOCAL education authorities in England have been given three months to
produce detailed plans for reducing surplus school places.
Mr John Patten, education secretary, said yesterday that he aims to take
statutory powers to impose plans if authorities do not produce satisfactory
proposals to eliminate the estimated 1.5m surplus places.
He also intends to take powers to close grant-maintained schools which have
an unacceptable number of surplus places. This raises for the first time the
prospect of the forced closure of schools that have opted out of local
education authority control.
Since opting-out has proved attractive to schools threatened with closure by
their local authority, the consequences could be far-reaching for the
government's policy of encouraging all schools to seek grant-maintained
status.
Mr Patten made an exception for 'scattered communities and small schools,
particularly those in rural areas, which face special problems'. Such
schools are mainly in rural Tory constituencies, and backbench Tory MPs will
be resistant to plans to close their village schools wholesale.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5849</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABBFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Pioneering road-rail freight service collapses
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RICHARD TOMKINS, Transport Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A REVOLUTIONARY rail freight service launched just 11 weeks ago by Mr John
MacGregor, the transport secretary, collapsed last night as the operator,
Charterail, called in the liquidators.
The service had been cited by Mr MacGregor as an example of how freight
could be switched from road to rail. He said it would take 10,000 lorry
movements a year off the roads.
Failure of the experiment will not only deeply embarrass him, but will also
cast severe doubts on the long-term prospects for rail freight in the UK -
particularly after rail privatisation.
The revolutionary aspect of the collapsed freight operation was that it
offered a door-to-door rail service by switching lorry trailers on to
specially adapted rail wagons for the long distance part of their journeys.
Launched on June 11, it ran nightly each way between rail depots in London
and Glasgow with a stop at Warrington, Cheshire, to serve the Manchester
area. Customers included Coca-Cola, Nestle, Ranks Hovis McDougall and
Safeway.
The service was not making money. Charterail, 78 per cent owned by the
private sector and 22 per cent by British Rail, said the critical element
had been the high price charged by BR for the haulage of its trains.
BR, which has no active involvement in Charterail's management, said
proposals put to it by Charterail for a cut in its haulage rates were
unacceptable.
Charterail also had a contract to deliver petfood from the Pedigree Petfoods
plant in Melton Mowbray, Leicestershire, to London. This potentially
profitable service seems likely to be taken over by BR's Railfreight
Distribution subsidiary.
The service's collapse highlights the difficulties faced by private sector
railfreight operators in trying to compete with road transport when their
costs are much higher. The problem is likely to be exacerbated after
privatisation when BR must adopt a new system of charging rail users the
full commercial cost of access to its tracks.
Last night the Department of Transport was distancing itself from the
collapse, saying it was purely a commercial matter.
Mr Roger Freeman, the public transport minister, said on the BBC's Nine
O'Clock News that the failure would not shake the government's resolve to
press ahead with BR's privatisation.
Charterail signals poor outlook for BR sell-off, Page 6
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5850</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCABAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Allies enforce 'no-fly' zone over southern Iraq
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ROGER MATTHEWS
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   WASHINGTON
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
US and British aircraft began imposing the allied air exclusion zone over
southern Iraq yesterday as Baghdad warned that it would deal with this
'aggressive, illegal action' in 'due time and with the appropriate methods'.
The Pentagon said Iraq had kept its aircraft out of the zone, which runs
south of the 32nd parallel. 'There have been no flights by Iraqi aircraft
today below the 32-degree line. Only coalition aircraft are flying below the
32-degree line,' Pentagon spokesman Mr Bob Hall said.
As tension between Iraq and the Gulf war allies grew, it emerged that the
Baghdad regime is holding a second Briton, Mr Michael Wainwright, accused of
illegal entry into the country. He was arrested as long ago as May after
crossing from Turkey.
General Brent Scowcroft, the US national security adviser, said he did not
expect President Saddam Hussein to challenge the flight ban, but added:
'It's difficult to predict what Saddam Hussein may do. He has violated
logic, at least our logic, many times in the past.'
The US, Britain and France announced on Wednesday that no Iraqi aircraft
would be permitted to fly south of the 32nd parallel, in order to protect
the Shia population from further air attacks. Six British Tornado aircraft
arrived yesterday in Saudi Arabia and 10 French Mirage 2000s are expected
soon. The US has more than 200 aircraft in the immediate region.
President George Bush has also said the US would view very seriously further
large-scale Iraqi military action on the ground.
'What we are trying to do is prevent genocidal acts on the part of Saddam
Hussein in compliance with UN resolution 688. It is not an attempt to break
up Iraq. On the contrary, we believe strongly in the territorial integrity
of Iraq,' said Gen Scowcroft.
Iraq could test the exclusion zone by flying 'non-combat missions' along its
border with Iran, where it says Tehran is trying to infiltrate forces, and
by continuing civilian flights from Baghdad to Basra, its second largest
city.
Mr Zaid Haidar, Iraq's ambassador to the European Community, insisted
yesterday that flights would continue over the area, but they would not be
combat missions.
'We shall not attack. But if attacked, we will respond,' Mr Haidar said. 'We
have civilian aircraft carrying people from Baghdad to Basra. We also have
other aircraft for training and to control the border with Iran. These
flights will continue.'
US spokesmen have refused to provide details of the rules of engagement. But
a Pentagon official said that civilian aircraft would be 'turned back'.
The Pentagon says Iraq has some 60,000 troops in the south, including 2 1/2
divisions of armoured and mechanised forces and associated artillery. An
official said its capabilities would be hampered without air support.
Iraq warning, Page 3
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5851</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAA9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Leading Japanese politician resigns over funding scandal
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By STEVEN BUTLER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE Japanese government was yesterday shaken by the sudden resignation of Mr
Shin Kanemaru as vice-chairman of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party over a
political funding scandal.
Mr Kanemaru, 77, widely regarded as the most powerful politician in Japan,
admitted that his political secretary had accepted a Y500m (Pounds 2m)
payment from the former chief executive of Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin, the parcel
delivery company at the heart of a Y500bn fraudulent loan scandal, before
the 1989 upper house election.
'I first refused the money,' Mr Kanemaru told a brief televised news
conference. 'But I accepted it in the end as a contribution to my colleagues
at the time of the general elections (in 1990). I must assume responsibility
for my conduct.'
In a statement, Mr Kanemaru acknowledged that the money was not reported to
the home affairs ministry, which would have made it a legitimate political
contribution.
Mr Kanemaru holds enormous power within the ruling party, and as chairman of
the party's largest faction was a supporter of Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, the prime
minister.
The implications for the stability of Mr Miyazawa's government were last
night unclear.
Mr Kanemaru also submitted his resignation as chairman of the faction,
although the resignation was not immediately accepted.
Mr Takayoshi Miyagawa, president of the Center for Political Public
Relations, said: 'The LDP without Kanemaru is like a company without a
president. It has no strength. For Miyazawa, it will be difficult to manage
politics.'
Analysts said Mr Kanemaru had resigned in an attempt to limit possible
political fallout from the scandal, which otherwise would have leaked out
and caused enormous embarrassment to the ruling party.
Mr Kanemaru is expected to be questioned shortly by the prosecutor's office
concerning possible violation of the political funds control law.
There is also a strong possibility that the scandal will spread to other
politicians. The prosecutors have been told by Sagawa Kyubin executives that
Y2bn in contributions were made to 10 ruling party politicians.
Nikkei soars, Page 3
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5852</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAA8FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Ombudsman warns on pensions
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE GOVERNMENT'S pensions ombudsman said yesterday he was able to resolve
only 47 of more than 2,100 complaints received by his office last year.
Nearly half were rejected for consideration because they were either out of
his jurisdiction or concerned events that happened too long ago.
Mr Michael Platt was delivering the first annual report since the office was
established early in 1991.
'I think it only right to record that my inability to act in these
circumstances has given rise to a sense of frustration among the members of
some schemes who are worried that their pension rights may be insecure,' he
said.
He added that this lack of power should be taken up by government advisers
currently reviewing pensions law.
Some of the complaints received by his office but determined to be out of
his jurisdiction concerned employers' use of pension scheme surpluses for
their own purposes. Mr Platt urged the government to consider clarifying in
law the question of the ownership of surpluses.
The average complaint took seven months to handle, which Mr Platt said was
too long to meet the requirements of the Citizen's Charter. Delays had
occurred partly through the difficulties involved in setting up the
ombudsman's office. Additional staff had recently been hired.
Of the 47 complaints resolved by his office, only 18 were upheld in favour
of the complainant and a further four decisions supported the complainant in
part. In most of the other cases, the complaint was not upheld.
A spokesman for the National Association of Pension Funds, the industry's
trade organisation, said the fact that fewer than half the complaints proved
justified was evidence that serious problems did not exist in the industry.
'The number of complaints upheld is quite reassuringly low,' he said. The
current trust law governing pension arrangements was probably adequate, he
said.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5853</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAA7FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / The Lex Column: Weir Group
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Given that Weir nearly went bust 10 years ago the change in its fortunes is
truly dramatic. Fairey, Howden and 600 Group are just some of the proud
British engineering names whose market capitalisations you could add
together and emerge with change from Weir's near Pounds 400m.
Yesterday's interim results provided another demonstration of the company's
ability to withstand most shocks in the current recession. Turnover was down
a touch as a result of lower demand for spares and short run orders, but the
built-in strength of long-term contracts enabled pre-tax profits to advance
by 23 per cent. Orders received were in line with last year's second half -
even if they were down on the exceptionally buoyant equivalent six month
period - while the cash performance was good, taking account of money spent
on acquisitions. Weir's equanimity about the current sterling exchange rate
is enviable, though there may be more pressure from American competitors in
coming months.
At last night's close of 507p the shares are on a prospective multiple of 14
assuming full-year profits of around Pounds 40m. If, as seems likely,
investors in the engineering sector are increasingly going to focus on a
handful of well managed companies with decent businesses - rather than
forlornly searching for bombed out cyclicals - the rating seems well
justified.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5854</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAA6FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / The Lex Column: BASF
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Bulk petrochemicals have always been a cyclical business, but on the
evidence of yesterday's interim results from BASF the cycle is in danger of
getting out of hand. The problem is one of chronic over-capacity rather than
exceptionally weak demand: the result is that margins are under intense
pressure and profits are down 37 per cent. The company sees no significant
improvement until 1997. This view may reflect a peculiarly German
perspective on the economic cycle, but Hoechst and Bayer are no more
optimistic on the immediate prospects.
The big producers will hope that September price increases stick this time
around, but with additional ethylene capacity coming on stream in Europe in
the second half the odds seem stacked against them. Additional spending on
environmental protection, particularly in Germany, and the weakness of the
dollar only adds to pressure on the bottom line. Unlike its main German
competitors, BASF is not cushioned from the chemicals cycle by a large and
profitable pharmaceuticals business. The consumer division based on magnetic
tapes is, if anything, faring worse than plastics. Whether the dividend can
escape unscathed may hinge on the tax treatment of substantial restructuring
costs expected in the second half.
Little wonder the company is looking for new sources of earnings. Research
spending on pharmaceuticals has risen and heavy investment in piping Russian
natural gas into Germany continues. The project could still pay a handsome
return, although its outcome hangs on political stability in Moscow until
supply contracts have been signed with North Sea producers.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5855</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAA5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / The Lex Column: Slough Estates
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
The City's deep disillusion with property companies and growing fears of a
prolonged recession in the UK are amply reflected in the share price of
Slough Estates. Some would even say that at 95p one or two of the more
apocalyptic visions of the UK economy are being discounted by investors.
Indeed, only a few weeks ago the market would have regarded Slough as a
screaming buy on a prospective yield of 11.4 per cent and an admittedly
highly unscientific estimate for net assets of 270p per share.
With hindsight it is easy to say that Slough should have stuck to industrial
property, while recent signals over the dividend have been confusing. The
previous payout was never going to be sustainable - and excuses about
deteriorating conditions in the last few weeks don't wash  - but now that
the deed has been done the company deserves the benefit of the doubt. Adding
to earnings that element of the capitalised interest tied to a pre-let
development - and taking account of trading property rents not credited to
the profit and loss account - this year's total dividend should just about
be covered by recurring income.
The 50 per cent fall in Slough's shares over the last six months owes much
to loss of credibility as well as dawning realisation in the market that the
famed industrial portfolio is less defensive than was earlier assumed.
Bottom fishers, though, will surely be tempted to have another go.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5856</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAA4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / The Lex Column: Lorries turning
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Interim figures from Volvo, Renault and Daf yesterday confirmed that life in
the European truck industry remains grim. For Daf grim may be too small a
word. The company's sales are skewed towards the UK, where the truck market
fell first and hardest; Daf manufactures lowish volumes across a wide range
of commercial vehicles, failing to gain the economies of scale enjoyed by
larger rivals. As a result a string of losses has eroded the company's
capital base.
With a moth-eaten balance sheet, Daf clearly needs a capital injection, but
does anyone else need Daf? Any potential investor needs to calculate
carefully. If the UK truck market has finally bottomed and recovers in 1993,
a buyer could get a good slice of European sales for a song. But if the
recession drags on for two more years, the weight of Daf's debts will prove
heavy.
A further difficulty for any partner is that while Daf's operations could be
tightened up, substantial savings will only come from reducing the
development cost of the next generation of models. Of possible European
partners, only Daimler-Benz, MAN and Scania appear to be in a position to
act. Despite possible competition problems, Daimler is by far the most
likely candidate. Any interested Japanese or American investor would face
the problem of entering a market with excess capacity through buying one of
the weaker players.
Daf shareholders should not rejoice too quickly. If no deal is struck, the
company faces the threat of asphyxiation in the medium term - though in the
last resort the Dutch government may help out. However, an equity injection
would dilute existing holdings, and while that may be preferable to slow
strangulation, it is hard to see the shares rising much from here.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 14
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5857</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAA3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Coffee producers 'may have to
go it alone'
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID BLACKWELL
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
COFFEE PRODUCING countries, many of which are finding it difficult to pay
growers a subsistence wage, are increasingly realising that they may have to
take unilateral action to rescue their industries from impending collapse,
according to the latest monthly market report from GNI, the London futures
brokers.
When the International Coffee Organisation meets from September 21 to 30 in
London producers will finally discover how serious consumers are about a new
international pact. 'Further delays in negotiations or consumer insistence
on an unrealistic price range will force the origins (producers) to go it
alone.'
With arabica coffee prices near 50 cents a lb and robustas near 30 cents,
producers are united in believing prices need to rise. However, before
taking action they would have to overcome the mistrust that followed the
collapse of the international coffee agreement's export quota system in July
1989. The necessary trust to work together should prices rally to 70 cents a
lb 'may not yet be in place', says GNI.
The best chance for co-operative action lies with the arabica producers.
More than 80 per cent of the world's best arabica is grown in Central and
South America. Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras and Nicaragua already speak as one at the ICO 'and would probably
act as a cohesive unit in an arabica cartel' along with Brazil and Colombia,
the two biggest producers.
The cartel would first have to tackle the consumer stockpile of 18m bags (60
kg each). Of this 5m bags is stored in US warehouses and certified for
delivery against the New York arabica futures market.
'At 50 cents a lb the arabica cartel could theoretically buy all the excess
exchange stocks for around Dollars 330m or just a fraction of the Dollars
5.2bn which the Brazilian government has made available to its farmers to
finance the 1992-93 coffee harvest,' GNI points out. But it adds that the US
authorities will 'not be a willing party to any outside attempt to push up
coffee prices'.
The robusta producers would find it much more difficult to act together as
the production from 36 countries is spread again across Africa, Asia and
America.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5858</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAA2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / World Commodities Prices: Market report
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By REUTER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
London COCOA prices finished lower, and New York prices were sharply down at
midday, after talk of thunder storms in the Ivory Coast prompted nervous
speculative long liquidation. However, one weather report said the storms
were expected to be isolated and the weather was likely to remain mostly dry
over the next few days. Concern about dry weather in the region has been a
key supportive factor. Precious metals maintained a firmer tone on the
London bullion market as GOLD was fixed at Dollars 339 a troy ounce before
edging higher despite the dollar's rally on the back of an unexpectedly
large drop in US weekly jobless claims. The dollar's recent decline has
noticeably boosted demand for gold in other currencies, dealers said. In
Germany on Wednesday gold was fixed at DM15,360 a kilo - its lowest level
since 1979. One source estimated investment demand for gold in Germany was
currently at four times the 1991 level. New York COTTON futures were
modestly higher at midday after touching lifetime lows at the opening as the
threat of crop damage in the Delta from the remains of Hurricane Andrew
diminished, traders said.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5859</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAA1FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Oppenheimer to visit Moscow as
diamond shake-up looms
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MR HARRY Oppenheimer, whose family effectively controls the Anglo American
Corporation of South Africa and De Beers, is to visit Russia next week at a
time when the republic is considering a big shake-up in its diamond
industry.
His visit also comes at a time when the beleaguered diamond industry is rife
with rumours about unofficial exports from Russia contributing to the
present market turmoil which might force De Beers to cut its dividend
payment this year.
Some industry observers suggest that the presence in Russia of Mr
Oppenheimer, who will be 84 in October, will be timely. 'It appears to be
another sign that the former De Beers' chairman is taking a more active role
in guiding the company through its current difficulties,' says the
Diamantaire newsletter today.
De Beers said yesterday that the visit by Mr Oppenheimer, accompanied by his
son Nicholas, was a private one originally arranged for August last year but
postponed because of the coup d'etat in the former Soviet Union.
However, it admitted that Mr Oppenheimer would be meeting senior officials
from the Russian diamond industry during his stay because he would be going
to some of the big mines in Siberia and would be present when De Beers held
the formal opening of its Moscow office on September 8.
De Beers' London-based Central Selling Organisation, which controls about 80
per cent of world trade in rough (uncut) diamonds, in 1990 signed a Dollars
5bn, five-year sales contract with the former Soviet Union and at the same
time advanced a loan of Dollars 1bn. Diamond stocks were moved from Moscow
to London as collateral for the loan.
After the break-up of the Soviet Union the contract was continued with
Rosalmazzoloto, the Russian gold and diamond organisation, and an exclusive
sales agreement was later signed with Yukutia, the area in eastern Siberia
where most Russian diamonds are mined and which is now an autonomous
republic in the Russian Federation.
A CSO spokesman said yesterday: 'The Russian contract is working. Everything
is normal.'
Diamantaire points out that the Russian parliament is to consider next month
a plan to set up a state diamond centre under the control of the finance
ministry and Komdragmet, formerly know as Gokhran, the Moscow depository of
diamonds.
Reports suggest that the diamond centre would have exclusive rights to buy
all rough diamonds mined in the Russian Federation and it would also have a
monopoly of sorting gem diamonds.
These proposals are being opposed by the Yakut government, which is backing
a joint-stock company, Almazy Rossli (Diamonds of Russia), being set up with
Mr Valery Rudakov, formerly in charge of Rosalmazzoloto, at its head.
Rosalmazzoloto is to be broken up.
Almazy Rossli proposes to bring all the diamond industry's operations under
one roof, says Diamantaire.
Observers expect Mr Oppenheimer to bring his formidable negotiating skills
to bear to ensure that De Beers grip on the diamond market is in no way
weakened by any changes in Russia.
Meanwhile, the newsletter, which is available only to subscribers to Diamond
International magazine, also says that reports in Antwerp suggest that two
of the Belgian diamond trading organisations with which the CSO has a
special relationship have been punished by temporarily being excluded from
the CSO's 'sights' or diamond sales. The CSO invites only about 160
privileged merchants to its ten 'sights' a year in London, Lucerne and
Kimberley.
Diamantaire says that one of the Belgian organisations has had dealings with
Russia for more than 20 years.
Diamond International and Diamantaire, from CRU Publishing, 31 Mount
Pleasant, London WC1X 0AD, UK.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5860</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAA0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / World Commodities Prices: Fruit &amp; vegetables
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
Apples are this week's best fruit buy with a wide selection of varieties to
choose from reports the FFVIB. Cape Golden Delicious at 39-45p a lb
(45-50p), English Katy at 35p a lb (40-45p), and English Discovery at 29-35p
a lb (35-50p). Victoria plums are plentiful at 35-65p a lb (35-65p), along
with Spania watermelon at Pounds 1.50-Pounds 2.00 each (Pounds 1.50-Pounds
2.00). Excellent quality this week is English broccoli at 35-50p a lb
(45-80p), with English leeks also in good supply at 50-65p a lb (50-55p),
English corn on the cob is also a good buy at 20-30p each (25-35p). Dutch
peppers are this week's best salad choice at 70-80p a lb (80p-Pounds 1.00).
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5861</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAAZFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Rubber production lower
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KIERAN COOKE
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   KUALA LUMPUR
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
MALAYSIA'S RUBBER production in the first six months of this year fell to
568,803 tonnes from 569,495 tonnes in the same period last year, according
to figures released by the Government.
While smallholder production rose by 12,652 tonnes, or 3 per cent, over the
six month period, production in the estate sector fell by 8 per cent, with
many plantations choosing to move out of rubber cultivation into the more
profitable palm oil.
During the first half Malaysia exported 513,267 tonnes of rubber, a fall of
8 per cent from last year's figure. Total natural rubber stocks at the end
of June were 162,996 tonnes, a 5 per cent rise on the May figure.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5862</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAAYFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: End of US ban promises LME
options boost
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent and REUTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
THE LONDON Metal Exchange expects a substantial increase in business from
the US following the removal of a ban on the sale of its options there.
The exchange has been working for two years to have the ban removed by the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission and Mr David King, the LME's chief
executive, said yesterday: 'We are obviously very pleased. We felt that US
users of the LME were at a disadvantage compared with their European and
Japanese competitors who could use options.'
This success comes at a time when the LME, the world's biggest terminal
market for physical metal, has been experiencing phenomenal growth in
trading. The accounts show that last year the exchange handed back to
members Pounds 1.2m previously collected in levies and fees.
Turnover jumped by 32 per cent in 1990, by another 27 per cent last year and
in the first six months of 1992 soared by a further 39 per cent.
US clients have been contributing about 15 per cent of the exchange's
turnover but this has been growing fast since LME-authorised metal
warehouses were opened in the States last year.
Mr King said there was a 30-day gap before the CFTC's decision about LME
options became effective to give time for any objections to be raised.
The LME was taking legal advice on what its members might or might not do
when marketing options in the US, where regulations were very tight, he
added. This would be passed on to members after the 30 days were up.
Mr King suggested that the sharp rise in turnover showed exchange's own
marketing efforts, 'making itself more user-friendly', had been paying off.
'Also the world is becoming more financially aware. Companies first started
to hedge their foreign currency exposure and now they are looking to hedge
other aspects of their business.'
Options trading on the LME has been expanding even faster than its
traditional futures business - it rose 149 per cent in the first half of
this year. Mr King said: 'Many people were wary about options but more and
more they have come to realise that these are a valid way to hedge risk,
lock in prices and make better use of the market'.
The LME's accounts, recently filed, show that its income rose from Pounds
4.26m in 1990 to Pounds 4.54m last year and that pre-tax profits increased
from Pounds 1.07m to Pounds 1.41m. Retained profits at the year-end had
increased from Pounds 1.63m to Pounds 2.5m.
The accounts show that Mr King's emoluments (pay and pension contributions)
increased by 8.5 per cent last year from Pounds 112,810 to Pounds 122,453.
The New York Commodity Exchange (Comex) will launch platinum futures and
options and palladium futures on September 8, reports Reuter from New York.
They are already listed on New York Mercantile Exchange.
Comex will open trading for its platinum contract five minutes before Nymex
platinum opens. Trading will end five minutes after the Nymex close.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5863</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAAXFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Snow causes massive NZ lamb
losses
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TERRY HALL
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   WELLINGTON
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
FREAK SPRING snows blanketed much of the South Island to a depth of one
metre, causing massive losses among newly born lambs at the start of the
lambing season, and serious worries about this year's export trade.
The August snows are compounding problems for sheep farmers in both North
and South Islands who are struggling through one of the worst winters on
record. Farmers have been hit by repeated natural disasters: including
drought on the South Island's high country. In the North Island, farmers
have had to cope with almost constant rain, making pastures mushy, and
bitter winter cold, which has hindered grass growth.
The snows - the second freak fall this winter - are having a devastating
effect on farmers at the peak of lambing. With drifts up to four feet deep
down to the coast, there is little most farmers can do to save stock. While
ewes are managing to survive, new-born lambs die almost instantly, and
because of the freak drifts, farmers are unable to reach them.
For the second time this winter North Island farmers and sending free hay by
rail to their South Island counterparts.
The stock losses come at a time when export lamb prices are climbing in the
most optimistic outlook for sheep farmers for several years. The expected
heavy lamb losses are also likely to mean the closure of a more freezing
works, already having problems with overcapacity, with thousands of jobs
being lost.
The bad news follows currency moves, especially against sterling, which have
bolstered farm incomes. But demand for New Zealand lamb has also been
higher. Prices at Smithfield lambs were the equivalent of NZ5.10 (Pounds
1.39) a kilogram last week, compared with about Dollars NZ3.75 a year ago.
However New Zealand is running into quota problems. The New Zealand Meat
Board suggested this week that this was already causing buyers who relied on
the New Zealand product to bid up prices because of fears of a looming
shortage. By the end of July New Zealand had used up 79 per cent of its
annual quota of 205,000 tonnes under the voluntary restraint agreement with
the European Community. This compares with 66 per cent of the quota this
time last year.
The meat board says that European demand for lamb has been remarkably
buoyant this year, specially for barbecued cuts, and prices have been good.
Of the 79 per cent shipped so far this year, 38.3 per cent have been sold to
continental Europe (compared with 30.5 per cent at the same time last year)
with the rest going to Britain.
The EC as a whole normally takes 60 per cent of New Zealand's lamb
production with about half this going to Britain. A meat board official said
yesterday that New Zealand would have no trouble filling this year's quota:
the main concern was that there would not be enough to meet the demand.
There was some concern at the country's ability to meet the Christmas trade,
because of the effect of the bad weather on lamb numbers. South Island, the
main source of supply, was expected to face especially heavy losses.
However both exporters and the board official said that while carcasse
weights might be lower, the expected leanness of the meat meant quality was
likely to be higher than ever.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5864</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAAWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Banana plan under fire from
both sides - Producers' fears about the EC's quota proposals
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CANUTE JAMES
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE EUROPEAN Community's proposals for banana imports when its single market
comes into operation next year, which have been condemned by Latin American
producers, have also come under from attack the traditional producers whose
preferential access the EC apparently wants to ensure.
Countries of the African, Caribbean and Pacific group, the traditional
suppliers to the community, say the latest EC proposals are unacceptable
because they will limit the expansion of exports.
The community is proposing a quota of 2m tonnes per year for Latin American
exporters, and the ACP group says it will be left with preferential access
for 620,000 tonnes a year. 'This figure takes no account of the substantial
investments made in the ACP countries to improve production and shipping nor
for any share in for the ACP in the growth of EC consumption,' said a
statement from the Caribbean Banana Exporters' Association.
The Union of Banana Exporting Countries, a grouping of Latin American
exporters, had earlier attacked the community's proposals, saying that they
violated the General Agreement on Tariff and Trade. The group said the
proposals would cost them millions of dollars in lost income and lead to
higher prices for the fruit in Europe, causing reduced consumption.
Mr Marshall Hall, managing director of the Jamaica Banana Exporters
Association, said the ACP producers feared a cap on their access to the
European market. The ACP group was also concerned about the sourcing of
additional fruit that might be needed by the community. 'The proposed level
for the ACP group is based on 1990 production, but there has been
significant production increase since,' Mr Hall said. 'By 1994, for example,
based on current plans, the Caribbean producers will be increasing the
quantity of available export fruit. Belize will double its to 100,000 tonnes
per year, Suriname will move from 40,000 tonnes to 50,000 tonnes, Jamaica
from 70,000 tonnes to 120,000 tonnes and the Windward Islands from 280,000
tonnes to 300,000 tonnes.'
The ACP producers have also asked for more information on the form and
quantity of aid which the European Community is proposing for its own
producers. 'The European Community's assurance to guarantee revenue levels
in keeping with its obligations under the Lome Convention must now be
delivered by the market,' the Caribbean Banana Exporters' Association said.
'It would be most regrettable if ACP banana producers had to rely on
deficiency payments for their income.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5865</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAAVFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Russia seeks bids for copper
development
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By LEYLA BOULTON
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MOSCOW
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
RUSSIA HAS launched an international tender for bidders to develop its
largest copper mine, at Udokan in Siberia.
The project has long been planned but the government is now finally inviting
foreign and Russian companies to submit proposals for a feasibility study on
developing the mine. Goldman Sachs, which is already advising the government
on attracting foreign investment, will act as consultant to the Russian
tender committee.
The Izvestiya newspaper yesterday quoted Mr Yuri Proschin, the secretary for
the tender committee, as saying that it would take at least Dollars 1bn and
eight years to develop the mine, which was in an extremely difficult
geographical location.
A similar feasibility study to develop oil off Sakhalin island ran into
fierce political wrangling among various Russian authorities. Anxious to
attract widespread foreign investment, the government is hoping to avoid a
similar drama this time round.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 22
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5866</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAAUFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Slough Estates reduces dividend
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By VANESSA HOULDER, Property Correspondent
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
SLOUGH Estates, the UK's fourth biggest property company, yesterday became
the first large company in its sector to cut its dividend.
The company reversed its policy of holding its dividend a few weeks ago, in
response to deepening concern about the economy. 'The worries over the
currency and the fact that the North American recovery has stalled means
that now is the time to take a more prudent view,' said Sir Nigel Mobbs,
chairman.
'For the property sector at large, rental and capital growth prospects are
slight and are unlikely to improve in the short term,' he said.
He warned that a rise in interest rates would be a severe setback, because
it would increase business failures and dent confidence of potential
tenants. However, the 'reduced level of payment should be sustainable even
if the recession is prolonged'.
Sir Nigel said the 'climate had changed' for dividend reductions, following
cuts in payments by companies such as BP. City analysts predict that other
large property companies, such as Hammerson will follow suit.
As well as cutting the interim dividend from 4.4p to 3.1p, Slough forecast a
cut in the the final dividend from 7.15p to 5p.
Investors had anticipated a cut in the dividend, which was uncovered by
earnings, and the shares rallied from 89p to 95p.
Slough also said pre-tax profits rose from Pounds 19.1m to Pounds 33.6m for
the six months ended June 30. These were reduced by Pounds 5.5m of
provisions taken against property trading assets in the UK, Australia and
the US, compared with provisions of Pounds 10.9m a year ago.
Sir Nigel saw no further need for major provisions, but could not rule out
'top-ups' of existing provisions.
The group's properties' occupancy levels increased from 87 per cent to 87.6
per cent. About 85 per cent of the 318,000 sq ft construction programme is
leased or pre-sold.
The rise in profits stemmed from smaller provisions, an increase in
operating profits from Pounds 55.9m to Pounds 57.0m and a fall in net
interest from Pounds 18.6m to Pounds 14.8m. The net interest charged
excluded Pounds 20.9m of capitalised interest, down from Pounds 27.7m.
Earnings per share were 6.7p, up from 4.7p.
Lex, Page 14; Observer, Page 13
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5867</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAATFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Efim bankers hold three trump cards: The Italian treasury
has the weaker hand in negotiations on state holding company's debts
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By HAIG SIMONIAN, SARA WEBB and EMIKO TERAZONO
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   MILAN, LONDON, TOKYO
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
Negotiators in the row over Efim, the Italian state holding company put into
voluntary liquidation last month, are engaged in a round of brinkmanship
ahead of their planned meeting in London early next month.
While the Italian treasury seems ready to compromise, possibly to exploit
divisions among foreign creditors, Efim's London-based lenders are
threatening to disrupt Italy's ambitious privatisation programme before it
gets off the ground.
Efim has defaulted on its loans by virtue of the fact that it has gone into
liquidation: its subsidiaries are unable to make payments on their loans as
they fall due and so are also in default. The treasury plans to issue bonds
to creditors to repay the loans.
The creditor banks maintain that Efim, and its subsidiaries Agusta and
Safim, borrowed in the international loans market on competitive terms. 'As
far as the banks were concerned, this was state risk: Agusta was able to
borrow on much more favourable terms because of the Efim name,' said one
banker.
The treasury says banks should have known about Efim's perilous finances,
and that high interest rates on Efim's debt reflected this risk.
Efim's bankers have three trump cards when they meet Mr Mario Draghi, the
senior civil servant in charge of negotiations.
Principle. Efim was viewed in the Euromarkets as a state risk, even if there
was no explicit treasury guarantee. Unilateral default by one of the world's
seven richest countries is unacceptable to bankers. Intimidation. Failure to
meet creditors' demands could threaten treasury minister Piero Barucci's
privatisation programme. Four public sector entities - IRI, ENEL, ENI and
INA - were recently transformed into joint stock companies in the first step
towards restructuring and disposals.
Foreign bankers argue the change in status means the first three are now
technically in default on their loans. Ordinarily this would be overcome by
a waiver from the banks. 'Until such time as there is a satisfactory
response on Efim, these banks are going to withhold their waivers', said one
banker.
'Bankers are looking very closely at this question . . . it's a pressure
point and both parties know that - the whole privatisation programme could
be jeopardised.' The treasury is acutely aware of the risks.
Future borrowing. Until this is resolved, Italian borrowers will find it
almost impossible to tap the syndicated loans market and state-owned
companies may have to issue bonds.
The problem could become acute as several loans to IRI, ENI and ENEL are due
to mature within 18 months. With the Efim issue unsettled, the chances of
rolling over debt seem slim.
A continuing row over Efim could also close the door to other Italian
borrowers. Last year's dispute between international banks and the Italian
authorities over the collapsed Federconsorzi farm services group showed how
easily the loan market could be shut off to Italian names.
Some banks - mainly Japanese ones with a large exposure to Federconsorzi -
refused to lend to Italian state borrowers in protest at the government's
failure to repay the group's debts. When Italian names were able to return
to the loans market, they had to pay higher pricing on their credits.
The treasury has opened the door for talks with Efim's foreign banks and has
hinted it may be prepared to raise the interest rates on bonds it plans to
issue to creditors to repay the loans.
The five-year lira bonds being offered by the treasury will pay 7.25 per
cent interest, while the Ecu-denominated paper has a 4 per cent coupon -
around half current market levels for both currencies. As a result, creditor
banks will receive almost 80 per cent of the principal and interest due.
Creditor banks appear to be divided between those with sizeable operations
in Italy (who appear less aggressive about full repayment) and others
working out of London (who are pushing for 100 per cent of their money
back). 'Some of us understand that the domestic political environment could
still come up with solutions which London banks can't envisage', says one
banker in Italy.
Treasury officials have argued that the gap will close if market rates come
down during the five-year life of the bonds, which pay interest at a fixed
rate. So a 2 or 3 percentage point rise in the interest rate on the bonds
may be enough to convince some creditors to compromise.
Creditor banks can claim tax relief against the lost income, raising
receipts in some cases to 95 per cent of what was due. The issue of tax is
complex, and will not affect creditors equally. However, it is likely to be
discussed at the forthcoming talks.
Most leading commercial Japanese banks have lent money to Efim. A Tokyo
business newspaper estimated syndicated loans extended by 17 Japanese banks
at around Dollars 540m (Pounds 270m). Some banks sounded hopeful. 'There is
no way that all of the loans will not be repaid,' said Fuji Bank, which has
some Y1bn (Pounds 4.03m) in loans to Efim. However, most said Mitsubishi
Bank, the agent bank, was handling negotiations.
Foreign banks are in a quandary: while they want full repayment, some are
hoping to benefit from the profitable valuation and corporate finance
mandates likely to stem from privatisation. Italian press reports have
suggested Euromarket loans may have a more generous treatment than domestic
loans.
That may not appeal to the treasury, which has highlighted the fact that
domestic and foreign banks are being treated equally. Nor may it be willing
to concede more than a token rise in rates on the bonds.
Yet, failing a joker in the pack, it seems to hold the weaker hand.
Efim loan details, Page 21
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5868</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAASFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Carmakers warn of fresh downturn
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By Our Financial Staff
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
EUROPEAN car manufacturers yesterday warned of tougher times in the second
half of this year, writes Our Financial Staff.
Daimler-Benz of Germany referred to a 'subsiding boom' in the domestic
market and uncertainties in export markets. Renault of France warned of a
downward trend in the market which could accelerate in the second half.
Volvo of Sweden, which made a first-half operating loss of SKr835m (Pounds
82.5m) compared with a loss of SKr559m last year, said it expected no
improvement in the immediate future. Volkswagen of Germany, which recorded a
17 per cent fall in pre-tax profits in the first half, said it was not
ignoring the warning signs in the German economy, nor the likelihood of a
return to normal after the stimulus provided by reunification.
First-half results were mixed. Volvo said its unit sales of cars worldwide
had fallen 4 per cent, while Daimler's production fell the same amount.
Volkswagen of Germany reported unit sales up 6 per cent and forecast
full-year sales 12 per cent higher. Renault said its output of 767,000 cars
was the highest for 10 years.
Truck sales continued to be difficult. Volvo said its first-half sales by
value were down by 10 per cent worldwide, with European sales down 15 per
cent and US sales up 13 per cent. The division made a loss overall. Renault
said its sales of commercial vehicles were down 4 per cent by value.
However, Mercedes raised its truck sales 7 per cent by value and 4 per cent
by volume.
The only company among the four to raise its pre-tax profits in the first
half was Renault, with a rise of 465 per cent. Renault said it had increased
its market share from 9.9 per cent to 10.5 per cent in the period.
Volkswagen and Mercedes reported lower sales in the German market. Mercedes
said that while exports and sales of more expensive Mercedes-Benz cars had
risen, domestic demand had fallen. Volkswagen confirmed domestic sales in
the first half were down 11 per cent, while foreign sales were 19 per cent
up.
Volkswagen's pre-tax profits fell by 17 per cent, while Daimler's fell 3 per
cent.
However, the two companies increased their net profits by 3 per cent and 16
per cent respectively, chiefly because of lower tax charges.
Full results, Page 18;
Bourse rebounds, Page 29
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5869</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAARFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Weir eases engineering gloomwith profits advance of 23%
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JANE FULLER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
WEIR Group, the engineering concern with about 60 per cent of its sales
overseas, eased some of the gloom surrounding the UK engineering sector with
a 23 per cent advance in pre-tax profit in the first half of this year and a
higher interim dividend.
After increases in both interest income and contributions from associates,
the pre-tax figure rose from just over Pounds 15m to Pounds 18.5m. Turnover
stood at Pounds 194.8m, compared with Pounds 208.2m.
The group dominates the UK market for large, liquid-moving pumps and the
base for its strong export business is its low-cost manufacturing site in
Glasgow. It is cash-rich and has a record of acquiring other companies at
modest prices.
Lord Weir, chairman, said he did not want people to think that there was
'some magic' in the group's performance. 'Although we are doing better, it
is bloody difficult,' he said.
Weir's main rivals in the international pump and valve markets were Japanese
and German. 'We have been battling to improve productivity and keep costs
under control and, quite honestly, at today's exchange rates we are
competitive,' said Lord Weir.
He stressed the importance of cash generation. Although the net amount held
had slipped from about Pounds 45m in December to Pounds 40m in June, there
had been an inflow of Pounds 12m, leaving aside acquisitions. Interest
income rose by more than Pounds 700,000 to Pounds 1.67m.
Associates, mainly Weir-Houston and the consortium running the Devonport
Royal Dockyard, contributed Pounds 2.25m, against Pounds 1.8m. The
government is considering selling both Devonport and the other main naval
dockyard at Rosyth. Lord Weir expected his group and its partners, the BICC
subsidiary Balfour Beatty and Brown and Root of the US, to express an
interest.
Operating profit advanced by 18 per cent to Pounds 14.6m. Among buoyant
sectors were oil in the Middle East and power in the Far East. The order
intake, at Pounds 175m, was similar to the second half of last year,
although down on the comparable period which was distorted by large orders.
Earnings per share advanced to 16.4p from 14.4p. The interim dividend is
being raised to 3.5p, from 3.1p.
The share price gained 13p to close at 507p.
Lex, Page 14
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5870</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAAQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Brewers see no sign of upturn in pub trade
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PHILIP RAWSTORNE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE impact of the recession on the pub trade is getting worse, brewers
reported yesterday.
Some industry estimates suggested that volume beer sales through pubs in the
past two months were 5 per cent down on the same period last year, though
the take-home market was more buoyant.
'Trading conditions, far from showing any improvement, have further
deteriorated,' Sir Alick Rankin, chairman of Scottish &amp; Newcastle, said at
the company's annual meeting in Edinburgh. 'We cannot, as yet, discern any
sign of a future upturn.'
Sir Alick said that the impact of the recession, which had so far been felt
mainly in the south-east, was spreading into northern England and Scotland.
Scottish &amp; Newcastle was gaining market share, he claimed. 'However, it must
be acknowledged that we are currently operating in a highly competitive,
reducing marketplace.'
The group's holiday operations, Center Parcs and Pontin, were also being
affected by a general trend for customers to book later and spend less.
He warned that the company could not expect 'to overcome all the negative
aspects presented by today's business climate'.
Mr Simon Redman, chairman of Greene King, the East Anglia-based brewer, told
his shareholders yesterday that the company's total sales so far this year
were slightly below those in the same period last year.
'At the moment we see no real signs of an end to the recession,' he said.
'Trading conditions have, if anything, deteriorated in the last two months
after some improvement in May and June.'
Whitbread said that its total beer sales were ahead of last year's but
agreed that the pub trade had fallen in July and August.
Both Whitbread and Allied-Lyons, however, reported that business through
their off-licence chains remained relatively buoyant.
Bass described trading conditions as 'very, very tough', but claimed it was
gaining share in a market that was declining overall.
Mr Alan Flockhart, finance director of Wolverhampton &amp; Dudley, said: 'Trade
is certainly not getting any better. It is a gloomy marketplace.'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5871</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAAPFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: Swire rises 101% at half year
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By SIMON DAVIES
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   HONG KONG
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
SWIRE Pacific, the Hong Kong-based aviation, property and trading group,
revealed a 101 per cent increase in net profit to HKDollars 2.18bn
(USDollars 282m) for the six months to June.
The figures were buoyed by the HKDollars 631m exceptional profit from the
sale of the leasehold interest on an office site to Hong Kong Telecom. But
recurrent earnings were also 43 per cent higher.
'Notwithstanding the weakness of Cathay, virtually all the other Swire
businesses are exceeding profit forecasts', said Mr Sheldon Kasowitz,
research manager at Jardine Fleming, who is expecting full year profit of
HKDollars 4.3bn.
Turnover for the period increased 27 per cent to HKDollars 18.95bn, while
earnings per share soared to 137.4 cents for the A shares and 27.5 cents for
B shares. The interim dividend is 29 cents for A shares and 5.8 cents for
the B shares.
Cathay Pacific, the international airline subsidiary, announced a 13 per
cent rise in profits on Wednesday. The figures reflected recovery from the
Gulf war, but disappointed analysts who had underestimated the impact of
recession and price wars.
The main engine of growth for Swire was its enlarged property portfolio,
rental income increasing to HKDollars 798m from HKDollars 597m, as a result
of initial contributions from Cityplaza III and IV, and higher rental rates
in its Pacific Place development.
The industrial and trading division recorded strong growth, contributions
from the Coca-Cola bottling operations in the US and the Taiwanese vehicle
sales division, both better than expected.
The insurance division showed an improved performance, but earnings from
offshore oil services were below budget.
The outlook for the full year remains positive. The two new Cityplaza office
towers are 99 per cent occupied and Swire will receive a full six-month
contribution from the properties.
The only question mark over the second-half performance will be Cathay
Pacific, whose earnings will depend on factors such as oil price, dollar
movements and the extent of the current price war.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5872</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAAOFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: Fairfax exceeds prospectus
forecast
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN BROWN
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   SYDNEY
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
JOHN Fairfax Holdings, the Australian newspaper group controlled by Mr
Conrad Black, yesterday unveiled pre-tax profits for the year to June which
exceeded forecasts in its pre-flotation prospectus.
Profits before interest and tax increased by 9.8 per cent to ADollars 129.8m
(USDollars 93.3m), on turnover up 2.8 per cent to ADollars 729.1m. The group
said in March that pre-tax profits would increase to ADollars 123m on
turnover of ADollars 723m.
Fairfax also said it was entitled to ADollars 650m in tax credits, up from
ADollars 323m in the prospectus, which suggests the group is unlikely to pay
income tax for at least five years. Sir Zelman Cowen, chairman, said the
result was 'extremely good' in the light of 'a very difficult economic
environment' caused by Australia's slow recovery from recession. Earnings
since June had been 'broadly in line with projections, despite the
continuing recession and uneven trends in advertising volumes.'
Analysts said profitability had increased markedly since January, when
Fairfax was acquired for ADollars 1.4bn by the Tourang consortium led by Mr
Black's UK Daily Telegraph.
The group said second-half earnings before tax and interest were 11 per cent
higher at ADollars 60.1m, on revenue of ADollars 357.4m, up 1.6 per cent on
the prospectus forecast. Operating costs fell 0.4 per cent to ADollars
285.8m.
Net profit was 29 per cent higher than expected at ADollars 15.5m, after net
interest expenses of ADollars 33.1m and income tax of ADollars 11.5m.
However, the group said the tax bill would be offset against the tax
credits. It did not declare a dividend, in line with its prospectus
forecasts.
Fairfax said circulation of all its main titles increased, but advertising
volumes fell sharply. However, advertising revenue was unchanged at ADollars
534m, indicating a significant improvement in margins.
More than 160 staff had left through early retirements and voluntary
redundancies suggesting that costs are likely to fall further.
Following a flotation in May, the Telegraph owns 15 per cent of Fairfax.
Hellman and Friedman, the US investment bank, owns 5 per cent in the form of
non-voting debentures, and Australian financial institutions own the rest.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5873</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAANFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: Lend Lease improves on good MLC
results
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN BROWN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
LEND LEASE Corporation, the Australian property and financial services
group, yesterday announced a 6.5 per cent increase in net profit to ADollars
171m (USDollars 122.4m) for the year to June 30, largely reflecting a strong
performance by its MLC Life insurance subsidiary.
Mr Stuart Hornery, chairman, said MLC Life, Australia's third largest life
insurance company, paid a 70 per cent franked dividend of ADollars 103m,
against ADollars 82m last time.
Overall, retail financial services contributed ADollars 109m to the result,
equivalent to 55 per cent of group net profit, up from 45 per cent
previously.
The results do not include a contribution from Australian Eagle, the life
assurance business acquired by Lend Lease this year for ADollars 158m.
Lend Lease said the contribution from property services fell to ADollars
62m, equivalent to 32 per cent of group profits, from ADollars 79m (43 per
cent) the previous year.
The group has made provisions of ADollars 40m against its commercial
property portfolio, compared with ADollars 72m the previous year. Total
provisions stand at ADollars 144m.
It said its focus on regional shopping centres, infrastructure and the
industrial market would provide 'significant opportunities,' in spite of the
generally depressed property market. Mr Hornery said Lend Lease had
increased its share of the construction and reconstruction market.
The result was struck after an abnormal loss of ADollars 18m, mostly
relating to property write-downs, against an abnormal gain of ADollars 12m
last time. But the impact on net profits was offset by a tax credit of
ADollars 6.65m relating to a tax audit for the four years to 1990.
Lend Lease declared a fully franked final dividend of 33 cents, against 32 a
year earlier, making a total of 73 cents against 71 cents. The shares closed
unchanged at ADollars 15.90 on the Australian Stock Exchange.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5874</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAAMFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: Pasminco blames loss on lower
metals prices
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By KEVIN BROWN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
PASMINCO, the Australian lead and zinc group, blamed lower metals prices for
a net loss of ADollars 58.6m (USDollars 41.9m) for the year to the end of
June, against a loss of ADollars 47.6m the previous year.
Revenue fell from ADollars 1.5bn to ADollars 1.3bn, largely reflecting falls
of 11 per cent and 23 per cent in the average prices of zinc and lead on
world markets.
The loss was in line with the profits warning issued by the group last
month, which coincided with the partial unwinding of an 80.6 per cent joint
shareholding formerly held by North Broken Hill Peko (North) and CRA, the
Australian mining groups.
Pasminco said the figure included an abnormal loss of ADollars 15.4m,
reflecting the cost of rationalisation and a tax charge of ADollars 12.5m
following an audit of the 1985 to 1988 accounts by the Australian Taxation
Office. The bottom line loss increased to ADollars 140.1m after including a
net extraordinary loss of ADollars 81.5m relating to the previously
announced writedown of the Elura mine in New South Wales.
The group is still trying to sell Elura but has not received an acceptable
offer. It said negotiations werecontinuing on the sale of its smelter and
alloying plant in the UK.
Mr Peter Barnett, managing director, said metals prices had risen in recent
months and they The company had also benefited from the significantly better
ADollars /USDollars exchange rate.
As expected, the board said there is would be no dividend payment.
North and CRA reduced their 40.3 per cent shareholdings in Pasminco to 20
per cent and 31 per cent respectively in July, signalling the end of their
joint commitment to Pasminco.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 20
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5875</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAALFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Government Bonds: Treasuries firm after differing data
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PATRICK HARVERSON and ANGUS FOSTER
</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>
   NEW YORK, LONDON
</DATELINE>
<TEXT>
US TREASURY prices were slightly firmer yesterday in the wake of some
conflicting economic data.
In late trading the benchmark 30-year government bond was up  3/32 at 98
1/16 , yielding 7.406 per cent. The two-year note was also slightly firmer,
up  3/32 at 100 1/16 , to carry a yield of 4.201 per cent.
The good news for bonds was that the original estimate of 1.4 per cent
growth in second-quarter gross domestic product was not revised upward on a
second reading, as had been expected. The absence of a revision confirmed
that the economic recovery was extremely weak in the second three months of
the year.
The not-so-good news for the market was a 92,000 decline in weekly jobless
claims, the largest one-week drop in history. The figures, however, were
distorted by unusual factors, including a series of temporary layoffs at
General Motors' manufacturing plants.
UK GOVERNMENT gilts ended lower again as prices fell in afternoon trading in
line with a weakening pound. Shorter dated gilts were less affected but
longer issues lost as much as half a point.
The Liffe gilt futures contract fell from 95.08 to 94.21 while the 9 3/4 per
cent gilt due 2002 fell from 101 5/32 to 100 23/32 in late trading.
'It was currency factors again,' said Mr Philip Tyson, bond analyst at UBS
Phillips &amp; Drew. Sterling fell a pfennig from its opening of DM2.8005 during
the day and in late trading stood at DM2.7898, just above its absolute floor
against the D-Mark of DM2.7780.
Rumours in London, quickly denied, that the Bank of Italy was about to raise
interest rates also hit gilts in the afternoon. The lira and sterling are
both close to the bottom of their ERM bands and dealers feared an Italian
rate rise would force the UK to follow suit.
Some London dealers said the longer end of the yield curve was also
overshadowed by Wednesday's poor response to the Pounds 2.5bn auction of 8
3/4 per cent gilts due 2017, which was covered only 1.24 times.
OTHER European government bonds traded quietly after recent volatility, with
main markets little changed.
German government bunds were marked down after slightly higher-than-expected
inflation figures for former West Germany showed prices rose a preliminary
3.5 per cent year-on-year in August, compared with 3.3 per cent in July.
But bunds recovered most of their losses and analysts said the inflation
figures were distorted by one-off rent increases.
The Liffe bund futures contract opened at 88.09 and was quoted in late trade
at 88.01 after briefly slipping below the 88.00 resistance level.
Some switching into higher yielding Dutch bonds was reported, but dealers
said the contract's quick recovery above the resistance level showed the
German market remained firm and was still benefitting from worries elsewhere
in Europe ahead of the French referendum next month.
French government bonds ended slightly lower. Another poll, conducted for
the French bank Societe Generale, suggested public opinion is split down the
middle on Maastricht.
The yield on the benchmark 8 1/2 per cent bond due 2002 rose slightly from
9.13 per cent to 9.17 per cent. Dealers said uncertainty would keep a cap on
price rises before the referendum. But following falls this week, the market
is now well underpinned, they said.
JAPANESE government bonds closed little changed as attention focused on the
stock market and today's announcement of measures designed to stimulate the
economy.
Poorer-than-expected economic data on industrial production and retail sales
boosted hopes of an interest rate cut. But news that the package would be
worth a larger than expected Y9,000bn, and the authorities' moves to dampen
speculation about an imminent reduction, kept the market guessing.
The No 145 bond, which took over as the benchmark yesterday, opened at 4.825
per cent and closed at 4.815 per cent after volatile trading. Dealers said
sentiment towards bonds remained positive.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5876</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAAKFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Capital Markets: Efim's syndicated loans
breakdown
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
THE VOLUNTARY liquidation last month of Efim, the Italian state holding
company, has left many bankers wondering whether their loans will be repaid
in full.
The table below shows the international syndicated credits taken out by Efim
and by its wholly-owned subsidiaries. These include Agusta, its helicopters
division, Safim (the finance subsidiary which was renamed Nuova Safim), and
Breda Construzioni Ferroviarie (BCF), a railway equipment subsidiary.
Efim has total debts of L8,500bn, of which about L3,500bn was lent by
foreign banks. The international syndicated credits shown below are the ones
which were publicly announced, according to data provided by Euromoney
Loanware. However, these figures do not include privately arranged credits
and bilateral loans taken out by Efim and its subsidiaries.
Six agent banks - Bankers Trust, Chemical Bank, Chase, Citicorp, Mitsubishi
and SG Warburg - are representing the interests of the foreign banks in the
international syndicates when it comes to negotiations with the Italian
authorities. The bankers are due to meet with Italian treasury officials in
early September to discuss further developments.
There are other groups of banks which lent to Efim, including Italian and
foreign banks which provided funds for Efim domestically rather than in the
international market.
Efim and its subsidiaries borrowed in a range of currencies and maturities.
The table shows the margins at which they borrowed (usually quoted as the
margin over the London interbank offered rate) and the fees due to bankers.
Commitment fees are those paid by a borrower on the undrawn part of a loan.
A facility fee is the annual fee paid on the total amount of a committed
standby facility, regardless of whether that facility is drawn. A
participation fee is the amount paid either on signing the loan or on the
first drawdown. A utilisation fee is the fee paid by a borrower if more than
a certain part of the loan is drawn.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5877</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAAJFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / International Bonds: Marketmakers widen margins on Ecu bonds
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TRACY CORRIGAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A GROUP of a dozen marketmakers yesterday decided unilaterally to widen the
margins quoted between bid and offer prices on Ecu Eurobonds, in an effort
to shore up the market's diminishing liquidity, as prices went into another
downward spin.
A spate of opinion polls showing a majority of French voters against the
Maastricht treaty in next month's referendum sent Ecu bond prices tumbling.
For example, Italy's Ecu bonds due 2011 have dipped four points so far this
week.
Selling of Ecu bond holdings by central banks, in order to raise funds for
intervention in the foreign exchange market, added to the downward pressure,
according to dealers.
The market is 'struggling with the fact that we may be heading for a no
vote,' said one trader. It has virtually stopped functioning.'
Many Ecu bond traders have not been picking up telephones this week, in an
attempt to avoid accumulating further dealing losses, but leaving investors
unable to liquidate their holdings. Although the International Securities
Market Association, the self-regulatory body which oversees the Eurobond
market, still recognises 44 marketmakers, only a small proportion of that
number are still active in the sector.
'The market is once again examining the appropriate liquidity in a difficult
situation,' said Mr David Ovenden, who heads the International Securities
Market Association's Ecu sub-committee.
Yesterday's move to wider spreads, orchestrated by Paribas, is designed to
encourage marketmakers to continue making prices. However, a similar
agreement reached by all marketmakers only two weeks ago has already failed.
If the latest agreement fails, a further suspension of marketmaking is
likely to be considered. Marketmaking was stopped for a day last month,
after chaotic selling of Ecu bonds was triggered by Denmark's rejection of
the treaty.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 21
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5878</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAAIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Foreign Exchanges: Dollar weakens in late trading
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By JAMES BLITZ
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BOTH the dollar and sterling lost ground against the D-Mark in late European
trading yesterday after a comparatively calm day on the foreign exchanges,
writes James Blitz.
The US currency was steadier on Wednesday, rallying 65 basis points from the
DM1.4000 level, and yesterday ventured as high as DM1.4173 in Europe. It was
boosted by surprisingly good US employment data, with weekly jobless claims
dropping 93,000 to 382,000, the lowest since October 1990. Forecasters had
been expecting a figure of 405,000.
The dollar later slipped, partly because investors had gone long of dollars
in the morning in the hope of seeing it break through DM1.42 on the upside.
Analysts said the US currency continued to be weakened by the lack of any
chance of the dollar/D-Mark yield gap narrowing, and uncertainties over the
US presidential election. It ended in London up nearly  1/2 pfennig at
DM1.4105. In New York the dollar closed at DM1.4085.
According to Mr Paul Chertkow, head of global currency research at UBS
Phillips &amp; Drew, the market is showing signs that DM1.40 could be a firm
bottom for the dollar. 'There has been no intervention today, but the market
pushed the dollar up of its own accord,' he said.
Some dealers said the dollar still looked wobbly. According to Mr Richard
Crosby, head of forex trading at Swiss Banking Corporation in London, the
market should have pushed the dollar up further following a comment from Mr
Theo Waigel, the German finance minister, that the Bundesbank should cut
interest rates in the medium term. A slight rise in German inflation in
August, to an annualised 3.5 per cent, may make it difficult for the German
central bank to lower interest rates.
The Bank of England did not intervene to support sterling yesterday but the
currency showed signs of weakening late in the European afternoon. After
reaching a high of DM2.7989 in the morning, it fell in the afternoon. At one
stage it was at DM2.7880, only a pfennig from its permitted ERM floor. Mr
Neil MacKinnon, chief economist at Yamaichi International, said the DM2.79
support level may well crumble in the next few trading days. The pound
finished  1/2 pfennig down on the day at DM2.7900.
The Italian lira hit a record low of L764.70 against the D-Mark, compared to
its ERM floor of L765.40. Some dealers have the habit of selling lire on
Fridays because of fears that an Italian devaluation is most likely to come
on a weekend. Italy continues to come under pressure to reverse its recent
interest rate cut.
The D-Mark's strength was clear from the EMS grid: it has jumped three
places in three weeks to second position.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5879</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAAHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / Money Markets: Cautious trading
</HEADLINE>
<TEXT>
A CAUTIOUS calm returned to both the sterling cash and futures markets
yesterday as the pound continued to hold above its floor in the European
exchange rate mechanism.
The Bank of England's large intervention to support sterling appeared to
have been initially successful, although dealers feel that the pound will
next come under renewed pressure in the run-up to the French referendum on
the Maastricht treaty.
A late fall in the pound against the D-Mark also triggered new depression in
futures.
In the morning, short sterling futures rose sharply as confidence about the
currency spread, although they continue to price in a base rate rise of at
least  1/2 percentage point.
In late trading they fell back, as the pound took new losses on the foreign
exchanges. The September short sterling contract closed 1 basis point up
from its previous finish, at 89.18. The December contract closed up 1 basis
point to finish at 89.18. Volumes traded were again high, at more than
45,000 lots.
Period rates in the sterling cash market softened. Three-month money was
down by a  1/4 of a per cent on the offered side to 10 5/8 per cent, while
the 1-year rate was down to 10 13/16 per cent from a previous close of 11
per cent. One-month money was back on what dealers called 'the right side of
10 base rate': it closed at 10 1/4 per cent on the offered side from a
previous close of 10 9/16 per cent.
The Bank of England's operations in the sterling money market reflected the
easier tone. For the first three days of this week, dealers had rushed to
offer paper to the Bank, fearing an imminent rise in base rates. Yesterday,
the market took the whole day to remove the shortage of Pounds 1.1bn.
In the morning, the Bank bought Pounds 20m of Band 3 Treasury bills at 9 3/4
per cent, Pounds 60m of Band 3 bank bills, Pounds 82m of Band 4 bank bills
at 9 per cent, and Pounds 30m in a repurchase agreement at 9 15/16 per cent.
The forecast was later revised to Pounds 1bn and the Bank purchased Pounds
1m of Band 4 bank bills. In the afternoon, it purchased Pounds 62m of Band 1
Treasury bills at 9 7/8 per cent, Pounds 139m of Band 1 bank bills, Pounds
48m of Band 3 bank bills and Pounds 2m in Band 4 bank bills.
There was Pounds 405m of late assistance.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 23
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5880</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAAGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / London Stock Exchange: Equity futures and options trading
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTOPHER PRICE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
TRADING IN the futures market moved to a quieter pitch as the spotlight
turned away from sterling and on to more technical issues, writes
Christopher Price.
The FT-SE contract for September delivery opened firmer at 2,310 and
immediately started a slow climb as optimism pervaded the market. A bright
overnight Wall Street and sparkling Tokyo performance provided the impetus,
and the feeling that the falls of the last few days had been overdone helped
the momentum. Among the houses reported to be busy in the market was Goldman
Sachs, said to have been a big buyer in early morning trading.
September's move forward accelerated around midday with a spurious story
that Germany had cut its interest rates, sending the contract to a high for
the day of 2,334. Buyer interest faded during the latter part of the
session, and sentiment was not helped by a rumour that Italian rates had
been put up. September closed at 2,318, up 26 on the day and about a point
above fair value of around 5.5. Volume came to 9,449 lots.
Dealings also slackened in the traded options market. BTR was the top traded
stock option with 2,427 contracts dealt out of a total of 24,801.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 32
</PAGE>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-5881</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIBBCAAFFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920828
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 AUG 92 / London Stock Exchange: Brewers shaken by S &amp; N
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By PETER JOHN, CHRISTOPHER PRICE and STEVE THOMPSON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
A TRADING warning from Scottish &amp; Newcastle knocked the shares and sent
shock waves through the drinks sector. The company is seen as one of the
safest stocks in a sector valued for its defensive qualities, with its
northern-based market offering some immunity from the recession that is
particularly buffeting the hard-pressed south-east region.
However, S &amp; N yesterday warned that 'the company . . . cannot be expected
to overcome all the negative aspects presented by today's business climate'.
The stock retreated 29 to 390p.
Most analysts, who were forecasting profits in the region of Pounds 240m,
now expect only slight profits growth from last year's Pounds 222m. Mr
Graeme Eadie at County NatWest commented: 'Up to now, Scotland and the North
were thought to be holding up quite well, but if S &amp; N says it is suffering,
it does not bode well for the rest of the sector.'
The S &amp; N news crowns a bad week for the brewers, with Grand Metropolitan
issuing a profits warning, and a series of downgrades for Bass. Observers
now expect other leading stocks such as Allied Lyons and Guinness to come
under fresh market scrutiny.
Mr Andrew Holland at Kleinwort Benson, who yesterday also downgraded
Whitbread, said the wave of bad news 'shows that the drinks sector is not
the defensive division it has been painted'. Bass declined 9 to 488p and
Whitbread 'A' 3 to 373p, although Allied was steady at 556p while Guinness
put on 3 to 517p and GrandMet 5 to 389p.
Slough disquiet
Disquiet followed the decision by Slough Estates to reduce its interim
dividend, after many institutions and analysts had assumed that the payment
would be maintained.
The results themselves were largely in line with market expectations and
fully reflected the difficult times being endured in the property sector.
The shares, which stood at 203p just 10 weeks ago, gained 6 to 95p in good
3.3m turnover.
However, for some observers, the announced cut in the half-time dividend was
not large enough to restore confidence. Mr Graham Stanley at County NatWest
said: 'Cutting the dividend to a sustainable level has to be the correct
decision in the current market. But we believe a more substantial cut is
required for all overheads to be fully covered.'
Another analyst pointed out that on a prospective net asset value of 268p,
the shares are at a discount of around 67 per cent to nav, against a
forecast market average of 20 per cent. 'At those kind of levels, it is
obvious that the company has a credibility gap to close,' he said.
Wellcome wanted
Pharmaceuticals group Wellcome recovered sharply yesterday, spurred by hopes
of approval for a new drug in the Aids armoury. The shares bounced 18 to
800p.
Wellcome confirmed last night that the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
is to meet on September 23 to review the use of Atovaquone, a drug which
combats a form of pneumonia brought on by the HIV virus. The drug is
currently provided free in the US, on compassionate grounds, but if the FDA
gives full approval, it would be marketed commercially.
Pharmaceuticals analyst Mr Didier Cowling of Nomura Research said last
night: 'It will not be a blockbuster but could be a nice new addition to
Wellcome's portfolio.'
The shares were also encouraged yesterday after analysts at some securities
firms assured their marketmakers that suggestions of threats to Retrovir,
the group's anti-Aids drug, had been overstated.
There was hefty turnover in the electricity shares as unbundling of the
Electricity Package, which ceases to be traded on September 4, gathered pace
in very heavy volume. Among the leading recipients were Yorkshire, steady at
371p, where turnover reached 3.5m, and East Midland. The Package lost Pounds
92 to Pounds 3238.
Sun Alliance remained the pick of the composite insurers, with the shares
boosted a further 9 to 228p on 2.5m traded. The market is adopting a much
more positive attitude to the stock ahead of interim figures scheduled for
September 2.
Another firm showing by the dollar, together with hopes that the recent
hurricane damage may be the trigger for a sharp upturn in US rates, drove
insurance brokers higher.
The accolade for the most heavily traded stock yesterday in the London
market fell to Clyde Petroleum, which held at 21p after a series of big
blocks of shares moved across the Seaq ticker. The deals represented
clearing of a large block of shares recently sold into the market as part of
a big programme trade.
Dealers noted some aggressive US buying of the oil majors, with BP, where
American investors have been big buyers in recent weeks, closing 7 higher at
192 1/2 p on turnover of 5.6m. Shell put on the same amount to 464p.
BAT Industries rose 23 to 738p with support from a firmer dollar and
optimism about BAT's insurance and financial services activities.
Cable and Wireless, ruffled in recent weeks by a series of profits
downgrades prompted by the sharp decline in the dollar, staged a strong
recovery, closing 11 up at 504p.
Glaxo jumped 19 to 710p on news that the US Food and Drug Administration is
to discuss increased use of the company's Zofran drug.
Motor trader and coach builder Henlys was heavily traded, with hostile
bidder T. Cowie believed to be increasing its stake. Cowie's brokers took
its stake to 9.9 per cent and Henlys closed a penny firmer at 66p with 5.2m
traded. Cowie added a penny at 121p.
Chemicals group Courtaulds gained 9 to 430p as Hoare Govett reinforced its
buy recommendation.
Continued references to increasing supply and lower prices in the holiday
industry hurt Airtours, which slipped 7 to 190p. Owners Abroad eased a penny
to 62p. Rank Organisation, which runs the Butlin's holiday centres, suffered
from the backwash of the trading warning from Scottish &amp; Newcastle, owner of
Centre Parcs and Pontin's. The shares lost 8 to 519p.
Scottish Television performed well with the help of a note from SG Warburg
Securities. The stock jumped 23 to 375p.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1992
NEW HIGHS (6).
ELECTRONICS (1) Acorn Computer, INSURANCE COMPOSITE (1) Comm. Union,
INVESTMENT TRUSTS (2) EFM Japan Wts., Henderson Euro. Zero Pf, MEDIA (1)
CIA, WATER (1) Yorks.
NEW LOWS (126).
BRITISH FUNDS (4) Tr 2 1/2 pc IL '01, Tr 2 1/2 pc IL '03, Tr 2pc IL '06, Tr
4 1/8 pc IL '30, AMERICANS (2) Bowater Inc., Whirlpool, CANADIANS (2) ECO,
Inco, BREWERS &amp; DISTILLERS (5) Bass, Greenalls, Do 5.95pc Pf, Macdonald
Martin, Scot. &amp; Newcastle, BUILDING MATERIALS (5) Blue Circle 7 5/8 pc Pf,
Heywood Williams, Do Cv Pf, Ramus, Travis Perkins, BUSINESS SERVICES (2)
BNB, Manpower, CHEMICALS (3) Caird, Hickson, Yorks., CONGLOMERATES (1) Amer
Free A, CONTRACTING &amp; CONSTRUCTION (10) Amco, Bryant, Crest Nichlsn, Edmond,
Havelock Europa, NSM, Persimmon, Prowting, Tilbury Douglas, Try, ELECTRICALS
(2) Lec Refrig., Oxford Instrs., ELECTRICITY (1) Bedford (Wm), ELECTRONICS
(3) Computer People, Cranbrook, Prestwick 7 1/4 pc Pf, ENGINEERING AEROSPACE
(1) FR, ENGINEERING GENERAL (9) Babcock, Bridon, Bridport-Gundry, Dobson
Park, Hall, Neepsend, Simon, Vickers, Victaulic, FOOD MANUFACTURING (3)
Matthews (B), RHM, Unigate, FOOD RETAILING (1) Budgens, HEALTH &amp; HOUSEHOLD
(1) Crown Eyeglass, HOTELS &amp; LEISURE (2) Airtours, Fairline Boats, INSURANCE
BROKERS (2) Heath, Hogg, INSURANCE COMPOSITE (1) Domestic &amp; Gen., INVESTMENT
TRUSTS (15) Aberforth Smllr. Co's Wts., Amicable Smllr. Wts., Biotech Prtg.
Pf, CST Emrg. Asia, City Oxford Zero Pf, EFM Java, Eng. &amp; Caledonian, Eng. &amp;
Scot. Wts, Exmoor Dual Zero Pf, Flmg. Intl. High Inc., Gartmore Amer.,
Gartmore Value Zero Pf, Jersey Phoenix, Kleinwort Smllr. Co's, River &amp; Merc.
Smllr. Co, MEDIA (5) Aegis, Holmes Marchant, Metro Radio, Shandwick,
Yorkshire Tyne-Tees, MERCHANT BANKS (1) Hambros, METAL &amp; METAL FORMING (1)
ASW, MISCELLANEOUS (3) Ricardo, Strong &amp; Fisher, Walker Greenbank, MOTORS
(2) ERF, Lucas, OIL &amp; GAS (4) BP, NZ Oil, Petrofina, Tullow, OTHER FINANCIAL
(2) Aitken Hume, FNFC 6.3pc Pf, OTHER INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS (1) Whitecroft,
PACKAGING, PAPER &amp; PRINTING (1) Smurfit (J), PROPERTY (11) Allied Lon.,
Dwyer, Greycoat, Olives, Raglan, Regalian, Sheafbank, St. Modwen, Trafford
Park, Wates City of Lon., YRM, STORES (3) Liberty N/V, Mallett, Pentos,
TELEPHONE NETWORKS (2) GN Gt. Nordic, Nth. Telecom, TEXTILES (2) Lamont,
Wensum, TRANSPORT (5) Assoc. Br. Ports, Graig, Manchester Ship Canal, Ocean,
Vard, MINES (8) Aztec Explr., Dominion, Joel (HJ), Mount Martin,
Randfontein, Renison, Sthn. Pacific, Vaal Reefs.
Other market statistics, Page 21
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 32
</PAGE>
</DOC>
